The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom — Complete
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom — Complete

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: September 9, 2004 [eBook #6761]
                Most recently updated: October 30, 2022

Language: English

Credits: Tapio Riikonen and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM — COMPLETE ***




The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom

by Tobias Smollett


Titlepage

Frontispiece of Part One

COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS

With the Author’s Preface, and an Introduction by G. H. Maynadier, Ph.D.
Department of English, Harvard University.




CONTENTS

 INTRODUCTION

 PART I.
 TO DOCTOR
 CHAPTER ONE. Some sage Observations that naturally introduce our important History
 CHAPTER TWO. A superficial View of our Hero’s Infancy
 CHAPTER THREE. He is initiated in a Military Life, and has the good Fortune to acquire a generous Patron
 CHAPTER FOUR. His Mother’s Prowess and Death; together with some Instances of his own Sagacity
 CHAPTER FIVE. A brief Detail of his Education
 CHAPTER SIX. He meditates Schemes of Importance
 CHAPTER SEVEN. Engages in Partnership with a female Associate, in order to put his Talents in Action
 CHAPTER EIGHT. Their first Attempt; with a Digression which some Readers may think impertinent
 CHAPTER NINE. The Confederates change their Battery, and achieve a remarkable Adventure
 CHAPTER TEN. They proceed to levy Contributions with great Success, until our Hero sets out with the young Count for Vienna, where he enters into League with another Adventurer
 CHAPTER ELEVEN. Fathom makes various Efforts in the World of Gallantry
 CHAPTER TWELVE. He effects a Lodgment in the House of a rich Jeweller
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN. He is exposed to a most perilous Incident in the Course of his Intrigue with the Daughter
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN. He is reduced to a dreadful Dilemma, in consequence of an Assignation with the Wife
 CHAPTER FIFTEEN. But at length succeeds in his Attempt upon both
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN. His Success begets a blind Security, by which he is once again well-nigh entrapped in his Dulcinea’s Apartment
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. The Step-dame’s Suspicions being awakened, she lays a Snare for our Adventurer, from which he is delivered by the Interposition of his Good Genius
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. Our Hero departs from Vienna, and quits the Domain of Venus for the rough Field of Mars
 CHAPTER NINETEEN. He puts himself under the Guidance of his Associate, and stumbles upon the French Camp, where he finishes his Military Career
 CHAPTER TWENTY. He prepares a Stratagem, but finds himself countermined—Proceeds on his Journey, and is overtaken by a terrible Tempest
 CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. He falls upon Scylla, seeking to avoid Charybdis.
 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. He arrives at Paris, and is pleased with his Reception
 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE. Acquits himself with Address in a Nocturnal Riot
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. He overlooks the Advances of his Friends, and smarts severely for his Neglect
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. He bears his Fate like a Philosopher; and contracts acquaintance with a very remarkable Personage
 CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. The History of the Noble Castilian
 CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. A flagrant Instance of Fathom’s Virtue, in the Manner of his Retreat to England
 CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT. Some Account of his Fellow-Travellers
 CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE. Another providential Deliverance from the Effects of the Smuggler’s ingenious Conjecture
 CHAPTER THIRTY. The singular Manner of Fathom’s Attack and Triumph over the Virtue of the fair Elenor
 CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE. He by accident encounters his old Friend, with whom he holds a Conference, and renews a Treaty
 CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO. He appears in the great World with universal Applause and Admiration
 CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE. He attracts the Envy and Ill Offices of the minor Knights of his own Order, over whom he obtains a complete Victory
 CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR. He attracts the Envy and Ill Offices of the minor Knights of his own Order, over whom he obtains a complete Victory
 CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT. The Biter is Bit

 PART II.
 CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE. Our Adventurer is made acquainted with a new Scene of Life
 CHAPTER FORTY. He contemplates Majesty and its Satellites in Eclipse
 CHAPTER FORTY-ONE. One Quarrel is compromised, and another decided by unusual Arms
 CHAPTER FORTY-TWO. An unexpected Rencontre, and a happy Revolution in the Affairs of our Adventurer
 CHAPTER FORTY-THREE. Fathom justifies the Proverb, “What’s bred in the Bone will never come out of the Flesh”
 CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR. Fathom justifies the Proverb, “What’s bred in the Bone will never come out of the Flesh”
 CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE. Renaldo’s Distress deepens, and Fathom’s Plot thickens
 CHAPTER FORTY-SIX. Our Adventurer becomes absolute in his Power over the Passions of his Friend, and effects one half of his Aim
 CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN. The Art of Borrowing further explained, and an Account of a Strange Phenomenon
 CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT. Count Fathom unmasks his Battery; is repulsed; and varies his Operations without effect
 CHAPTER FORTY-NINE. Monimia’s Honour is protected by the Interposition of Heaven
 CHAPTER FIFTY. Fathom shifts the Scene, and appears in a new Character
 CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE. Triumphs over a Medical Rival
 CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO. Repairs to the Metropolis, and enrols himself among the Sons of Paean
 CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE. Acquires Employment in consequence of a lucky Miscarriage
 CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR. His Eclipse, and gradual Declination
 CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE. After divers unsuccessful Efforts, he has recourse to the Matrimonial Noose
 CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX. In which his Fortune is effectually strangled
 CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN. Fathom being safely housed, the Reader is entertained with a Retrospect
 CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT. Renaldo abridges the Proceedings at Law, and approves himself the Son of his Father
 CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE. He is the Messenger of Happiness to his Sister, who removes the film which had long obstructed his Penetration, with regard to Count Fathom
 CHAPTER SIXTY. He recompenses the Attachment of his Friend; and receives a Letter that reduces him to the Verge of Death and Distraction
 CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE. Renaldo meets with a living Monument of Justice, and encounters a Personage of some Note in these Memoirs
 CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO. His Return to England, and Midnight Pilgrimage to Monimia’s Tomb
 CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE. He renews the Rites of Sorrow, and is entranced
 CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR. The Mystery unfolded—Another Recognition, which, it is to be hoped, the Reader could not foresee
 CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE. A retrospective Link, necessary for the Concatenation of these Memoirs
 CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX. The History draws near a Period
 CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN. The Longest and the Last




ILLUSTRATIONS



 Titlepage of Part One
 Frontispiece of Part One
 He Opened the Repository
 Titlepage of Part Two
 Frontispiece of Part Two
 You Are the Count de Melvil




INTRODUCTION


The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom, Smollett’s third novel, was
given to the world in 1753. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, writing to her
daughter, the Countess of Bute, over a year later [January 1st, 1755],
remarked that “my friend Smollett . . . has certainly a talent for
invention, though I think it flags a little in his last work.” Lady
Mary was both right and wrong. The inventive power which we commonly
think of as Smollett’s was the ability to work over his own experience
into realistic fiction. Of this, Ferdinand Count Fathom shows
comparatively little. It shows relatively little, too, of Smollett’s
vigorous personality, which in his earlier works was present to give
life and interest to almost every chapter, were it to describe a street
brawl, a ludicrous situation, a whimsical character, or with venomous
prejudice to gibbet some enemy. This individuality—the peculiar spirit
of the author which can be felt rather than described—is present in the
dedication of Fathom to Doctor ———, who is no other than Smollett
himself, and a candid revelation of his character, by the way, this
dedication contains. It is present, too, in the opening chapters, which
show, likewise, in the picture of Fathom’s mother, something of the
author’s peculiar “talent for invention.” Subsequently, however, there
is no denying that the Smollett invention and the Smollett spirit both
flag. And yet, in a way, Fathom displays more invention than any of the
author’s novels; it is based far less than any other on personal
experience. Unfortunately such thorough-going invention was not suited
to Smollett’s genius. The result is, that while uninteresting as a
novel of contemporary manners, Fathom has an interest of its own in
that it reveals a new side of its author. We think of Smollett,
generally, as a rambling storyteller, a rational, unromantic man of the
world, who fills his pages with his own oddly-metamorphosed
acquaintances and experiences. The Smollett of Count Fathom, on the
contrary, is rather a forerunner of the romantic school, who has
created a tolerably organic tale of adventure out of his own brain.
Though this is notably less readable than the author’s earlier works,
still the wonder is that when the man is so far “off his beat,” he
should yet know so well how to meet the strange conditions which
confront him. To one whose idea of Smollett’s genius is formed entirely
by Random and Pickle and Humphry Clinker, Ferdinand Count Fathom will
offer many surprises.

The first of these is the comparative lifelessness of the book. True,
here again are action and incident galore, but generally unaccompanied
by that rough Georgian hurly-burly, common in Smollett, which is so
interesting to contemplate from a comfortable distance, and which goes
so far towards making his fiction seem real. Nor are the characters,
for the most part, life-like enough to be interesting. There is an
apparent exception, to be sure, in the hero’s mother, already
mentioned, the hardened camp-follower, whom we confidently expect to
become vitalised after the savage fashion of Smollett’s characters.
But, alas! we have no chance to learn the lady’s style of conversation,
for the few words that come from her lips are but partially
characteristic; we have only too little chance to learn her manners and
customs. In the fourth chapter, while she is making sure with her
dagger that all those on the field of battle whom she wishes to rifle
are really dead, an officer of the hussars, who has been watching her
lucrative progress, unfeelingly puts a brace of bullets into the lady’s
brain, just as she raises her hand to smite him to the heart. Perhaps
it is as well that she is thus removed before our disappointment at the
non-fulfilment of her promise becomes poignant. So far as we may judge
from the other personages of Count Fathom, even this interesting Amazon
would sooner or later have turned into a wooden figure, with a label
giving the necessary information as to her character.

Such certainly is her son, Fathom, the hero of the book. Because he is
placarded, “Shrewd villain of monstrous inhumanity,” we are fain to
accept him for what his creator intended; but seldom in word or deed is
he a convincingly real villain. His friend and foil, the noble young
Count de Melvil, is no more alive than he; and equally wooden are
Joshua, the high-minded, saint-like Jew, and that tedious, foolish Don
Diego. Neither is the heroine alive, the peerless Monimia, but then, in
her case, want of vitality is not surprising; the presence of it would
amaze us. If she were a woman throbbing with life, she would be
different from Smollett’s other heroines. The “second lady” of the
melodrama, Mademoiselle de Melvil, though by no means vivified, is yet
more real than her sister-in-law.

The fact that they are mostly inanimate figures is not the only
surprise given us by the personages of Count Fathom. It is a surprise
to find few of them strikingly whimsical; it is a surprise to find them
in some cases far more distinctly conceived than any of the people in
Roderick Random or Peregrine Pickle. In the second of these, we saw
Smollett beginning to understand the use of incident to indicate
consistent development of character. In Count Fathom, he seems fully to
understand this principle of art, though he has not learned to apply it
successfully. And so, in spite of an excellent conception, Fathom, as I
have said, is unreal. After all his villainies, which he perpetrates
without any apparent qualms of conscience, it is incredible that he
should honestly repent of his crimes. We are much inclined to doubt
when we read that “his vice and ambition was now quite mortified within
him,” the subsequent testimony of Matthew Bramble, Esq., in Humphry
Clinker, to the contrary, notwithstanding. Yet Fathom up to this point
is consistently drawn, and drawn for a purpose:—to show that
cold-blooded roguery, though successful for a while, will come to grief
in the end. To heighten the effect of his scoundrel, Smollett develops
parallel with him the virtuous Count de Melvil. The author’s scheme of
thus using one character as the foil of another, though not conspicuous
for its originality, shows a decided advance in the theory of
constructive technique. Only, as I have said, Smollett’s execution is
now defective.

“But,” one will naturally ask, “if Fathom lacks the amusing, and not
infrequently stimulating, hurly-burly of Smollett’s former novels; if
its characters, though well-conceived, are seldom divertingly fantastic
and never thoroughly animate; what makes the book interesting?” The
surprise will be greater than ever when the answer is given that, to a
large extent, the plot makes Fathom interesting. Yes, Smollett,
hitherto indifferent to structure, has here written a story in which
the plot itself, often clumsy though it may be, engages a reader’s
attention. One actually wants to know whether the young Count is ever
going to receive consolation for his sorrows and inflict justice on his
basely ungrateful pensioner. And when, finally, all turns out as it
should, one is amazed to find how many of the people in the book have
helped towards the designed conclusion. Not all of them, indeed, nor
all of the adventures, are indispensable, but it is manifest at the end
that much, which, for the time, most readers think irrelevant—such as
Don Diego’s history—is, after all, essential.

It has already been said that in Count Fathom Smollett appears to some
extent as a romanticist, and this is another fact which lends interest
to the book. That he had a powerful imagination is not a surprise. Any
one versed in Smollett has already seen it in the remarkable situations
which he has put before us in his earlier works. These do not indicate,
however, that Smollett possessed the imagination which could excite
romantic interest; for in Roderick Random and in Peregrine Pickle, the
wonderful situations serve chiefly to amuse. In Fathom, however, there
are some designed to excite horror; and one, at least, is eminently
successful. The hero’s night in the wood between Bar-le-duc and Chalons
was no doubt more blood-curdling to our eighteenth-century ancestors
than it is to us, who have become acquainted with scores of similar
situations in the small number of exciting romances which belong to
literature, and in the greater number which do not. Still, even to-day,
a reader, with his taste jaded by trashy novels, will be conscious of
Smollett’s power, and of several thrills, likewise, as he reads about
Fathom’s experience in the loft in which the beldame locks him to pass
the night.

This situation is melodramatic rather than romantic, as the word is
used technically in application to eighteenth and nineteenth-century
literature. There is no little in Fathom, however, which is genuinely
romantic in the latter sense. Such is the imprisonment of the Countess
in the castle-tower, whence she waves her handkerchief to the young
Count, her son and would-be rescuer. And especially so is the scene in
the church, when Renaldo (the very name is romantic) visits at midnight
the supposed grave of his lady-love. While he was waiting for the
sexton to open the door, his “soul . . . was wound up to the highest
pitch of enthusiastic sorrow. The uncommon darkness, . . . the solemn
silence, and lonely situation of the place, conspired with the occasion
of his coming, and the dismal images of his fancy, to produce a real
rapture of gloomy expectation, which the whole world could not have
persuaded him to disappoint. The clock struck twelve, the owl screeched
from the ruined battlement, the door was opened by the sexton, who, by
the light of a glimmering taper, conducted the despairing lover to a
dreary aisle, and stamped upon the ground with his foot, saying, ‘Here
the young lady lies interred.’”

We have here such an amount of the usual romantic machinery of the
“grave-yard” school of poets—that school of which Professor W. L.
Phelps calls Young, in his Night Thoughts, the most “conspicuous
exemplar”—that one is at first inclined to think Smollett poking fun at
it. The context, however, seems to prove that he was perfectly serious.
It is interesting, then, as well as surprising, to find traces of the
romantic spirit in his fiction over ten years before Walpole’s Castle
of Otranto. It is also interesting to find so much melodramatic feeling
in him, because it makes stronger the connection between him and his
nineteenth-century disciple, Dickens.

From all that I have said, it must not be thought that the usual
Smollett is always, or almost always, absent from Count Fathom. I have
spoken of the dedication and of the opening chapters as what we might
expect from his pen. There are, besides, true Smollett strokes in the
scenes in the prison from which Melvil rescues Fathom, and there is a
good deal of the satirical Smollett fun in the description of Fathom’s
ups and downs, first as the petted beau, and then as the fashionable
doctor. In chronicling the latter meteoric career, Smollett had already
observed the peculiarity of his countrymen which Thackeray was fond of
harping on in the next century—“the maxim which universally prevails
among the English people . . . to overlook, . . . on their return to
the metropolis, all the connexions they may have chanced to acquire
during their residence at any of the medical wells. And this social
disposition is so scrupulously maintained, that two persons who live in
the most intimate correspondence at Bath or Tunbridge, shall, in
four-and-twenty hours . . . meet in St. James’s Park, without betraying
the least token of recognition.” And good, too, is the way in which, as
Dr. Fathom goes rapidly down the social hill, he makes excuses for his
declining splendour. His chariot was overturned “with a hideous crash”
at such danger to himself, “that he did not believe he should ever
hazard himself again in any sort of wheel carriage.” He turned off his
men for maids, because “men servants are generally impudent, lazy,
debauched, or dishonest.” To avoid the din of the street, he shifted
his lodgings into a quiet, obscure court. And so forth and so on, in
the true Smollett vein.

But, after all, such of the old sparks are struck only occasionally.
Apart from its plot, which not a few nineteenth-century writers of
detective-stories might have improved, The Adventures of Ferdinand
Count Fathom is less interesting for itself than any other piece of
fiction from Smollett’s pen. For a student of Smollett, however, it is
highly interesting as showing the author’s romantic, melodramatic
tendencies, and the growth of his constructive technique.

G. H. MAYNADIER




THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM




TO DOCTOR ———


You and I, my good friend, have often deliberated on the difficulty of
writing such a dedication as might gratify the self-complacency of a
patron, without exposing the author to the ridicule or censure of the
public; and I think we generally agreed that the task was altogether
impracticable.—Indeed, this was one of the few subjects on which we
have always thought in the same manner. For, notwithstanding that
deference and regard which we mutually pay to each other, certain it
is, we have often differed, according to the predominancy of those
different passions, which frequently warp the opinion, and perplex the
understanding of the most judicious.

In dedication, as in poetry, there is no medium; for, if any one of the
human virtues be omitted in the enumeration of the patron’s good
qualities, the whole address is construed into an affront, and the
writer has the mortification to find his praise prostituted to very
little purpose.

On the other hand, should he yield to the transports of gratitude or
affection, which is always apt to exaggerate, and produce no more than
the genuine effusions of his heart, the world will make no allowance
for the warmth of his passion, but ascribe the praise he bestows to
interested views and sordid adulation.

Sometimes too, dazzled by the tinsel of a character which he has no
opportunity to investigate, he pours forth the homage of his admiration
upon some false Maecenas, whose future conduct gives the lie to his
eulogium, and involves him in shame and confusion of face. Such was the
fate of a late ingenious author [the Author of the “Seasons”], who was
so often put to the blush for the undeserved incense he had offered in
the heat of an enthusiastic disposition, misled by popular applause,
that he had resolved to retract, in his last will, all the encomiums
which he had thus prematurely bestowed, and stigmatise the unworthy by
name—a laudable scheme of poetical justice, the execution of which was
fatally prevented by untimely death.

Whatever may have been the fate of other dedicators, I, for my own
part, sit down to write this address, without any apprehension of
disgrace or disappointment; because I know you are too well convinced
of my affection and sincerity to repine at what I shall say touching
your character and conduct. And you will do me the justice to believe,
that this public distinction is a testimony of my particular friendship
and esteem.

Not that I am either insensible of your infirmities, or disposed to
conceal them from the notice of mankind. There are certain foibles
which can only be cured by shame and mortification; and whether or not
yours be of that species, I shall have the comfort to think my best
endeavours were used for your reformation.

Know then, I can despise your pride, while I honour your integrity, and
applaud your taste, while I am shocked at your ostentation.—I have
known you trifling, superficial, and obstinate in dispute; meanly
jealous and awkwardly reserved; rash and haughty in your resentments;
and coarse and lowly in your connexions. I have blushed at the weakness
of your conversation, and trembled at the errors of your conduct—yet,
as I own you possess certain good qualities, which overbalance these
defects, and distinguish you on this occasion as a person for whom I
have the most perfect attachment and esteem, you have no cause to
complain of the indelicacy with which your faults are reprehended. And
as they are chiefly the excesses of a sanguine disposition and
looseness of thought, impatient of caution or control, you may, thus
stimulated, watch over your own intemperance and infirmity with
redoubled vigilance and consideration, and for the future profit by the
severity of my reproof.

These, however, are not the only motives that induce me to trouble you
with this public application. I must not only perform my duty to my
friends, but also discharge the debt I owe to my own interest. We live
in a censorious age; and an author cannot take too much precaution to
anticipate the prejudice, misapprehension, and temerity of malice,
ignorance, and presumption.

I therefore think it incumbent upon me to give some previous intimation
of the plan which I have executed in the subsequent performance, that I
may not be condemned upon partial evidence; and to whom can I with more
propriety appeal in my explanation than to you, who are so well
acquainted with all the sentiments and emotions of my breast?

A novel is a large diffused picture, comprehending the characters of
life, disposed in different groups, and exhibited in various attitudes,
for the purposes of an uniform plan, and general occurrence, to which
every individual figure is subservient. But this plan cannot be
executed with propriety, probability, or success, without a principal
personage to attract the attention, unite the incidents, unwind the
clue of the labyrinth, and at last close the scene, by virtue of his
own importance.

Almost all the heroes of this kind, who have hitherto succeeded on the
English stage, are characters of transcendent worth, conducted through
the vicissitudes of fortune, to that goal of happiness, which ever
ought to be the repose of extraordinary desert.—Yet the same principle
by which we rejoice at the remuneration of merit, will teach us to
relish the disgrace and discomfiture of vice, which is always an
example of extensive use and influence, because it leaves a deep
impression of terror upon the minds of those who were not confirmed in
the pursuit of morality and virtue, and, while the balance wavers,
enables the right scale to preponderate.

In the drama, which is a more limited field of invention, the chief
personage is often the object of our detestation and abhorrence; and we
are as well pleased to see the wicked schemes of a Richard blasted, and
the perfidy of a Maskwell exposed, as to behold a Bevil happy, and an
Edward victorious.

The impulses of fear, which is the most violent and interesting of all
the passions, remain longer than any other upon the memory; and for one
that is allured to virtue, by the contemplation of that peace and
happiness which it bestows, a hundred are deterred from the practice of
vice, by that infamy and punishment to which it is liable, from the
laws and regulations of mankind.

Let me not, therefore, be condemned for having chosen my principal
character from the purlieus of treachery and fraud, when I declare my
purpose is to set him up as a beacon for the benefit of the
unexperienced and unwary, who, from the perusal of these memoirs, may
learn to avoid the manifold snares with which they are continually
surrounded in the paths of life; while those who hesitate on the brink
of iniquity may be terrified from plunging into that irremediable gulf,
by surveying the deplorable fate of Ferdinand Count Fathom.

That the mind might not be fatigued, nor the imagination disgusted, by
a succession of vicious objects, I have endeavoured to refresh the
attention with occasional incidents of a different nature; and raised
up a virtuous character, in opposition to the adventurer, with a view
to amuse the fancy, engage the affection, and form a striking contrast
which might heighten the expression, and give a relief to the moral of
the whole.

If I have not succeeded in my endeavours to unfold the mysteries of
fraud, to instruct the ignorant, and entertain the vacant; if I have
failed in my attempts to subject folly to ridicule, and vice to
indignation; to rouse the spirit of mirth, wake the soul of compassion,
and touch the secret springs that move the heart; I have, at least,
adorned virtue with honour and applause, branded iniquity with reproach
and shame, and carefully avoided every hint or expression which could
give umbrage to the most delicate reader—circumstances which (whatever
may be my fate with the public) will with you always operate in favour
of,

Dear sir, your very affectionate friend and servant,

THE AUTHOR.




CHAPTER ONE

SOME SAGE OBSERVATIONS THAT NATURALLY INTRODUCE OUR IMPORTANT HISTORY.


Cardinal de Retz very judiciously observes, that all historians must of
necessity be subject to mistakes, in explaining the motives of those
actions they record, unless they derive their intelligence from the
candid confession of the person whose character they represent; and
that, of consequence, every man of importance ought to write his own
memoirs, provided he has honesty enough to tell the truth, without
suppressing any circumstance that may tend to the information of the
reader. This, however, is a requisite that, I am afraid, would be very
rarely found among the number of those who exhibit their own portraits
to the public. Indeed, I will venture to say, that, how upright soever
a man’s intentions may be, he will, in the performance of such a task,
be sometimes misled by his own phantasy, and represent objects, as they
appeared to him, through the mists of prejudice and passion.

An unconcerned reader, when he peruses the history of two competitors,
who lived two thousand years ago, or who perhaps never had existence,
except in the imagination of the author, cannot help interesting
himself in the dispute, and espousing one side of the contest, with all
the zeal of a warm adherent. What wonder, then, that we should be
heated in our own concerns, review our actions with the same
self-approbation that they had formerly acquired, and recommend them to
the world with all the enthusiasm of paternal affection?

Supposing this to be the case, it was lucky for the cause of historical
truth, that so many pens have been drawn by writers, who could not be
suspected of such partiality; and that many great personages, among the
ancients as well as moderns, either would not or could not entertain
the public with their own memoirs. From this want of inclination or
capacity to write, in our hero himself, the undertaking is now left to
me, of transmitting to posterity the remarkable adventures of FERDINAND
COUNT FATHOM; and by the time the reader shall have glanced over the
subsequent sheets, I doubt not but he will bless God that the
adventurer was not his own historian.

This mirror of modern chivalry was none of those who owe their dignity
to the circumstances of their birth, and are consecrated from the
cradle for the purposes of greatness, merely because they are the
accidental children of wealth. He was heir to no visible patrimony,
unless we reckon a robust constitution, a tolerable appearance, and an
uncommon capacity, as the advantages of inheritance. If the comparison
obtains in this point of consideration, he was as much as any man
indebted to his parent; and pity it was, that, in the sequel of his
fortune, he never had an opportunity of manifesting his filial
gratitude and regard. From this agreeable act of duty to his sire, and
all those tendernesses that are reciprocally enjoyed betwixt the father
and the son, he was unhappily excluded by a small circumstance; at
which, however, he was never heard to repine. In short, had he been
brought forth in the fabulous ages of the world, the nature of his
origin might have turned to his account; he might, like other heroes of
antiquity, have laid claim to divine extraction, without running the
risk of being claimed by an earthly father. Not that his parents had
any reason to disown or renounce their offspring, or that there was
anything preternatural in the circumstances of his generation and
birth; on the contrary, he was, from the beginning, a child of
promising parts, and in due course of nature ushered into the world
amidst a whole cloud of witnesses. But, that he was acknowledged by no
mortal sire, solely proceeded from the uncertainty of his mother, whose
affections were so dissipated among a number of admirers, that she
could never pitch upon the person from whose loins our hero sprung.

Over and above this important doubt under which he was begotten, other
particularities attended his birth, and seemed to mark him out as
something uncommon among the sons of men. He was brought forth in a
waggon, and might be said to be literally a native of two different
countries; for, though he first saw the light in Holland, he was not
born till after the carriage arrived in Flanders; so that, all these
extraordinary circumstances considered, the task of determining to what
government he naturally owed allegiance, would be at least as difficult
as that of ascertaining the so much contested birthplace of Homer.

Certain it is, the Count’s mother was an Englishwoman, who, after
having been five times a widow in one campaign, was, in the last year
of the renowned Marlborough’s command, numbered among the baggage of
the allied army, which she still accompanied, through pure benevolence
of spirit, supplying the ranks with the refreshing streams of choice
Geneva, and accommodating individuals with clean linen, as the
emergency of their occasions required. Nor was her philanthropy
altogether confined to such ministration; she abounded with “the milk
of human kindness,” which flowed plentifully among her
fellow-creatures; and to every son of Mars who cultivated her favour,
she liberally dispensed her smiles, in order to sweeten the toils and
dangers of the field.

And here it will not be amiss to anticipate the remarks of the reader,
who, in the chastity and excellency of his conception, may possibly
exclaim, “Good Heaven! will these authors never reform their
imaginations, and lift their ideas from the obscene objects of low
life? Must the public be again disgusted with the grovelling adventures
of a waggon? Will no writer of genius draw his pen in the vindication
of taste, and entertain us with the agreeable characters, the dignified
conversation, the poignant repartee, in short, the genteel comedy of
the polite world?”

Have a little patience, gentle, delicate, sublime critic; you, I doubt
not, are one of those consummate connoisseurs, who, in their
purifications, let humour evaporate, while they endeavour to preserve
decorum, and polish wit, until the edge of it is quite worn off. Or,
perhaps, of that class, who, in the sapience of taste, are disgusted
with those very flavours in the productions of their own country which
have yielded infinite delectation to their faculties, when imported
from another clime; and d—n an author in despite of all precedent and
prescription;—who extol the writings of Petronius Arbiter, read with
rapture the amorous sallies of Ovid’s pen, and chuckle over the story
of Lucian’s ass; yet, if a modern author presumes to relate the
progress of a simple intrigue, are shocked at the indecency and
immorality of the scene;—who delight in following Guzman d’Alfarache,
through all the mazes of squalid beggary; who with pleasure accompany
Don Quixote and his squire, in the lowest paths of fortune; who are
diverted with the adventures of Scarron’s ragged troop of strollers,
and highly entertained with the servile situations of Gil Blas; yet,
when a character in humble life occasionally occurs in a performance of
our own growth, exclaim, with an air of disgust, “Was ever anything so
mean! sure, this writer must have been very conversant with the lowest
scenes of life;”—who, when Swift or Pope represents a coxcomb in the
act of swearing, scruple not to laugh at the ridiculous execrations;
but, in a less reputed author, condemn the use of such profane
expletives;—who eagerly explore the jakes of Rabelais, for amusement,
and even extract humour from the dean’s description of a lady’s
dressing-room; yet in a production of these days, unstamped with such
venerable names, will stop their noses, with all the signs of loathing
and abhorrence, at a bare mention of the china chamber-pot;—who
applauded Catullus, Juvenal, Persius, and Lucan, for their spirit in
lashing the greatest names of antiquity; yet, when a British satirist,
of this generation, has courage enough to call in question the talents
of a pseudo-patron in power, accuse him of insolence, rancour, and
scurrility.

If such you be, courteous reader, I say again, have a little patience;
for your entertainment we are about to write. Our hero shall, with all
convenient despatch, be gradually sublimed into those splendid
connexions of which you are enamoured; and God forbid, that, in the
meantime, the nature of his extraction should turn to his prejudice in
a land of freedom like this, where individuals are every day ennobled
in consequence of their own qualifications, without the least
retrospective regard to the rank or merit of their ancestors. Yes,
refined reader, we are hastening to that goal of perfection, where
satire dares not show her face; where nature is castigated, almost even
to still life; where humour turns changeling, and slavers in an insipid
grin; where wit is volatilised into a mere vapour; where decency,
divested of all substance, hovers about like a fantastic shadow; where
the salt of genius, escaping, leaves nothing but pure and simple
phlegm; and the inoffensive pen for ever drops the mild manna of
soul-sweetening praise.




CHAPTER TWO

A SUPERFICIAL VIEW OF OUR HERO’S INFANCY.


Having thus bespoken the indulgence of our guests, let us now produce
the particulars of our entertainment, and speedily conduct our
adventurer through the stage of infancy, which seldom teems with
interesting incidents.

As the occupations of his mother would not conveniently permit her to
suckle this her firstborn at her own breast, and those happy ages were
now no more, in which the charge of nursing a child might be left to
the next goat or she-wolf, she resolved to improve upon the ordinances
of nature, and foster him with a juice much more energetic than the
milk of goat, wolf, or woman; this was no other than that delicious
nectar, which, as we have already hinted, she so cordially distributed
from a small cask that hung before her, depending from her shoulders by
a leathern zone. Thus determined, ere he was yet twelve days old, she
enclosed him in a canvas knapsack, which being adjusted to her neck,
fell down upon her back, and balanced the cargo that rested on her
bosom.

There are not wanting those who affirm, that, while her double charge
was carried about in this situation, her keg was furnished with a long
and slender flexible tube, which, when the child began to be clamorous,
she conveyed into his mouth, and straight he stilled himself with
sucking; but this we consider as an extravagant assertion of those who
mix the marvellous in all their narrations, because we cannot conceive
how the tender organs of an infant could digest such a fiery beverage,
which never fails to discompose the constitutions of the most hardy and
robust. We therefore conclude that the use of this potation was more
restrained, and that it was with simple element diluted into a
composition adapted to his taste and years. Be this as it will, he
certainly was indulged in the use of it to such a degree as would have
effectually obstructed his future fortune, had not he been happily
cloyed with the repetition of the same fare, for which he conceived the
utmost detestation and abhorrence, rejecting it with loathing and
disgust, like those choice spirits, who, having been crammed with
religion in their childhood, renounce it in their youth, among other
absurd prejudices of education.

While he was thus dangled in a state of suspension, a German trooper
was transiently smit with the charms of his mother, who listened to his
honourable addresses, and once more received the silken bonds of
matrimony; the ceremony having been performed as usual at the
drum-head. The lady had no sooner taken possession of her new name,
than she bestowed it upon her son, who was thenceforward distinguished
by the appellation of Ferdinand de Fadom; nor was the husband offended
at this presumption in his wife, which he not only considered as a
proof of her affection and esteem, but also as a compliment, by which
he might in time acquire the credit of being the real father of such a
hopeful child.

Notwithstanding this new engagement with a foreigner, our hero’s mother
still exercised the virtues of her calling among the English troops, so
much was she biassed by that laudable partiality, which, as Horace
observes, the natale solum generally inspires. Indeed this inclination
was enforced by another reason, that did not fail to influence her
conduct in this particular; all her knowledge of the High Dutch
language consisted in some words of traffic absolutely necessary for
the practice of hex vocation, together with sundry oaths and terms of
reproach, that kept her customers in awe; so that, except among her own
countrymen, she could not indulge that propensity to conversation, for
which she had been remarkable from her earliest years. Nor did this
instance of her affection fail of turning to her account in the sequel.
She was promoted to the office of cook to a regimental mess of
officers; and, before the peace of Utrecht, was actually in possession
of a suttling-tent, pitched for the accommodation of the gentlemen in
the army.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand improved apace in the accomplishments of infancy;
his beauty was conspicuous, and his vigour so uncommon, that he was
with justice likened unto Hercules in the cradle. The friends of his
father-in-law dandled him on their knees, while he played with their
whiskers, and, before he was thirteen months old, taught him to suck
brandy impregnated with gunpowder, through the touch-hole of a pistol.
At the same time, he was caressed by divers serjeants of the British
army, who severally and in secret contemplated his qualifications with
a father’s pride, excited by the artful declaration with which the
mother had flattered each apart.

Soon as the war was (for her unhappily) concluded, she, as in duty
bound, followed her husband into Bohemia; and his regiment being sent
into garrison at Prague, she opened a cabaret in that city, which was
frequented by a good many guests of the Scotch and Irish nations, who
were devoted to the exercise of arms in the service of the Emperor. It
was by this communication that the English tongue became vernacular to
young Ferdinand, who, without such opportunity, would have been a
stranger to the language of his forefathers, in spite of all his
mother’s loquacity and elocution; though it must be owned, for the
credit of her maternal care, that she let slip no occasion of making it
familiar to his ear and conception; for, even at those intervals in
which she could find no person to carry on the altercation, she used to
hold forth in earnest soliloquies upon the subject of her own
situation, giving vent to many opprobrious invectives against her
husband’s country, between which and Old England she drew many odious
comparisons; and prayed, without ceasing, that Europe might speedily be
involved in a general war, so as that she might have some chance of
re-enjoying the pleasures and emoluments of a Flanders campaign.




CHAPTER THREE

HE IS INITIATED IN A MILITARY LIFE, AND HAS THE GOOD FORTUNE TO ACQUIRE
A GENEROUS PATRON.


While she wearied Heaven with these petitions, the flame of war broke
out betwixt the houses of Ottoman and Austria, and the Emperor sent
forth an army into Hungary, under the auspices of the renowned Prince
Eugene. On account of this expedition, the mother of our hero gave up
housekeeping, and cheerfully followed her customers and husband into
the field; having first provided herself with store of those
commodities in which she had formerly merchandised. Although the hope
of profit might in some measure affect her determination, one of the
chief motives for her visiting the frontiers of Turkey, was the desire
of initiating her son in the rudiments of his education, which she now
thought high time to inculcate, he being, at this period, in the sixth
year of his age; he was accordingly conducted to the camp, which she
considered as the most consummate school of life, and proposed for the
scene of his instruction; and in this academy he had not continued many
weeks, when he was an eye-witness of that famous victory, which, with
sixty thousand men, the Imperial general obtained over an army of one
hundred and fifty thousand Turks.

His father-in-law was engaged, and his mother would not be idle on this
occasion. She was a perfect mistress of all the camp qualifications,
and thought it a duty incumbent on her to contribute all that lay in
her power towards distressing the enemy. With these sentiments she
hovered about the skirts of the army, and the troops were no sooner
employed in the pursuit, than she began to traverse the field of battle
with a poignard and a bag, in order to consult her own interest, annoy
the foe, and exercise her humanity at the same time. In short, she had,
with amazing prowess, delivered some fifty or threescore disabled
Mussulmen of the pain under which they groaned, and made a comfortable
booty of the spoils of the slain, when her eyes were attracted by the
rich attire of an Imperial officer, who lay bleeding on the plain, to
all appearance in the agonies of death.

She could not in her heart refuse that favour to a friend and Christian
she had so compassionately bestowed upon so many enemies and infidels,
and therefore drew near with the sovereign remedy, which she had
already administered with such success. As she approached this
deplorable object of pity, her ears were surprised with an ejaculation
in the English tongue, which he fervently pronounced, though with a
weak and languid voice, recommending his soul to God, and his family to
the protection of Heaven. Our Amazon’s purpose was staggered by this
providential incident; the sound of her native language, so
unexpectedly heard, and so pathetically delivered, had a surprising
effect upon her imagination; and the faculty of reflection did not
forsake her in such emergency. Though she could not recollect the
features of this unhappy officer, she concluded, from his appearance,
that he was some person of distinction in the service, and foresaw
greater advantage to herself in attempting to preserve his life, than
she could possibly reap from the execution of her first resolve. “If,”
said she to herself, “I can find means of conveying him to his tent
alive, he cannot but in conscience acknowledge my humanity with some
considerable recompense; and, should he chance to survive his wounds, I
have everything to expect from his gratitude and power.”

Fraught with these prudential suggestions, she drew near the
unfortunate stranger, and, in a softened accent of pity and condolence,
questioned him concerning his name, condition, and the nature of his
mischance, at the same time making a gentle tender of her service.
Agreeably surprised to hear himself accosted in such a manner, by a
person whose equipage seemed to promise far other designs, he thanked
her in the most grateful terms for her humanity, with the appellation
of kind countrywoman; gave her to understand that he was colonel of a
regiment of horse; that he had fallen in consequence of a shot he
received in his breast at the beginning of the action; and, finally,
entreated her to procure some carriage on which he might be removed to
his tent. Perceiving him faint and exhausted with loss of blood, she
raised up his head, and treated him with that cordial which was her
constant companion. At that instant, espying a small body of hussars
returning to the camp with the plunder they had taken, she invoked
their assistance, and they forthwith carried the officer to his own
quarters, where his wound was dressed, and his preserver carefully
tended him until his recovery was completed.

In return for these good offices, this gentleman, who was originally of
Scotland, rewarded her for the present with great liberality, assured
her of his influence in promoting her husband, and took upon himself
the charge of young Ferdinand’s education; the boy was immediately
taken into his protection, and entered as a trooper in his own
regiment; but his good intentions towards his father-in-law were
frustrated by the death of the German, who, in a few days after this
disposition, was shot in the trenches before Temiswaer.

This event, over and above the conjugal affliction with which it
invaded the lady’s quiet, would have involved her in infinite
difficulty and distress, with regard to her temporal concerns, by
leaving her unprotected in the midst of strangers, had not she been
thus providentially supplied with an effectual patron in the colonel,
who was known by the appellation of Count Melvil. He no sooner saw her,
by the death of her husband, detached from all personal connexions with
a military life, than he proposed that she should quit her occupation
in the camp, and retire to his habitation in the city of Presburg,
where she would be entertained in ease and plenty during the remaining
part of her natural life. With all due acknowledgments of his
generosity, she begged to be excused from embracing his proposal,
alleging she was so much accustomed to her present way of life, and so
much devoted to the service of the soldiery, that she should never be
happy in retirement, while the troops of any prince in Christendom kept
the field.

The Count, finding her determined to prosecute her scheme, repeated his
promise of befriending her upon all occasions; and in the meantime
admitted Ferdinand into the number of his domestics, resolving that he
should be brought up in attendance upon his own son, who was a boy of
the same age. He kept him, however, in his tent, until he should have
an opportunity of revisiting his family in person; and, before that
occasion offered, two whole years elapsed, during which the illustrious
Prince Eugene gained the celebrated battle of Belgrade, and afterwards
made himself master of that important frontier.




CHAPTER FOUR

HIS MOTHER’S PROWESS AND DEATH; TOGETHER WITH SOME INSTANCES OF HIS OWN
SAGACITY.


It would have been impossible for the mother of our adventurer, such as
she hath been described, to sit quietly in her tent, while such an
heroic scene was acting. She was no sooner apprised of the general’s
intention to attack the enemy, than she, as usual, packed up her
moveables in a waggon, which she committed to the care of a peasant in
the neighbourhood, and put herself in motion with the troops; big with
the expectation of re-acting that part in which she had formerly
acquitted herself so much to her advantage.—Nay, she by this time
looked upon her own presence as a certain omen of success to the cause
which she espoused; and, in their march to battle, actually encouraged
the ranks with repeated declarations, importing, that she had been
eye-witness of ten decisive engagements, in all of which her friends
had been victorious, and imputing such uncommon good fortune to some
supernatural quality inherent in her person.

Whether or not this confidence contributed to the fortune of the day,
by inspiring the soldiers to an uncommon pitch of courage and
resolution, I shall not pretend to determine. But, certain it is, the
victory began from that quarter in which she had posted herself; and no
corps in the army behaved with such intrepidity as that which was
manifested by those who were favoured with her admonitions and example;
for she not only exposed her person to the enemy’s fire, with the
indifference and deliberation of a veteran, but she is said to have
achieved a very conspicuous exploit by the prowess of her single arm.
The extremity of the line to which she had attached herself, being
assaulted in flank by a body of the spahis, wheeled about, in order to
sustain the charge, and received them with such a seasonable fire, as
brought a great number of turbans to the ground; among those who fell,
was one of the chiefs or agas, who had advanced before the rest, with a
view to signalise his valour.

Our English Penthesilea no sooner saw this Turkish leader drop, than,
struck with the magnificence of his own and horse’s trappings, she
sprung forward to seize them as her prize, and found the aga not dead,
though in a good measure disabled by his misfortune, which was entirely
owing to the weight of his horse, that, having been killed by a
musket-ball, lay upon his leg, so that he could not disengage himself.
Nevertheless, perceiving the virago approach with fell intent, he
brandished his symitar, and tried to intimidate his assailant with a
most horrible exclamation; but it was not the dismal yell of a
dismounted cavalier, though enforced with a hideous ferocity of
countenance, and the menacing gestures with which he waited her
approach, that could intimidate such an undaunted she-campaigner; she
saw him writhing in the agonies of a situation from which he could not
move; and, running towards him with the nimbleness and intrepidity of a
Camilla, described a semicircle in the progress of her assault, and
attacking him on one side, plunged her well-tried dagger in his throat.
The shades of death encompassed him, his life-blood issued at the
wound, he fell prone upon the earth, he bit the dust, and having thrice
invoked the name of Allah! straight expired.

While his destiny was thus fulfilled, his followers began to reel; they
seemed dismayed at the fate of their chief, beheld their companions
drop like the leaves in autumn, and suddenly halted in the midst of
their career. The Imperialists, observing the confusion of the enemy,
redoubled their fire; and, raising a dreadful shout, advanced in order
to improve the advantage they had gained. The spahis durst not wait the
shock of such an encounter; they wheeled to the right-about, and
clapping spurs to their horses, fled in the utmost disorder. This was
actually the circumstance that turned the scale of battle. The
Austrians pursued their good fortune with uncommon impetuosity, and in
a few minutes left the field clear for the mother of our hero, who was
such an adept in the art of stripping, that in the twinkling of an eye
the bodies of the aga and his Arabian lay naked to the skin. It would
have been happy for her, had she been contented with these
first-fruits, reaped from the fortune of the day, and retired with her
spoils, which were not inconsiderable; but, intoxicated with the glory
she had won, enticed by the glittering caparisons that lay scattered on
the plain, and without doubt prompted by the secret instinct of her
fate, she resolved to seize opportunity by the forelock, and once for
all indemnify herself for the many fatigues, hazards, and sorrows she
had undergone.

Thus determined, she reconnoitred the field, and practised her address
so successfully, that in less than half an hour she was loaded with
ermine and embroidery, and disposed to retreat with her burden, when
her regards were solicited by a splendid bundle, which she descried at
some distance lying on the ground. This was no other than an unhappy
officer of hussars; who, after having the good fortune to take a
Turkish standard, was desperately wounded in the thigh, and obliged to
quit his horse; finding himself in such a helpless condition, he had
wrapped his acquisition round his body, that whatever might happen, he
and his glory should not be parted; and thus shrouded, among the dying
and the dead, he had observed the progress of our heroine, who stalked
about the field, like another Atropos, finishing, wherever she came,
the work of death. He did not at all doubt, that he himself would be
visited in the course of her peregrinations, and therefore provided for
her reception, with a pistol ready cocked in his hand, while he lay
perdue beneath his covert, in all appearance bereft of life. He was not
deceived in his prognostic; she no sooner eyed the golden crescent
than, inflamed with curiosity or cupidity, she directed thitherward her
steps, and discerning the carcase of a man, from which, she thought,
there would be a necessity for disengaging it, she lifted up her
weapon, in order to make sure of her purchase; and in the very instant
of discharging her blow, received a brace of bullets in her brain.

Thus ended the mortal pilgrimage of this modern Amazon; who, in point
of courage, was not inferior to Semiramis, Tomyris, Zenobia,
Thalestris, or any boasted heroine of ancient times. It cannot be
supposed that this catastrophe made a very deep impression upon the
mind of young Ferdinand, who had just then attained the ninth year of
his age, and been for a considerable time weaned from her maternal
caresses; especially as he felt no wants nor grievances in the family
of the Count, who favoured him with a particular share of indulgence,
because he perceived in him a spirit of docility, insinuation, and
sagacity, far above his years. He did not, however, fail to lament the
untimely fate of his mother, with such filial expressions of sorrow, as
still more intimately recommended him to his patron; who, being himself
a man of extraordinary benevolence, looked upon the boy as a prodigy of
natural affection, and foresaw in his future services a fund of
gratitude and attachment, that could not fail to render him a valuable
acquisition to his family.

In his own country, he had often seen connexions of that sort, which
having been planted in the infancy of the adherent, had grown up to a
surprising pitch of fidelity and friendship, that no temptation could
bias, and no danger dissolve. He therefore rejoiced in the hope of
seeing his own son accommodated with such a faithful attendant, in the
person of young Fathom, on whom he resolved to bestow the same
education he had planned for the other, though conveyed in such a
manner as should be suitable to the sphere in which he was ordained to
move. In consequence of these determinations, our young adventurer led
a very easy life, in quality of page to the Count, in whose tent he lay
upon a pallet, close to his field-bed, and often diverted him with his
childish prattle in the English tongue, which the more seldom his
master had occasion to speak, he the more delighted to hear. In the
exercise of his function, the boy was incredibly assiduous and alert;
far from neglecting the little particulars of his duty, and embarking
in the mischievous amusements of the children belonging to the camp, he
was always diligent, sedate, agreeably officious and anticipating; and
in the whole of his behaviour seemed to express the most vigilant sense
of his patron’s goodness and generosity; nay, to such a degree had
these sentiments, in all appearance, operated upon his reflection, that
one morning, while he supposed the Count asleep, he crept softly to his
bedside, and gently kissing his hand, which happened to be uncovered,
pronounced, in a low voice, a most fervent prayer in his behalf,
beseeching Heaven to shower down blessings upon him, as the widow’s
friend and the orphan’s father. This benediction was not lost upon the
Count, who chanced to be awake, and heard it with admiration; but what
riveted Ferdinand in his good graces, was a discovery that our youth
made, while his master was upon duty in the trenches before Belgrade.

Two foot soldiers, standing sentry near the door of the tent, were
captivated with the sight of some valuable moveables belonging to it;
and supposing, in their great wisdom, that the city of Belgrade was too
well fortified to be taken during that campaign, they came to a
resolution of withdrawing themselves from the severe service of the
trenches, by deserting to the enemy, after they should have rifled
Count Melvil’s tent of the furniture by which they were so powerfully
allured. The particulars of this plan were concerted in the French
language, which, they imagined, would screen them from all risk of
being detected, in case they should be overheard, though, as there was
no living creature in sight, they had no reason to believe that any
person was privy to their conversation. Nevertheless, they were
mistaken in both these conjectures. The conference reached the ears of
Fathom, who was at the other end of the tent, and had perceived the
eager looks with which they considered some parts of the furniture. He
had penetration enough to suspect their desire, and, alarmed by that
suspicion, listened attentively to their discourse; which, from a
slender knowledge in the French tongue, he had the good fortune partly
to understand.

This important piece of intelligence he communicated to the Count at
his return, and measures were immediately taken to defeat the design,
and make an example of the authors, who being permitted to load
themselves with the booty, were apprehended in their retreat, and
punished with death according to their demerits.




CHAPTER FIVE

A BRIEF DETAIL OF HIS EDUCATION.


Nothing could have more seasonably happened to confirm the good opinion
which the colonel entertained of Ferdinand’s principles. His intentions
towards the boy grew every day more and more warm; and, immediately
after the peace of Passarowitz, he retired to his own house at
Presburg, and presented young Fathom to his lady, not only as the son
of a person to whom he owed his life, but also as a lad who merited his
peculiar protection and regard by his own personal virtue. The
Countess, who was an Hungarian, received him with great kindness and
affability, and her son was ravished with the prospect of enjoying such
a companion. In short, fortune seemed to have provided for him an
asylum, in which he might be safely trained up, and suitably prepared
for more important scenes of life than any of his ancestors had ever
known.

He was not, in all respects, entertained on the footing of his young
master; yet he shared in all his education and amusements, as one whom
the old gentleman was fully determined to qualify for the station of an
officer in the service; and, if he did not eat with the Count, he was
every day regaled with choice bits from his table; holding, as it were,
a middle place between the rank of a relation and favourite domestic.
Although his patron maintained a tutor in the house, to superintend the
conduct of his heir, he committed the charge of his learning to the
instructions of a public school; where he imagined the boy would imbibe
a laudable spirit of emulation among his fellows, which could not fail
of turning out to the advantage of his education. Ferdinand was entered
in the same academy; and the two lads proceeded equally in the paths of
erudition; a mutual friendship and intimacy soon ensued, and,
notwithstanding the levity and caprice commonly discernible in the
behaviour of such boys, very few or rather no quarrels happened in the
course of their communication. Yet their dispositions were altogether
different, and their talents unlike. Nay, this dissimilarity was the
very bond of their union; because it prevented that jealousy and
rivalship which often interrupts the harmony of two warm
contemporaries.

The young Count made extraordinary progress in the exercises of the
school, though he seemed to take very little pains in the cultivation
of his studies; and became a perfect hero in all the athletic
diversions of his fellow-scholars; but, at the same time, exhibited
such a bashful appearance and uncouth address, that his mother
despaired of ever seeing him improved into any degree of polite
behaviour. On the other hand, Fathom, who was in point of learning a
mere dunce, became, even in his childhood, remarkable among the ladies
for his genteel deportment and vivacity; they admired the proficiency
he made under the directions of his dancing-master, the air with which
he performed his obeisance at his entrance and exit; and were charmed
with the agreeable assurance and lively sallies of his conversation;
while they expressed the utmost concern and disgust at the boorish
demeanour of his companion, whose extorted bows resembled the pawings
of a mule, who hung his head in silence like a detected sheep-stealer,
who sat in company under the most awkward expressions of constraint,
and whose discourse never exceeded the simple monosyllables of negation
and assent.

In vain did all the females of the family propose to him young Fathom,
as a pattern and reproach. He remained unaltered by all their efforts
and expostulations, and allowed our adventurer to enjoy the triumph of
his praise, while he himself was conscious of his own superiority in
those qualifications which seemed of more real importance than the mere
exteriors and forms of life. His present ambition was not to make a
figure at his father’s table, but to eclipse his rivals at school, and
to acquire an influence and authority among these confederates.
Nevertheless, Fathom might possibly have fallen under his displeasure
or contempt, had not that pliant genius found means to retain his
friendship by seasonable compliances and submission; for the sole
study, or at least the chief aim of Ferdinand, was to make himself
necessary and agreeable to those on whom his dependence was placed. His
talent was in this particular suited to his inclination; he seemed to
have inherited it from his mother’s womb; and, without all doubt, would
have raised upon it a most admirable superstructure of fortune and
applause, had not it been inseparably yoked with a most insidious
principle of self-love, that grew up with him from the cradle, and left
no room in his heart for the least particle of social virtue. This
last, however, he knew so well how to counterfeit, by means of a large
share of ductility and dissimulation, that, surely, he was calculated
by nature to dupe even the most cautious, and gratify his appetites, by
levying contributions on all mankind.

So little are the common instructors of youth qualified to judge the
capacities of those who are under their tutelage and care, that Fathom,
by dint of his insinuating arts, made shift to pass upon the
schoolmaster as a lad of quick parts, in despite of a natural
inaptitude to retain his lessons, which all his industry could never
overcome. In order to remedy, or rather to cloak this defect in his
understanding, he had always recourse to the friendship of the young
Count, who freely permitted him to transcribe his exercises, until a
small accident happened, which had well-nigh put a stop to these
instances of his generosity.—The adventure, inconsiderable as it is, we
shall record, as the first overt act of Ferdinand’s true character, as
well as an illustration of the opinion we have advanced touching the
blind and injudicious decisions of a right pedagogue.

Among other tasks imposed by the pedant upon the form to which our two
companions belonged, they were one evening ordered to translate a
chapter of Caesar’s Commentaries. Accordingly the young Count went to
work, and performed the undertaking with great elegance and despatch.
Fathom, having spent the night in more effeminate amusements, was next
morning so much hurried for want of time, that in his transcription he
neglected to insert a few variations from the text, these being the
terms on which he was allowed to use it; so that it was verbatim a copy
of the original. As those exercises were always delivered in a heap,
subscribed with the several names of the boys to whom they belonged,
the schoolmaster chanced to peruse the version of Ferdinand, before he
looked into any of the rest, and could not help bestowing upon it
particular marks of approbation. The next that fell under his
examination was that of the young Count, when he immediately perceived
the sameness, and, far from imputing it to the true cause, upbraided
him with having copied the exercise of our adventurer, and insisted
upon chastising him upon the spot for his want of application.

Had not the young gentleman thought his honour was concerned, he would
have submitted to the punishment without murmuring; but he inherited,
from his parents, the pride of two fierce nations, and, being
overwhelmed with reproaches for that which he imagined ought to have
redounded to his glory, he could not brook the indignity, and boldly
affirmed, that he himself was the original, to whom Ferdinand was
beholden for his performance. The schoolmaster, nettled to find himself
mistaken in his judgment, resolved that the Count should have no cause
to exult in the discovery he had made, and, like a true flogger,
actually whipped him for having allowed Fathom to copy his exercise.
Nay, in the hope of vindicating his own penetration, he took an
opportunity of questioning Ferdinand in private concerning the
circumstances of the translation, and our hero, perceiving his drift,
gave him such artful and ambiguous answers, as persuaded him that the
young Count had acted the part of a plagiary, and that the other had
been restrained from doing himself justice, by the consideration of his
own dependence.

This profound director did not fail, in honour of his own discernment,
to whisper about the misrepresentation, as an instance of the young
Count’s insolence, and Fathom’s humility and good sense. The story was
circulated among the servants, especially the maids belonging to the
family, whose favour our hero had acquired by his engaging behaviour;
and at length it reached the ears of his patron, who, incensed at his
son’s presumption and inhospitality, called him to a severe account,
when the young gentleman absolutely denied the truth of the allegation,
and appealed to the evidence of Fathom himself. Our adventurer was
accordingly summoned by the father, and encouraged to declare the
truth, with an assurance of his constant protection; upon which
Ferdinand very wisely fell upon his knees, and, while the tears gushed
from his eyes, acquitted the young Count of the imputation, and
expressed his apprehension, that the report had been spread by some of
his enemies, who wanted to prejudice him in the opinion of his patron.

The old gentleman was not satisfied of his son’s integrity by this
declaration; being naturally of a generous disposition, highly
prepossessed in favour of the poor orphan, and chagrined at the
unpromising appearance of his heir, he suspected that Fathom was
overawed by the fear of giving offence, and that, notwithstanding what
he had said, the case really stood as it had been represented. In this
persuasion, he earnestly exhorted his son to resist and combat with any
impulse he might feel within himself, tending to selfishness, fraud, or
imposition; to encourage every sentiment of candour and benevolence,
and to behave with moderation and affability to all his
fellow-creatures. He laid upon him strong injunctions, not without a
mixture of threats, to consider Fathom as the object of his peculiar
regard; to respect him as the son of the Count’s preserver, as a
Briton, a stranger, and, above all, an helpless orphan, to whom the
rights of hospitality were doubly due.

Such admonitions were not lost upon the youth, who, under the rough
husk of his personal exhibition, possessed a large share of generous
sensibility. Without any formal professions to his father, he resolved
to govern himself according to his remonstrances; and, far from
conceiving the least spark of animosity against Fathom, he looked upon
the poor boy as the innocent cause of his disgrace, and redoubled his
kindness towards him, that his honour might never again be called in
question, upon the same subject. Nothing is more liable to
misconstruction than an act of uncommon generosity; one half of the
world mistake the motive, from want of ideas to conceive an instance of
beneficence that soars so high above the level of their own sentiments;
and the rest suspect it of something sinister or selfish, from the
suggestions of their own sordid and vicious inclinations. The young
Count subjected himself to such misinterpretation, among those who
observed the increased warmth of civility and complaisance in his
behaviour to Ferdinand. They ascribed it to his desire of still
profiting by our adventurer’s superior talents, by which alone they
supposed him enabled to maintain any degree of reputation at school; or
to the fear of being convicted by him of some misdemeanour of which he
knew himself guilty. These suspicions were not effaced by the conduct
of Ferdinand, who, when examined on the subject, managed his answers in
such a manner, as confirmed their conjectures, while he pretended to
refute them, and at the same time acquired to himself credit for his
extraordinary discretion and self-denial.

If he exhibited such a proof of sagacity in the twelfth year of his
age, what might not be expected from his finesse in the maturity of his
faculties and experience? Thus secured in the good graces of the whole
family, he saw the days of his puerility glide along in the most
agreeable elapse of caresses and amusement. He never fairly plunged
into the stream of school-education, but, by floating on the surface,
imbibed a small tincture of those different sciences which his master
pretended to teach. In short, he resembled those vagrant swallows that
skim along the level of some pool or river, without venturing to wet
one feather in their wings, except in the accidental pursuit of an
inconsiderable fly. Yet, though his capacity or inclination was
unsuited for studies of this kind, he did not fail to manifest a
perfect genius in the acquisition of other more profitable arts. Over
and above the accomplishments of address, for which he hath been
already celebrated, he excelled all his fellows in his dexterity at
fives and billiards; was altogether unrivalled in his skill at draughts
and backgammon; began, even at these years, to understand the moves and
schemes of chess; and made himself a mere adept in the mystery of
cards, which he learned in the course of his assiduities and attention
to the females of the house.




CHAPTER SIX

HE MEDITATES SCHEMES OF IMPORTANCE.


It was in these parties that he attracted the notice and friendship of
his patron’s daughter, a girl by two years older than himself, who was
not insensible to his qualifications, and looked upon him with the most
favourable eyes of prepossession. Whether or not he at this period of
his life began to project plans for availing himself of her
susceptibility, is uncertain; but, without all doubt, he cultivated her
esteem with as obsequious and submissive attention as if he had already
formed the design, which, in his advanced age, he attempted to put in
execution.

Divers circumstances conspired to promote him in the favour of this
young lady; the greenness of his years secured him from any appearance
of fallacious aim; so that he was indulged in frequent opportunities of
conversing with his young mistress, whose parents encouraged this
communication, by which they hoped she would improve in speaking the
language of her father. Such connexions naturally produce intimacy and
friendship. Fathom’s person was agreeable, his talents calculated for
the meridian of those parties, and his manners so engaging, that there
would have been no just subject for wonder, had he made an impression
upon the tender unexperienced heart of Mademoiselle de Melvil, whose
beauty was not so attractive as to extinguish his hope, in raising up a
number of formidable rivals; though her expectations of fortune were
such as commonly lend additional lustre to personal merit.

All these considerations were so many steps towards the success of
Ferdinand’s pretensions; and though he cannot be supposed to have
perceived them at first, he in the sequel seemed perfectly well
apprised of his advantages, and used them to the full extent of his
faculties. Observing that she delighted in music, he betook himself to
the study of that art, and, by dint of application and a tolerable ear,
learned of himself to accompany her with a German flute, while she sung
and played upon the harpsichord. The Count, seeing his inclination, and
the progress he had made, resolved that his capacity should not be lost
for want of cultivation; and accordingly provided him with a master, by
whom he was instructed in the principles of the art, and soon became a
proficient in playing upon the violin.

In the practice of these improvements and avocations, and in attendance
upon his young master, whom he took care never to disoblige or neglect,
he attained to the age of sixteen, without feeling the least abatement
in the friendship and generosity of those upon whom he depended; but,
on the contrary, receiving every day fresh marks of their bounty and
regard. He had before this time been smit with the ambition of making a
conquest of the young lady’s heart, and foresaw manifold advantages to
himself in becoming son-in-law to Count Melvil, who, he never doubted,
would soon be reconciled to the match, if once it could be effectuated
without his knowledge. Although he thought he had great reason to
believe that Mademoiselle looked upon him with an eye of peculiar
favour, his disposition was happily tempered with an ingredient of
caution, that hindered him from acting with precipitation; and he had
discerned in the young lady’s deportment certain indications of
loftiness and pride, which kept him in the utmost vigilance and
circumspection; for he knew, that, by a premature declaration, he
should run the risk of forfeiting all the advantages he had gained, and
blasting those expectations that now blossomed so gaily in his heart.

Restricted by these reflections, he acted at a wary distance, and
determined to proceed by the method of sap, and, summoning all his
artifice and attractions to his aid, employed them under the insidious
cover of profound respect, in order to undermine those bulwarks of
haughtiness or discretion, which otherwise might have rendered his
approaches to her impracticable. With a view to enhance the value of
his company, and sound her sentiments at the same time, he became more
reserved than usual, and seldomer engaged in her parties of music and
cards; yet, in the midst of his reserve, he never failed in those
demonstrations of reverence and regard, which he knew perfectly well
how to express, but devised such excuses for his absence, as she could
not help admitting. In consequence of this affected shyness, she more
than once gently chid him for his neglect and indifference, observing,
with an ironical air, that he was now too much of a man to be
entertained with such effeminate diversions; but her reproofs were
pronounced with too much ease and good-humour to be agreeable to our
hero, who desired to see her ruffled and chagrined at his absence, and
to hear himself rebuked with an angry affectation of disdain. This
effort, therefore, he reinforced with the most captivating carriage he
could assume, in those hours which he now so sparingly bestowed upon
his mistress. He regaled her with all the entertaining stories he could
learn or invent, particularly such as he thought would justify and
recommend the levelling power of love, that knows no distinctions of
fortune. He sung nothing but tender airs and passionate complaints,
composed by desponding or despairing swains; and, to render his
performances of this kind the more pathetic, interlarded them with some
seasonable sighs, while the tears, which he had ever at command, stood
collected in either eye.

It was impossible for her to overlook such studied emotions; she in a
jocose manner taxed him with having lost his heart, rallied the excess
of his passion, and in a merry strain undertook to be an advocate for
his love. Her behaviour was still wide of his wish and expectation. He
thought she would, in consequence of her discovery, have betrayed some
interested symptom; that her face would have undergone some favourable
suffusion; that her tongue would have faltered, her breast heaved, and
her whole deportment betokened internal agitation and disorder, in
which case, he meant to profit by the happy impression, and declare
himself, before she could possibly recollect the dictates of her
pride.—Baffled however in his endeavours, by the serenity of the young
lady, which he still deemed equivocal, he had recourse to another
experiment, by which he believed he should make a discovery of her
sentiments beyond all possibility of doubt. One day, while he
accompanied Mademoiselle in her exercise of music, he pretended all of
a sudden to be taken ill, and counterfeited a swoon in her apartment.
Surprised at this accident, she screamed aloud, but far from running to
his assistance, with the transports and distraction of a lover, she
ordered her maid, who was present, to support his head, and went in
person to call for more help. He was accordingly removed to his own
chamber, where, willing to be still more certified of her inclinations,
he prolonged the farce, and lay groaning under the pretence of a severe
fever.

The whole family was alarmed upon this occasion; for, as we have
already observed, he was an universal favourite. He was immediately
visited by the old Count and his lady, who expressed the utmost concern
at his distemper, ordered him to be carefully attended, and sent for a
physician without loss of time. The young gentleman would scarce stir
from his bedside, where he ministered unto him with all the
demonstrations of brotherly affection; and Miss exhorted him to keep up
his spirits, with many expressions of unreserved sympathy and regard.
Nevertheless, he saw nothing in her behaviour but what might be
naturally expected from common friendship, and a compassionate
disposition, and was very much mortified at his disappointment.

Whether the miscarriage actually affected his constitution, or the
doctor happened to be mistaken in his diagnostics, we shall not pretend
to determine; but the patient was certainly treated secundum artem, and
all his complaints in a little time realised; for the physician, like a
true graduate, had an eye to the apothecary in his prescriptions; and
such was the concern and scrupulous care with which our hero was
attended, that the orders of the faculty were performed with the utmost
punctuality. He was blooded, vomited, purged, and blistered, in the
usual forms (for the physicians of Hungary are generally as well
skilled in the arts of their occupation as any other leeches under the
sun), and swallowed a whole dispensary of bolusses, draughts, and
apozems, by which means he became fairly delirious in three days, and
so untractable, that he could be no longer managed according to rule;
otherwise, in all likelihood, the world would never have enjoyed the
benefit of these adventures. In short, his constitution, though unable
to cope with two such formidable antagonists as the doctor and the
disease he had conjured up, was no sooner rid of the one, than it
easily got the better of the other; and though Ferdinand, after all,
found his grand aim unaccomplished, his malady was productive of a
consequence, which, though he had not foreseen it, he did not fail to
convert to his own use and advantage.




CHAPTER SEVEN

ENGAGES IN PARTNERSHIP WITH A FEMALE ASSOCIATE, IN ORDER TO PUT HIS
TALENTS IN ACTION.


While he displayed his qualifications in order to entrap the heart of
his young mistress, he had unwittingly enslaved the affections of her
maid. This attendant was also a favourite of the young lady, and,
though her senior by two or three good years at least, unquestionably
her superior in point of personal beauty; she moreover possessed a good
stock of cunning and discernment, and was furnished by nature with a
very amorous complexion. These circumstances being premised, the reader
will not be surprised to find her smitten by those uncommon
qualifications which we have celebrated in young Fathom. She had in
good sooth long sighed in secret, under the powerful influence of his
charms, and practised upon him all those little arts, by which a woman
strives to attract the admiration, and ensnare the heart of a man she
loves; but all his faculties were employed upon the plan which he had
already projected; that was the goal of his whole attention, to which
all his measures tended; and whether or not he perceived the impression
he had made upon Teresa, he never gave her the least reason to believe
he was conscious of his victory, until he found himself baffled in his
design upon the heart of her mistress.—She therefore persevered in her
distant attempts to allure him, with the usual coquetries of dress and
address, and, in the sweet hope of profiting by his susceptibility,
made shift to suppress her feelings, and keep her passion within
bounds, until his supposed danger alarmed her fears, and raised such a
tumult within her breast, that she could no longer conceal her love,
but gave a loose to her sorrow in the most immoderate expressions of
anguish and affliction, and, while his delirium lasted, behaved with
all the agitation of a despairing shepherdess.

Ferdinand was, or pretended to be, the last person in the family who
understood the situation of her thoughts; when he perceived her
passion, he entered into deliberation with himself, and tasked his
reflection and foresight, in order to discover how best he might
convert this conquest to his own advantage. Here, then, that we may
neglect no opportunity of doing justice to our hero, it will be proper
to observe, that, howsoever unapt his understanding might be to receive
and retain the usual culture of the schools, he was naturally a genius
self-taught, in point of sagacity and invention.—He dived into the
characters of mankind, with a penetration peculiar to himself, and, had
he been admitted as a pupil in any political academy, would have
certainly become one of the ablest statesmen in Europe.

Having revolved all the probable consequences of such a connexion, he
determined to prosecute an amour with the lady whose affection he had
subdued; because he hoped to interest her as an auxiliary in his grand
scheme upon Mademoiselle, which he did not as yet think proper to lay
aside; for he was not more ambitious in the plan, than indefatigable in
the prosecution of it. He knew it would be impossible to execute his
aims upon the Count’s daughter under the eye of Teresa, whose natural
discernment would be whetted with jealousy, and who would watch his
conduct, and thwart his progress with all the vigilance and spite of a
slighted maiden. On the other hand, he did not doubt of being able to
bring her over to his interest, by the influence he had already gained,
or might afterwards acquire over her passions; in which case, she would
effectually espouse his cause, and employ her good offices with her
mistress in his behalf; besides, he was induced by another motive,
which, though secondary, did not fail in this case to have an effect
upon his determination. He looked upon Teresa with the eyes of
appetite, which he longed to gratify; for he was not at all dead to the
instigations of the flesh, though he had philosophy enough to resist
them, when he thought they interfered with his interest. Here the case
was quite different. His desire happened to be upon the side of his
advantage, and therefore, resolving to indulge it, he no sooner found
himself in a condition to manage such an adventure, than he began to
make gradual advances in point of warmth and particular complacency to
the love-sick maid.

He first of all thanked her, in the most grateful terms, for the
concern she had manifested at his distemper, and the kind services he
had received from her during the course of it; he treated her upon all
occasions with unusual affability and regard, assiduously courted her
acquaintance and conversation, and contracted an intimacy that in a
little time produced a declaration of love. Although her heart was too
much intendered to hold out against all the forms of assault, far from
yielding at discretion, she stood upon honourable terms, with great
obstinacy of punctilio, and, while she owned he was master of her
inclinations, gave him to understand, with a peremptory and resolute
air, that he should never make a conquest of her virtue; observing,
that, if the passion he professed was genuine, he would not scruple to
give such a proof of it as would at once convince her of his sincerity;
and that he could have no just cause to refuse her that satisfaction,
she being his equal in point of birth and situation; for, if he was the
companion and favourite of the young Count, she was the friend and
confidant of Mademoiselle.

He acknowledged the strength of her argument, and that her
condescension was greater than his deserts, but objected against the
proposal, as infinitely prejudicial to the fortunes of them both. He
represented the state of dependence in which they mutually stood; their
utter incapacity to support one another under the consequences of a
precipitate match, clandestinely made, without the consent and
concurrence of their patrons. He displayed, with great eloquence, all
those gay expectations they had reason to entertain, from that eminent
degree of favour which they had already secured in the family; and set
forth, in the most alluring colours, those enchanting scenes of
pleasure they might enjoy in each other, without that disagreeable
consciousness of a nuptial chain, provided she would be his associate
in the execution of a plan which he had projected for their reciprocal
convenience.

Having thus inflamed her love of pleasure and curiosity, he, with great
caution, hinted his design upon the young lady’s fortune, and,
perceiving her listening with the most greedy attention, and perfectly
ripe for the conspiracy, he disclosed his intention at full length,
assuring her, with the most solemn protestations of love and
attachment, that, could he once make himself legal possessor of an
estate which Mademoiselle inherited by the will of a deceased aunt, his
dear Teresa should reap the happy fruits of his affluence, and wholly
engross his time and attention.

Such a base declaration our hero would not have ventured to make, had
he not implicitly believed the damsel was as great a latitudinarian as
himself, in point of morals and principle; and been well assured, that,
though he should be mistaken in her way of thinking, so far as to be
threatened with a detection of his purpose, he would always have it in
his power to refute her accusation as mere calumny, by the character he
had hitherto maintained, and the circumspection of his future conduct.

He seldom or never erred in his observations on the human heart.
Teresa, instead of disapproving, relished the plan in general, with
demonstrations of singular satisfaction. She at once conceived all the
advantageous consequences of such a scheme, and perceived in it only
one flaw, which, however, she did not think incurable. This defect was
no other than a sufficient bond of union, by which they might be
effectually tied down to their mutual interest. She foresaw, that, in
case Ferdinand should obtain possession of the prize, he might, with
great ease, deny their contract, and disavow her claim of
participation. She therefore demanded security, and proposed, as a
preliminary of the agreement, that he should privately take her to
wife, with a view to dispel all her apprehensions of his inconstancy or
deceit, as such a previous engagement would be a check upon his
behaviour, and keep him strictly to the letter of their contract.

He could not help subscribing to the righteousness of this proposal,
which, nevertheless, he would have willingly waived, on the supposition
that they could not possibly be joined in the bands of wedlock with
such secrecy as the nature of the case absolutely required. This would
have been a difficulty soon removed, had the scene of the transaction
been laid in the metropolis of England, where passengers are plied in
the streets by clergymen, who prostitute their characters and
consciences for hire, in defiance of all decency and law; but in the
kingdom of Hungary, ecclesiastics are more scrupulous in the exercise
of their function, and the objection was, or supposed to be, altogether
insurmountable; so that they were fain to have recourse to an
expedient, with which, after some hesitation, our she-adventurer was
satisfied. They joined hands in the sight of Heaven, which they called
to witness, and to judge the sincerity of their vows, and engaged, in a
voluntary oath, to confirm their union by the sanction of the church,
whenever a convenient opportunity for so doing should occur.

The scruples of Teresa being thus removed, she admitted Ferdinand to
the privileges of a husband, which he enjoyed in stolen interviews, and
readily undertook to exert her whole power in promoting his suit with
her young mistress, because she now considered his interest as
inseparably connected with her own. Surely nothing could be more absurd
or preposterous than the articles of this covenant, which she insisted
upon with such inflexibility. How could she suppose that her pretended
lover would be restrained by an oath, when the very occasion of
incurring it was an intention to act in violation of all laws human and
divine? and yet such ridiculous conjuration is commonly the cement of
every conspiracy, how dark, how treacherous, how impious soever it may
be: a certain sign that there are some remains of religion left in the
human mind, even after every moral sentiment hath abandoned it; and
that the most execrable ruffian finds means to quiet the suggestions of
his conscience, by some reversionary hope of Heaven’s forgiveness.




CHAPTER EIGHT

THEIR FIRST ATTEMPT; WITH A DIGRESSION WHICH SOME READERS MAY THINK
IMPERTINENT.


Be this as it will, our lovers, though real voluptuaries, amidst the
first transports of their enjoyment did not neglect the great political
aim of their conjunction. Teresa’s bedchamber, to which our hero
constantly repaired at midnight, was the scene of their deliberations,
and there it was determined that the damsel, in order to avoid
suspicion, should feign herself irritated at the indifference of
Ferdinand, her passion for whom was by this time no secret in the
family; and that, with a view to countenance this affectation, he
should upon all occasions treat her with an air of loftiness and
disdain.

So screened from all imputation of fraud, she was furnished by him with
artful instructions how to sound the inclinations of her young
mistress, how to recommend his person and qualifications by the sure
methods of contradiction, comparisons, revilings, and reproach; how to
watch the paroxysms of her disposition, inflame her passions, and
improve, for his advantage, those moments of frailty from which no
woman is exempted. In short, this consummate politician taught his
agent to poison the young lady’s mind with insidious conversation,
tending to inspire her with the love of guilty pleasure, to debauch her
sentiments, and confound her ideas of dignity and virtue. After all,
the task is not difficult to lead the unpractised heart astray, by dint
of those opportunities her seducer possessed. The seeds of insinuation
seasonably sown upon the warm luxuriant soil of youth, could hardly
fail of shooting up into such intemperate desires as he wanted to
produce, especially when cultured and cherished in her unguarded hours,
by that stimulating discourse which familiarity admits, and the looser
passions, ingrafted in every breast, are apt to relish and excuse.

Fathom had previously reconnoitred the ground, and discovered some
marks of inflammability in Mademoiselle’s constitution; her beauty was
not such as to engage her in those gaieties of amusement which could
flatter her vanity and dissipate her ideas; and she was of an age when
the little loves and young desires take possession of the fancy; he
therefore concluded, that she had the more leisure to indulge these
enticing images of pleasure that youth never fails to create,
particularly in those who, like her, were addicted to solitude and
study.

Teresa, full fraught with the wily injunctions of her confederate, took
the field, and opened the campaign with such remarkable sourness in her
aspect when Ferdinand appeared, that her young lady could not help
taking notice of her affected chagrin, and asked the reason of such
apparent alteration in her way of thinking. Prepared for this question,
the other replied, in a manner calculated for giving Mademoiselle to
understand, that, whatever impressions Ferdinand might have formerly
made on her heart, they were now altogether effaced by the pride and
insolence with which he had received her advances; and that her breast
now glowed with all the revenge of a slighted lover.

To evince the sincerity of this declaration, she bitterly inveighed
against him, and even affected to depreciate those talents, in which
she knew his chief merit to consist; hoping, by these means, to
interest Mademoiselle’s candour in his defence. So far the train
succeeded. That young lady’s love for truth was offended at the
calumnies that were vented against Ferdinand in his absence. She chid
her woman for the rancour of her remarks, and undertook to refute the
articles of his dispraise. Teresa supported her own assertions with
great obstinacy, and a dispute ensued, in which her mistress was heated
into some extravagant commendations of our adventurer.

His supposed enemy did not fail to make a report of her success, and to
magnify every advantage they had gained; believing, in good earnest,
that her lady’s warmth was the effect of a real passion for the
fortunate Mr. Fathom. But he himself viewed the adventure in a
different light, and rightly imputed the violence of Mademoiselle’s
behaviour to the contradiction she had sustained from her maid, or to
the fire of her natural generosity glowing in behalf of innocence
traduced. Nevertheless, he was perfectly well pleased with the nature
of the contest; because, in the course of such debates, he foresaw that
he should become habitually her hero, and that, in time, she would
actually believe those exaggerations of his merit, which she herself
had feigned, for the honour of her own arguments.

This presage, founded upon that principle of self-respect, without
which no individual exists, may certainly be justified by manifold
occurrences in life. We ourselves have known a very pregnant example,
which we shall relate, for the emolument of the reader. A certain needy
author having found means to present a manuscript to one of those sons
of fortune who are dignified with the appellation of patrons, instead
of reaping that applause and advantage with which he had regaled his
fancy, had the mortification to find his performance treated with
infinite irreverence and contempt, and, in high dudgeon and
disappointment, appealed to the judgment of another critic, who, he
knew, had no veneration for the first.

This common consolation, to which all baffled authors have recourse,
was productive of very happy consequences to our bard; for, though the
opinions of both judges concerning the piece were altogether the same,
the latter, either out of compassion to the appellant, or desire of
rendering his rival ridiculous in the eye of taste, undertook to repair
the misfortune, and in this manner executed the plan. In a meeting of
literati, to which both these wits belonged, he who had espoused the
poet’s cause, having previously desired another member to bring his
composition on the carpet, no sooner heard it mentioned, than he began
to censure it with flagrant marks of scorn, and, with an ironical air,
looking at its first condemner, observed, that he must be furiously
infected with the rage of patronising, who could take such a deplorable
performance into his protection. The sarcasm took effect.

The person against whom it was levelled, taking umbrage at his
presumption, assumed an aspect of disdain, and replied with great
animosity, that nothing was more easily supported than the character of
a Zoilus, because no production was altogether free from blemishes; and
any man might pronounce against any piece by the lump, without
interesting his own discernment; but to perceive the beauties of a
work, it was requisite to have learning, judgment, and taste; and
therefore he did not wonder that the gentleman had overlooked a great
many in the composition which he so contemptuously decried. A rejoinder
succeeded this reply, and produced a long train of altercation, in
which the gentleman, who had formerly treated the book with such
disrespect, now professed himself its passionate admirer, and held
forth in praise of it with great warmth and elocution.

Not contented with having exhibited this instance of regard, he next
morning sent a message to the owner, importing, that he had but
superficially glanced over the manuscript, and desiring the favour of
perusing it a second time. Being indulged in this request, he
recommended it in terms of rapture to all his friends and dependants,
and, by dint of unwearied solicitation, procured a very ample
subscription for the author.

But, to resume the thread of our story. Teresa’s practices were not
confined to simple defamation. Her reproaches were contrived so as to
imply some intelligence in favour of the person she reviled. In
exemplifying his pertness and arrogance, she repeated his witty
repartee; on pretence of blaming his ferocity, she recounted proofs of
his spirit and prowess; and, in explaining the source of his vanity,
gave her mistress to understand, that a certain young lady of fashion
was said to be enamoured of his person. Nor did this well-instructed
understrapper omit those other parts of her cue which the principal
judged necessary for the furtherance of his scheme. Her conversation
became less guarded, and took a freer turn than usual; she seized all
opportunities of introducing little amorous stories, the greatest part
of which were invented for the purposes of warming her passions, and
lowering the price of chastity in her esteem; for she represented all
the young lady’s contemporaries in point of age and situation, as so
many sensualists, who, without scruple, indulged themselves in the
stolen pleasures of youth.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand seconded these endeavours with his whole industry
and address. He redoubled, if possible, his deference and respect,
whetting his assiduity to the keenest edge of attention; and, in short,
regulated his dress, conversation, and deportment, according to the
fancy, turn, and prevailing humour of his young mistress. He, moreover,
attempted to profit by her curiosity, which he knew to be truly
feminine; and having culled from the library of his patron certain
dangerous books, calculated to debauch the minds of young people, left
them occasionally upon the table in his apartment, after having
directed Teresa to pick them up, as if by accident, in his absence, and
carry them off for the entertainment of Mademoiselle; nay, this crafty
projector found means to furnish his associate with some mischievous
preparations, which were mingled in her chocolate, tea, or coffee, as
provocations to warm her constitution; yet all these machinations,
ingenious as they were, failed, not only in fulfilling their aim, but
even in shaking the foundations of her virtue or pride, which stood
their assaults unmoved, like a strong tower built upon a rock,
impregnable to all the tempestuous blasts of heaven.

Not but that the conspirators were more than once mistaken in the
effects of their artifices, and disposed to applaud themselves on the
progress they had made. When at any time she expressed a desire to
examine those performances which were laid before her as snares to
entrap her chastity, they attributed that, which was no other than
curiosity, to a looseness of sentiment; and when she discovered no
aversion to hear those anecdotes concerning the frailty of her
neighbours, they imputed to abatement of chastity that satisfaction
which was the result of self-congratulation on her own superior virtue.

So far did the treacherous accomplice of Fathom presume upon these
misconstructions, that she at length divested her tongue of all
restraint, and behaved in such a manner, that the young lady,
confounded and incensed at her indecency and impudence, rebuked her
with great severity, and commanded her to reform her discourse, on pain
of being dismissed with disgrace from her service.




CHAPTER NINE

THE CONFEDERATES CHANGE THEIR BATTERY, AND ACHIEVE A REMARKABLE
ADVENTURE.


Thunderstruck at this disappointment, the confederates held a council,
in order to deliberate upon the next measures that should be taken; and
Ferdinand, for the present, despairing of accomplishing his grand aim,
resolved to profit in another manner, by the conveniency of his
situation. He represented to his helpmate, that it would be prudent for
them to make hay while the sun shone, as their connexion might be
sooner or later discovered, and an end put to all those opportunities
which they now so happily enjoyed. All principles of morality had been
already excluded from their former plan; consequently he found it an
easy task to interest Teresa in any other scheme tending to their
mutual advantage, howsoever wicked and perfidious it might be. He
therefore persuaded her to be his auxiliary in defrauding Mademoiselle
at play, and gave her suitable directions for that purpose; and even
tutored her how to abuse the trust reposed in her, by embezzling the
young lady’s effects, without incurring the suspicion of dishonesty.

On the supposition that every servant in the house was not able to
resist such temptation, the purse of her mistress, to which the maid
had always access, was dropped in a passage which the domestics had
occasion to frequent; and Fathom posted himself in a convenient place,
in order to observe the effect of his stratagem. Here he was not
disappointed in his conjecture. The first person who chanced to pass
that way, was one of the chambermaids, with whom Teresa had lived for
some time in a state of inveterate enmity, because the wench had failed
in that homage and respect which was paid to her by the rest of the
servants.

Ferdinand had, in his heart, espoused the quarrel of his associate, and
longed for an occasion to deliver her from the malicious observance of
such an antagonist. When he, therefore, saw her approach, his heart
throbbed with joyful expectations; but, when she snatched up the purse,
and thrust it in her bosom, with all the eagerness and confusion of one
determined to appropriate the windfall to her own use, his transports
were altogether unspeakable. He traced her to her own apartment,
whither she immediately retreated with great trepidation, and then
communicated the discovery to Teresa, together with instructions how to
behave in the sequel.

In conformity with these lessons, she took the first opportunity of
going to Mademoiselle, and demanding money for some necessary expense,
that the loss might be known before the finder could have leisure to
make any fresh conveyance of the prize; and, in the meantime, Ferdinand
kept a strict eye upon the motions of the chambermaid. The young lady,
having rummaged her pockets in vain, expressed some surprise at the
loss of her purse; upon which her attendant gave indications of extreme
amazement and concern. She said, it could not possibly be lost;
entreated her to search her escritoir, while she herself ran about the
room, prying into every corner, with all the symptoms of fear and
distraction. Having made this unsuccessful inquiry, she pretended to
shed a flood of tears, bewailing her own fate, in being near the person
of any lady who met with such a misfortune, by which, she observed, her
character might be called in question. She produced her own keys, and
begged upon her knees, that her chamber and boxes might be searched
without delay.

In a word, she demeaned herself so artfully upon this occasion, that
her mistress, who never entertained the least doubt of her integrity,
now looked upon her as a miracle of fidelity and attachment, and was at
infinite pains to console her for the accident which had happened;
protesting that, for her own part, the loss of the money should never
affect her with a moment’s uneasiness, if she could retrieve a certain
medal which she had long kept in her purse, as a remembrance of her
deceased aunt, from whom she received it in a present.

Fathom entered accidentally into the midst of this well-acted scene,
and, perceiving the agitation of the maid, and the concern of the
mistress, desired, in a respectful manner, to know the cause of their
disorder. Before the young lady had time to make him acquainted with
the circumstances of the case, his accomplice exclaimed, in an affected
passion, “Mr. Fathom, my lady has lost her purse; and, as no persons in
the family are so much about her as you and I, you must give me leave,
in my own justification, to insist upon Mademoiselle’s ordering the
apartments of us both to be searched without loss of time. Here are my
pockets and my keys, and you cannot scruple to give her the same
satisfaction; for innocence has nothing to fear.”

Miss Melvil reprimanded her sharply for her unmannerly zeal; and
Ferdinand eyeing her with a look of disdain, “Madam,” said he, “I
approve of your proposal; but, before I undergo such mortification, I
would advise Mademoiselle to subject the two chambermaids to such
inquiry; as they also have access to the apartments, and are, I
apprehend, as likely as you or I to behave in such a scandalous
manner.”

The young lady declared that she was too well satisfied of Teresa’s
honesty and Ferdinand’s honour, to harbour the least suspicion of
either, and that she would sooner die than disgrace them so far as to
comply with the proposal the former had made; but as she saw no reason
for exempting the inferior servants from that examination which Fathom
advised, she would forthwith put it in execution. The chambermaids
being accordingly summoned, she calmly asked if either of them had
accidentally found the purse she had dropped? and both replying in the
negative, she assumed an air of severity and determination, and
demanding their keys, threatened to examine their trunks on the
instant.

The guilty Abigail, who, though an Hungarian, was not inferior, in
point of effrontery, to any one of the sisterhood in England, no sooner
heard this menace, than she affected an air of affronted innocence,
thanked God she had lived in many reputable families, and been trusted
with untold gold, but was never before suspected of theft; that the
other maid might do as she should think proper, and be mean-spirited
enough to let her things be tumbled topsy-turvy and exposed; but, for
her own part, if she should be used in that inhuman and disgraceful
manner, she would not stay another hour in the house; and in conclusion
said, that Mademoiselle had more reason to look sharp after those who
enjoyed the greatest share of her favour, than believe their malicious
insinuations against innocent people whom they were well known to hate
and defame.

This declaration, implying an hint to the prejudice of Teresa, far from
diverting Miss Melvil from her purpose, served only to enhance the
character of the accused in her opinion, and to confirm her suspicion
of the accuser, of whom she again demanded her keys, protesting that,
should she prove refractory, the Count himself should take cognisance
of the affair, whereas, if she would deal ingenuously, she should have
no cause to repent of her confession. So saying, she desired our
adventurer to take the trouble of calling up some of the men-servants;
upon which the conscious criminal began to tremble, and, falling upon
her knees, acknowledged her guilt, and implored the forgiveness of her
young mistress.

Teresa, seizing this occasion to signalise her generosity, joined in
the request, and the offender was pardoned, after having restored the
purse, and promised in the sight of Heaven, that the devil should never
again entice her to the commission of such a crime. This adventure
fully answered all the purposes of our politician; it established the
opinion of his fellow-labourer’s virtue, beyond the power of accident
or information to shake, and set up a false beacon to mislead the
sentiments of Mademoiselle, in case she should for the future meet with
the like misfortune.




CHAPTER TEN

THEY PROCEED TO LEVY CONTRIBUTIONS WITH GREAT SUCCESS, UNTIL OUR HERO
SETS OUT WITH THE YOUNG COUNT FOR VIENNA, WHERE HE ENTERS INTO LEAGUE
WITH ANOTHER ADVENTURER.


Under this secure cover, Teresa levied contributions upon her mistress
with great success. Some trinket was missing every day; the young
lady’s patience began to fail; the faithful attendant was overwhelmed
with consternation, and, with the appearance of extreme chagrin,
demanded her dismission, affirming that these things were certainly
effected by some person in the family, with a view of murdering her
precious reputation. Miss Melvil, not without difficulty, quieted her
vexation with assurances of inviolable confidence and esteem, until a
pair of diamond earrings vanished, when Teresa could no longer keep her
affliction within bounds. Indeed, this was an event of more consequence
than all the rest which had happened, for the jewels were valued at
five hundred florins.

Mademoiselle was accordingly alarmed to such a degree, that she made
her mother acquainted with her loss, and that good lady, who was an
excellent economist, did not fail to give indications of extraordinary
concern. She asked, if her daughter had reason to suspect any
individual in the family, and if she was perfectly confident of her own
woman’s integrity? Upon which Mademoiselle, with many encomiums on the
fidelity and attachment of Teresa, recounted the adventure of the
chambermaid, who immediately underwent a strict inquiry, and was even
committed to prison, on the strength of her former misdemeanour. Our
adventurer’s mate insisted upon undergoing the same trial with the rest
of the domestics, and, as usual, comprehended Fathom in her
insinuations; while he seconded the proposal, and privately counselled
the old lady to introduce Teresa to the magistrate of the place. By
these preconcerted recriminations, they escaped all suspicion of
collusion. After a fruitless inquiry, the prisoner was discharged from
her confinement, and turned out of the service of the Count, in whose
private opinion the character of no person suffered so much, as that of
his own son, whom he suspected of having embezzled the jewels, for the
use of a certain inamorata, who, at that time, was said to have
captivated his affections.

The old gentleman felt upon this occasion all that internal anguish
which a man of honour may be supposed to suffer, on account of a son’s
degeneracy; and, without divulging his sentiments, or even hinting his
suspicions to the youth himself, determined to detach him at once from
such dangerous connexions, by sending him forthwith to Vienna, on
pretence of finishing his exercises at the academy, and ushering him
into acquaintance with the great world. Though he would not be thought
by the young gentleman himself to harbour the least doubt of his
morals, he did not scruple to unbosom himself on that subject to
Ferdinand, whose sagacity and virtue he held in great veneration. This
indulgent patron expressed himself in the most pathetic terms, on the
untoward disposition of his son; he told Fathom, that he should
accompany Renaldo (that was the youth’s name) not only as a companion,
but a preceptor and pattern; conjured him to assist his tutor in
superintending his conduct, and to reinforce the governor’s precepts by
his own example; to inculcate upon him the most delicate punctilios of
honour, and decoy him into extravagance, rather than leave the least
illiberal sentiment in his heart.

Our crafty adventurer, with demonstrations of the utmost sensibility,
acknowledged the great goodness of the Count in reposing such
confidence in his integrity; which, as he observed, none but the worst
of villains could abuse; and fervently wished that he might no longer
exist, than he should continue to remember and resent the obligations
he owed to his kind benefactor. While preparations were making for
their departure, our hero held a council with his associate, whom he
enriched with many sage instructions touching her future operations; he
at the same time disburdened her of all or the greatest part of the
spoils she had won, and after having received divers marks of bounty
from the Count and his lady, together with a purse from his young
mistress, he set out for Vienna, in the eighteenth year of his age,
with Renaldo and his governor, who were provided with letters of
recommendation to some of the Count’s friends belonging to the Imperial
court.

Such a favourable introduction could not fail of being advantageous to
a youth of Ferdinand’s specious accomplishments; for he was considered
as the young Count’s companion, admitted into his parties, and included
in all the entertainments to which Renaldo was invited. He soon
distinguished himself by his activity and address, in the course of
those exercises that were taught at the academy of which he was pupil;
his manners were so engaging as to attract the acquaintance of his
fellow-students, and his conversation being sprightly and inoffensive,
grew into very great request; in a word, he and the young Count formed
a remarkable contrast, which, in the eye of the world, redounded to his
advantage.

They were certainly, in all respects, the reverse of each other.
Renaldo, under a total defect of exterior cultivation, possessed a most
excellent understanding, with every virtue that dignifies the human
heart; while the other, beneath a most agreeable outside, with an
inaptitude and aversion to letters, concealed an amazing fund of
villany and ingratitude. Hitherto his observation had been confined to
a narrow sphere, and his reflections, though surprisingly just and
acute, had not attained to that maturity which age and experience give;
but now, his perceptions began to be more distinct, and extended to a
thousand objects which had never before come under his cognisance.

He had formerly imagined, but was now fully persuaded, that the sons of
men preyed upon one another, and such was the end and condition of
their being. Among the principal figures of life, he observed few or no
characters that did not bear a strong analogy to the savage tyrants of
the wood. One resembled a tiger in fury and rapaciousness; a second
prowled about like an hungry wolf, seeking whom he might devour; a
third acted the part of a jackal, in beating the bush for game to his
voracious employer; and the fourth imitated the wily fox, in practising
a thousand crafty ambuscades for the destruction of the ignorant and
unwary. This last was the department of life for which he found himself
best qualified by nature and inclination; and he accordingly resolved
that his talent should not rust in his possession. He was already
pretty well versed in all the sciences of play; but he had every day
occasion to see these arts carried to such a surprising pitch of
finesse and dexterity, as discouraged him from building his schemes on
that foundation.

He therefore determined to fascinate the judgment, rather than the eyes
of his fellow-creatures, by a continual exercise of that gift of
deceiving, with which he knew himself endued to an unrivalled degree;
and to acquire unbounded influence with those who might be subservient
to his interest, by an assiduous application to their prevailing
passions. Not that play was altogether left out in the projection of
his economy.— Though he engaged himself very little in the executive
part of gaming, he had not been long in Vienna, when he entered into
league with a genius of that kind, whom he distinguished among the
pupils of the academy, and who indeed had taken up his habitation in
that place with a view to pillage the provincials on their first
arrival in town, before they could be armed with proper circumspection
to preserve their money, or have time to dispose of it in any other
shape.

Similar characters naturally attract each other, and people of our
hero’s principles are, of all others, the most apt to distinguish their
own likeness wheresoever it occurs; because they always keep the
faculty of discerning in full exertion. It was in consequence of this
mutual alertness, that Ferdinand and the stranger, who was a native of
Tyrol, perceived themselves reflected in the dispositions of each
other, and immediately entered into an offensive and defensive
alliance; our adventurer undertaking for the articles of intelligence,
countenance, and counsel, and his associate charging himself with the
risk of execution.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

FATHOM MAKES VARIOUS EFFORTS IN THE WORLD OF GALLANTRY.


Thus connected, they began to hunt in couples; and Fathom, in order to
profit by the alliance with a good grace, contrived a small scheme that
succeeded to his wish. Renaldo being one night intoxicated in the
course of a merry-making with his fellow-pupils, from which Fathom had
purposely absented himself, was by the Tyrolese so artfully provoked to
play, that he could not resist the temptation, but engaged at passdice
with that fell adversary, who, in less than an hour, stripped him of a
pretty round sum. Next day, when the young gentleman recovered the use
of his reflection, he was sensibly chagrined at the folly and
precipitation of his own conduct, an account of which he communicated
in confidence to our hero, with demonstrations of infinite shame and
concern.

Ferdinand, having moralised upon the subject with great sagacity, and
sharply inveighed against the Tyrolese, for the unfair advantage he had
taken, retired to his closet, and wrote the following billet, which was
immediately sent to his ally:—

“The obligations I owe, and the attachments I feel, to the Count de
Melvil, will not suffer me to be an idle spectator of the wrongs
offered to his son, in the dishonourable use, I understand, you made
last night of his unguarded hours. I therefore insist upon your making
immediate restitution of the booty which you so unjustly got; otherwise
I expect you will meet me upon the ramparts, near the bastion de la
Port Neuve, to-morrow morning at daybreak, in order to justify, with
your sword, the finesse you have practised upon the friend of FERDINAND
DE FATHOM.”

The gamester no sooner received this intimation, than, according to the
plan which had been preconcerted betwixt the author and him, he went to
the apartment of Renaldo, and presenting the sum of money which he had
defrauded him of the preceding night, told him, with a stern
countenance, that, though it was a just acquisition, he scorned to
avail himself of his good fortune against any person who entertained
the smallest doubt of his honour.

The young Count, surprised at this address, rejected his offer with
disdain, and desired to know the meaning of such an unexpected
declaration. Upon which, the other produced Ferdinand’s billet, and
threatened, in very high terms, to meet the stripling according to his
invitation, and chastise him severely for his presumption. The
consequence of this explanation is obvious. Renaldo, imputing the
officiousness of Fathom to the zeal of his friendship, interposed in
the quarrel, which was amicably compromised, not a little to the honour
of our adventurer, who thus obtained an opportunity of displaying his
courage and integrity, without the least hazard to his person; while,
at the same time, his confederate recommended himself to the esteem of
the young Count, by his spirited behaviour on this occasion; so that
Renaldo being less shy of his company for the future, the Tyrolese had
the fairer opportunities to prosecute his designs upon the young
gentleman’s purse.

It would be almost superfluous to say, that these were not neglected.
The son of Count Melvil was not deficient in point of penetration; but
his whole study was at that time engrossed by the care of his
education, and he had sometimes recourse to play as an amusement by
which he sought to unbend the severity of his attention. No wonder then
that he fell a prey to an artful gamester, who had been regularly
trained to the profession, and made it the sole study of his life;
especially as the Hungarian was remarkable for a warmth of temper,
which a knight of the post always knows how to manage for his own
advantage.

In the course of these operations, Fathom was a very useful
correspondent. He instructed the Tyrolese in the peculiarities of
Renaldo’s disposition, and made him acquainted with the proper seasons
for profiting by his dexterity. Ferdinand, for example, who, by the
authority derived to him from the injunctions of the old Count,
sometimes took upon himself the office of an adviser, cunningly chose
to counsel the son at those conjunctures when he knew him least able to
bear such expostulation. Advice improperly administered generally acts
in diametrical opposition to the purpose for which it is supposed to be
given; at least this was the case with the young gentleman, who,
inflamed by the reproof of such a tutor, used to obey the dictates of
his resentment in an immediate repetition of that conduct which our
adventurer had taken the liberty to disapprove; and the gamester was
always at hand to minister unto his indignation. By these means he was
disencumbered of divers considerable remittances, with which his father
cheerfully supplied him, on the supposition that they were spent with
taste and liberality, under the direction of our adventurer.

But Ferdinand’s views were not confined to the narrow field of this
alliance. He attempted divers enterprises in the world of gallantry,
conscious of his own personal qualifications, and never doubting that
he could insinuate himself into the good graces of some married lady
about court, or lay an opulent dowager under contribution. But he met
with an obstacle in his endeavours of this kind, which all his art was
unable to surmount. This was no other than the obscurity of his birth,
and the want of a title, without which no person in that country lays
claim to the privileges of a gentleman. Had he foreseen this
inconvenience he might have made shift to obviate the consequences, by
obtaining permission to appear in the character of the Count’s kinsman;
though, in all probability, such an expedient would not have been
extremely agreeable to the old gentleman, who was very tenacious of the
honour of his family; nevertheless, his generosity might have been
prevailed upon to indulge Fathom with such a pretext, in consideration
of the youth’s supposed attachment, and the obligations for which he
deemed himself indebted to his deceased mother.

True it is, Ferdinand, upon his first arrival at Vienna, had been
admitted into fashionable company, on the footing of Renaldo’s
companion, because nobody suspected the defect of his pedigree; and
even after a report had been circulated to the prejudice of his
extraction, by the industry of a lacquey who attended the young Count,
there were not wanting many young people of distinction who still
favoured him with their countenance and correspondence; but he was no
longer invited to private families, in which only he could expect to
profit by his address among the ladies, and had the mortification of
finding himself frequently excepted from parties which were expressly
calculated for the entertainment of the young Count. Luckily, his
spirit was so pliant as to sustain these slights without being much
dejected; instead of repining at the loss of that respect which had
been paid to him at first, he endeavoured, with all his might, to
preserve the little that still remained, and resolved to translate into
a humbler sphere that gallantry which he had no longer opportunities of
displaying in the world of rank and fashion.




CHAPTER TWELVE

HE EFFECTS A LODGMENT IN THE HOUSE OF A RICH JEWELLER.


In consequence of this determination, he to the uttermost exerted his
good-humour among the few friends of consequence his fortune had left,
and even carried his complaisance so far as to become the humble
servant of their pleasures, while he attempted to extend his
acquaintance in an inferior path of life, where he thought his talents
would shine more conspicuous than at the assemblies of the great, and
conduce more effectually to the interest of all his designs. Nor did he
find himself disappointed in that expectation, sanguine as it was. He
soon found means to be introduced to the house of a wealthy bourgeois,
where every individual was charmed with his easy air and extraordinary
qualifications. He accommodated himself surprisingly to the humours of
the whole family; smoked tobacco, swallowed wine, and discoursed of
stones with the husband, who was a rich jeweller; sacrificed himself to
the pride and loquacity of the wife; and played upon the violin, and
sung alternately, for the amusement of his only daughter, a buxom lass,
nearly of his own age, the fruit of a former marriage.

It was not long before Ferdinand had reason to congratulate himself on
the footing he had gained in this society. He had expected to find, and
in a little time actually discovered, that mutual jealousy and rancour
which almost always subsist between a daughter and her step-dame,
inflamed with all the virulence of female emulation; for the disparity
in their ages served only to render them the more inveterate rivals in
the desire of captivating the other sex. Our adventurer having
deliberated upon the means of converting this animosity to his own
advantage, saw no method for this purpose so feasible as that of making
his approaches to the hearts of both, by ministering to each in
private, food for their reciprocal envy and malevolence; because he
well knew that no road lies so direct and open to a woman’s heart as
that of gratifying her passions of vanity and resentment.

When he had an opportunity of being particular with the mother, he
expressed his concern for having unwittingly incurred the displeasure
of Mademoiselle, which, he observed, was obvious in every circumstance
of her behaviour towards him; protesting he was utterly innocent of all
intention of offending her; and that he could not account for his
disgrace any other way, than by supposing she took umbrage at the
direction of his chief regards towards her mother-in-law, which, he
owned, was altogether involuntary, being wholly influenced by that
lady’s superior charms and politeness.

Such a declaration was perfectly well calculated for the meridian of a
dame like her, who with all the intoxications of unenlightened pride,
and an increased appetite for pleasure, had begun to find herself
neglected, and even to believe that her attractions were actually on
the wane. She very graciously consoled our gallant for the mishap of
which he complained, representing Wilhelmina (that was the daughter’s
name) as a pert, illiterate, envious baggage, of whose disgust he ought
to make no consideration; then she recounted many instances of her own
generosity to that young lady, with the returns of malice and
ingratitude she had made; and, lastly, enumerated all the imperfections
of her person, education, and behaviour; that he might see with what
justice the gypsy pretended to vie with those who had been
distinguished by the approbation and even gallantry of the best people
in Vienna.

Having thus established himself her confidant and gossip, he knew his
next step of promotion would necessarily be to the degree of her lover;
and in that belief resolved to play the same game with Mademoiselle
Wilhelmina, whose complexion was very much akin to that of her
stepmother; indeed they resembled each other too much to live upon any
terms of friendship or even decorum. Fathom, in order to enjoy a
private conversation with the young lady, never failed to repeat his
visit every afternoon, till at length he had the pleasure of finding
her disengaged, the jeweller being occupied among his workmen, and his
wife gone to assist at a lying-in.

Our adventurer and the daughter had already exchanged their vows, by
the expressive language of the eyes; he had even declared himself in
some tender ejaculations which had been softly whispered in her ear,
when he could snatch an opportunity of venting them unperceived; nay,
he had upon divers occasions gently squeezed her fair hand, on pretence
of tuning her harpsichord, and been favoured with returns of the same
cordial pressure; so that, instead of accosting her with the fearful
hesitation and reserve of a timid swain, he told her, after the
exercise of the doux-yeux, that he was come to confer with her upon a
subject that nearly concerned her peace; and asked if she had not
observed of late an evident abatement of friendship in her mother’s
behaviour to him, whom she had formerly treated with such marks of
favour and respect. Mademoiselle would not pay so ill a compliment to
her own discernment as to say she had not perceived the alteration;
which, on the contrary, she owned was extremely palpable; nor was it
difficult to divine the cause of such estranged looks. This remark was
accompanied with an irresistible glance; she smiled enchanting, the
colour deepened on her cheeks, her breast began to heave, and her whole
frame underwent a most agreeable confusion.

Ferdinand was not a man to let such a favourable conjuncture pass
unregarded. “Yes, charming Wilhelmina!” exclaimed the politician in an
affected rapture, “the cause is as conspicuous as your attractions. She
hath, in spite of all my circumspection, perceived that passion which
it is not in my power to conceal, and in consequence of which I now
declare myself your devoted adorer; or, conscious of your superior
excellence, her jealousy hath taken the alarm, and, though stung with
conjecture only, repines at the triumph of your perfections. How far
this spirit of malignity may be inflamed to my prejudice, I know not.
Perhaps, as this is the first, it may be also the last opportunity I
shall have of avowing the dearest sentiments of my heart to the fair
object that inspired them; in a word, I may be for ever excluded from
your presence. Excuse me, then, divine creature! from the practice of
those unnecessary forms, which I should take pride in observing, were I
indulged with the ordinary privileges of an honourable lover; and, once
for all, accept the homage of an heart overflowing with love and
admiration. Yes, adorable Wilhelmina! I am dazzled with your
supernatural beauty; your other accomplishments strike me with wonder
and awe. I am enchanted by the graces of your deportment, ravished with
the charms of your conversation; and there is a certain tenderness of
benevolence in that endearing aspect, which, I trust, will not fail to
melt with sympathy at the emotions of a faithful slave like me.”

So saying, he threw himself upon his knees, and, seizing her plump
hand, pressed it to his lips with all the violence of real transport.
The nymph, whose passions nature had filled to the brim, could not hear
such a rhapsody unmoved. Being an utter stranger to addresses of this
kind, she understood every word of it in the literal acceptation; she
believed implicitly in the truth of the encomiums he had bestowed, and
thought it reasonable he should be rewarded for the justice he had done
to her qualifications, which had hitherto been almost altogether
overlooked. In short, her heart began to thaw, and her face to hang out
the flag of capitulation; which was no sooner perceived by our hero,
than he renewed his attack with redoubled fervour, pronouncing in a
most vehement tone, “Light of my eyes, and empress of my soul! behold
me prostrate at your feet, waiting with the most pious resignation, for
that sentence from your lips, on which my future happiness or misery
must altogether depend. Not with more reverence does the unhappy bashaw
kiss the sultan’s letter that contains his doom, than I will submit to
your fatal determination. Speak then, angelic sweetness! for never, ah!
never will I rise from this suppliant posture, until I am encouraged to
live and hope. No! if you refuse to smile upon my passion, here shall I
breathe the last sighs of a despairing lover; here shall this faithful
sword do the last office to its unfortunate master, and shed the blood
of the truest heart that ever felt the cruel pangs of disappointed
love.”

The young lady, well-nigh overcome by this effusion, which brought the
tears into her eyes, “Enough, enough,” cried she, interrupting him,
“sure you men were created for the ruin of our sex.”—“Ruin!” re-echoed
Fathom, “talk not of ruin and Wilhelmina! let these terms be for ever
parted, far as the east and west asunder! let ever smiling peace attend
her steps, and love and joy still wanton in her train! Ruin, indeed,
shall wait upon her enemies, if such there be, and those love-lorn
wretches who pine with anguish under her disdain. Grant me, kind
Heaven, a more propitious boon; direct her genial regards to one whose
love is without example, and whose constancy is unparalleled. Bear
witness to my constancy and faith, ye verdant hills, ye fertile plains,
ye shady groves, ye purling streams; and if I prove untrue, ah! let me
never find a solitary willow or a bubbling brook, by help of which I
may be enabled to put a period to my wretched life.”

Here this excellent actor began to sob most piteously, and the
tender-hearted Wilhelmina, unable longer to withstand his moving tale,
with a repetition of the interjection, ah! gently dropped into his
arms. This was the beginning of a correspondence that soon rose to a
very interesting pitch; and they forthwith concerted measures for
carrying it on without the knowledge or suspicion of her mother-in-law.
Nevertheless, the young lady, vanquished as she was, and unskilled in
the ways of men, would not all at once yield at discretion; but
insisted upon those terms, without which no woman’s reputation can be
secured. Our lover, far from seeking to evade the proposal, assented to
it in terms of uncommon satisfaction, and promised to use his whole
industry in finding a priest upon whose discretion they could rely;
nay, he certainly resolved to comply with her request in good earnest,
rather than forfeit the advantages which he foresaw in their union. His
good fortune, however, exempted him from the necessity of taking such a
step, which at best must have been disagreeable; for so many
difficulties occurred in the inquiry which was set on foot, and so
artfully did Fathom in the meantime manage the influence he had already
gained over her heart, that, before her passion could obtain a legal
gratification, she surrendered to his wish, without any other
assurance, than his solemn profession of sincerity and truth, on which
she reposed herself with the most implicit confidence and faith.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

HE IS EXPOSED TO A MOST PERILOUS INCIDENT IN THE COURSE OF HIS INTRIGUE
WITH THE DAUGHTER.


He was rejoiced to find her so easily satisfied in such a momentous
concern, for the principal aim of the intrigue was to make her
necessary to his interested views, and even, if possible, an associate
in the fraudulent plans he had projected upon her father; consequently
he considered this relaxation in her virtue as an happy omen of his
future success. All the obstacles to their mutual enjoyment being thus
removed, our adventurer was by his mistress indulged with an
assignation in her own chamber, which, though contiguous to that of her
stepmother, was provided with a door that opened into a common
staircase, to which he had access at all hours of the night.

He did not neglect the rendezvous, but, presenting himself at the
appointed time, which was midnight, made the signal they had agreed
upon, and was immediately admitted by Wilhelmina, who waited for hire
with a lover’s impatience. Fathom was not deficient in those
expressions of rapture that are current on those occasions; but, on the
contrary, became so loud in the transports of self-congratulation, that
his voice reached the ears of the vigilant stepmother, who wakening the
jeweller from his first nap, gave him to understand that some person
was certainly in close conversation with his daughter; and exhorted him
to rise forthwith, and vindicate the honour of his family.

The German, who was naturally of a phlegmatic habit, and never went to
bed without a full dose of the creature, which added to his
constitutional drowsiness, gave no ear to his wife’s intimation, until
she had repeated it thrice, and used other means to rouse him from the
arms of slumber. Meanwhile Fathom and his inamorata overheard her
information, and our hero would have made his retreat immediately,
through the port by which he entered, had not his intention been
overruled by the remonstrances of the young lady, who observed that the
door was already fast bolted, and could not possibly be opened without
creating a noise that would confirm the suspicion of her parents; and
that over and above this objection he would, in sallying from that
door, run the risk of being met by her father, who in all probability
would present himself before it, in order to hinder our hero’s escape.
She therefore conveyed him softly into her closet, where she assured
him he might remain with great tranquillity, in full confidence that
she would take such measures as would effectually screen him from
detection.

He was fain to depend upon her assurance, and accordingly ensconced
himself behind her dressing-table; but he could not help sweating with
apprehension, and praying fervently to God for his deliverance, when he
heard the jeweller thundering at the door, and calling to his daughter
for admittance. Wilhelmina, who was already undressed, and had
purposely extinguished the light, pretended to be suddenly waked from
her sleep, and starting up, exclaimed in a tone of surprise and
affright, “Jesu, Maria! what is the matter?”—“Hussy!” replied the
German in a terrible accent, “open the door this instant; there is a
man in your bedchamber, and, by the lightning and thunder! I will wash
away the stain he has cast upon my honour with the schellum’s
heart’s-blood.”

Not at all intimidated by this boisterous threat, she admitted him
without hesitation, and, with a shrillness of voice peculiar to
herself, began to hold forth upon her own innocence and his unjust
suspicion, mingling in her harangue sundry oblique hints against her
mother-in-law, importing, that some people were so viciously inclined
by their own natures, that she did not wonder at their doubting the
virtue of other people; but that these people despised the insinuations
of such people, who ought to be more circumspect in their own conduct,
lest they themselves should suffer reprisals from those people whom
they had so maliciously slandered.

Having uttered these flowers of rhetoric, which were calculated for the
hearing of her step-dame, who stood with a light at her husband’s back,
the young lady assumed an ironical air, and admonished her father to
search every corner of her apartment. She even affected to assist his
inquiry; with her own hands pulled out a parcel of small drawers, in
which her trinkets were contained; desired him to look into her
needlecase and thimble, and, seeing his examination fruitless,
earnestly intreated him to rummage her closet also, saying, with a
sneer, that, in all probability, the dishonourer would be found in that
lurking-place. The manner in which she pretended to ridicule his
apprehensions made an impression upon the jeweller, who was very well
disposed to retreat into his own nest, when his wife, with a certain
slyness in her countenance, besought him to comply with his daughter’s
request, and look into that same closet, by which means Wilhelmina’s
virtue would obtain a complete triumph.

Our adventurer, who overheard the conversation, was immediately seized
with a palsy of fear. He trembled at every joint, the sweat trickled
down his forehead, his teeth began to chatter, his hair to stand on
end; and he, in his heart, bitterly cursed the daughter’s petulance,
the mother’s malice, together with his own precipitation, by which he
was involved in an adventure so pregnant with danger and disgrace.
Indeed, the reader may easily conceive his disorder, when he heard the
key turning in the lock, and the German swearing that he would make him
food for the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air.

Fathom had come unprepared with weapons of defence, was naturally an
economist of his person, and saw himself on the brink of forfeiting not
only the promised harvest of his double intrigue, but also the
reputation of a man of honour, upon which all his future hopes
depended. His agony was therefore unspeakable, when the door flew open;
and it was not till after a considerable pause of recollection, that he
perceived the candle extinguished by the motion of the air produced
from the German’s sudden irruption. This accident, which disconcerted
him so much as to put a full stop to his charge, was very favourable to
our hero, who, summoning all his presence of mind, crept up into the
chimney, while the jeweller stood at the door, waiting for his wife’s
return with another light; so that, when the closet was examined, there
was nothing found to justify the report which the stepmother had made;
and the father, after having made a slight apology to Wilhelmina for
his intrusion, retired with his yoke-fellow into their own chamber.

The young lady, who little thought that her papa would have taken her
at her word, was overwhelmed with confusion and dismay, when she saw
him enter the closet; and, had her lover been discovered, would, in all
probability, have been the loudest in his reproach, and, perhaps, have
accused him of an intention to rob the house; but she was altogether
astonished when she found he had made shift to elude the inquiry of her
parents, because she could not conceive the possibility of his escaping
by the window, which was in the third storey, at a prodigious distance
from the ground; and how he should conceal himself in the apartment,
was a mystery which she could by no means unfold. Before her father and
mother retired, she lighted her lamp, on pretence of being afraid to be
in the dark, after the perturbation of spirits she had undergone; and
her room was no sooner evacuated of such troublesome visitants, than
she secured the doors, and went in quest of her lover.

Accordingly, every corner of the closet underwent a new search, and she
called upon his name with a soft voice, which she thought no other
person would overhear. But Ferdinand did not think proper to gratify
her impatience, because he could not judge of the predicament in which
he stood by the evidence of all his senses, and would not relinquish
his post, until he should be better certified that the coast was clear.
Meanwhile, his Dulcinea, having performed her inquiry to no purpose,
imagined there was something preternatural in the circumstance of his
vanishing so unaccountably, and began to cross herself with great
devotion. She returned to her chamber, fixed the lamp in the fireplace,
and, throwing herself upon the bed, gave way to the suggestions of her
superstition, which were reinforced by the silence that prevailed, and
the gloomy glimmering of the light. She reflected upon the trespass she
had already committed in her heart, and, in the conjectures of her
fear, believed that her lover was no other than the devil himself, who
had assumed the appearance of Fathom, in order to tempt and seduce her
virtue.

While her imagination teemed with those horrible ideas, our adventurer,
concluding, from the general stillness, that the jeweller and his wife
were at last happily asleep, ventured to come forth from his
hiding-place, and stood before his mistress all begrimed with soot.
Wilhelmina, lifting up her eyes, and seeing this sable apparition,
which she mistook for Satan in propria persona, instantly screamed, and
began to repeat her pater-noster with an audible voice. Upon which
Ferdinand, foreseeing that her parents would be again alarmed, would
not stay to undeceive her and explain himself, but, unlocking the door
with great expedition, ran downstairs, and luckily accomplished his
escape. This was undoubtedly the wisest measure he could have taken;
for he had not performed one half of his descent toward the street,
when the German was at his daughter’s bedside, demanding to know the
cause of her exclamation. She then gave him an account of what she had
seen, with all the exaggerations of her own fancy, and, after having
weighed the circumstances of her story, he interpreted the apparition
into a thief, who had found means to open the door that communicated
with the stair; but, having been scared by Wilhelmina’s shriek, had
been obliged to retreat before he could execute his purpose.

Our hero’s spirits were so wofully disturbed by this adventure, that,
for a whole week, he felt no inclination to visit his inamorata, and
was not without apprehension that the affair had terminated in an
explanation very little to his advantage. He was, however, delivered
from this disagreeable suspense, by an accidental meeting with the
jeweller himself, who kindly chid him for his long absence, and
entertained him in the street with an account of the alarm which his
family had sustained, by a thief who broke into Wilhelmina’s apartment.
Glad to find his apprehension mistaken, he renewed his correspondence
with the family, and, in a little time, found reason to console himself
for the jeopardy and panic he had undergone.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

HE IS REDUCED TO A DREADFUL DILEMMA, IN CONSEQUENCE OF AN ASSIGNATION
WITH THE WIFE.


Nor was his whole care and attention engrossed by the execution of this
scheme upon the daughter. While he managed his concerns in that quarter
with incredible ardour and application, he was not the less
indefatigable in the prosecution of his design upon the mother-in-law,
which he forwarded with all his art during those opportunities he
enjoyed in the absence of Wilhelmina, who was frequently called away by
the domestic duties of the house. The passions of the jeweller’s wife
were in such a state of exaltation, as exempted our hero from the
repulses and fatigue attending a long siege.

We have already observed how cunningly he catered for the gratification
of her ruling appetite, and have exhibited pregnant proofs of his
ability in gaining upon the human heart; the reader will not therefore
be surprised at the rapidity of his conquest over the affections of a
lady whose complexion was perfectly amorous, and whose vanity laid her
open to all the attempts of adulation. In a word, matters were quickly
brought to such a mutual understanding, that, one evening, while they
amused themselves at lansquenet, Fathom conjured her to give him the
rendezvous next day at the house of any third person of her own sex, in
whose discretion she could confide; and, after a few affected scruples
on her side, which he well knew how to surmount, she complied with his
request, and the circumstances of the appointment were settled
accordingly. After this treaty, their satisfaction rose to such a
warmth, and the conversation became so reciprocally endearing, that our
gallant expressed his impatience of waiting so long for the
accomplishment of his wishes, and, with the most eager transport,
begged she would, if possible, curtail the term of his expectation,
that his brain might not suffer by his standing so many tedious hours
on the giddy verge of rapture.

The dame, who was naturally compassionate, sympathised with his
condition, and, unable to resist his pathetic supplications, gave him
to understand that his desire could not be granted, without subjecting
them both to some hazard, but that she was disposed to run any risk in
behalf of his happiness and peace. After this affectionate preamble,
she told him that her husband was then engaged in a quarterly meeting
of the jewellers, from whence he never failed to return quite
overwhelmed with wine, tobacco, and the phlegm of his own constitution;
so that he would fall fast asleep as soon as his head should touch the
pillow, and she be at liberty to entertain the lover without
interruption, provided he could find means to deceive the jealous
vigilance of Wilhelmina, and conceal himself in some corner of the
house, unsuspected and unperceived.

Our lover, remembering his adventure with the daughter, would have
willingly dispensed with this expedient, and began to repent of the
eagerness with which he had preferred his solicitation; but, seeing
there was now no opportunity of retracting with honour, he affected to
enter heartily into the conversation, and, after much canvassing, it
was determined, that, while Wilhelmina was employed in the kitchen, the
mother should conduct our adventurer to the outer door, where he should
pay the compliment of parting, so as to be overheard by the young lady;
but, in the meantime, glide softly into the jeweller’s bedchamber,
which was a place they imagined least liable to the effects of a
daughter’s prying disposition, and conceal himself in a large press or
wardrobe, that stood in one corner of the apartment. The scene was
immediately acted with great success, and our hero cooped up in his
cage, where he waited so long, that his desires began to subside, and
his imagination to aggravate the danger of his situation.

“Suppose,” said he to himself, “this brutal German, instead of being
stupefied with wine, should come home inflamed with brandy, to the use
of which he is sometimes addicted, far from feeling any inclination to
sleep, he will labour under the most fretful anxiety of watching; every
irascible particle in his disposition will be exasperated; he will be
offended with every object that may present itself to his view; and, if
there is the least ingredient of jealousy in his temper, it will
manifest itself in riot and rage. What if his frenzy should prompt him
to search his wife’s chamber for gallants? this would certainly be the
first place to which he would direct his inquiry; or, granting this
supposition chimerical, I may be seized with an irresistible
inclination to cough, before he is oppressed with sleep; he may be
waked by the noise I shall make in disengaging myself from this
embarrassed situation; and, finally, I may find it impracticable to
retire unseen or unheard, after everything else shall have succeeded to
my wish.”

These suggestions did not at all contribute to the quiet of our
adventurer, who, having waited three whole hours in the most
uncomfortable suspense, heard the jeweller brought into the room in
that very condition which his fears had prognosticated. He had, it
seems, quarrelled over his cups with another tradesman, and received a
salutation on the forehead with a candlestick, which not only left an
ignominious and painful mark upon his countenance, but even disordered
his brain to a very dangerous degree of delirium; so that, instead of
allowing himself quietly to be undressed and put to bed by his wife, he
answered all her gentle admonitions and caresses with the most
opprobrious invectives and obstreperous behaviour; and, though he did
not tax her with infidelity to his bed, he virulently accused her of
extravagance and want of economy; observed, her expensive way of living
would bring him to a morsel of bread; and unfortunately recollecting
the attempt of the supposed thief, started up from his chair, swearing
by G—’s mother that he would forthwith arm himself with a brace of
pistols, and search every apartment in the house. “That press,” said
he, with great vociferation, “may, for aught I know, be the receptacle
of some ruffian.”

So saying, he approached the ark in which Fathom was embarked, and
exclaiming, “Come forth, Satan,” applied his foot to the door of it,
with such violence as threw him from the centre of gravity, and laid
him sprawling on his back. This address made such an impression upon
our adventurer, that he had well-nigh obeyed the summons, and burst
from his concealment, in a desperate effort to escape, without being
recognised by the intoxicated German; and indeed, had the application
been repeated, he in all likelihood would have tried the experiment,
for by this time his terrors had waxed too strong to be much longer
suppressed. From this hazardous enterprise he was, however, exempted by
a lucky accident that happened to his disturber, whose head chancing to
pitch upon the corner of a chair in his fall, he was immediately lulled
into a trance, during which the considerate lady, guessing the disorder
of her gallant, and dreading further interruption, very prudently
released him from his confinement, after she had put out the light, and
in the dark conveyed him to the door, where he was comforted with the
promise that she would punctually remember the rendezvous of next day.

She then invoked the assistance of the servants, who, being waked for
the purpose, lifted up their master, and tumbled him into bed, while
Ferdinand hied him home in an universal sweat, blessing himself from
any future achievement of that sort in a house where he had been twice
in such imminent danger of life and reputation. Nevertheless, he did
not fail to honour the assignation, and avail himself of the
disposition his mistress manifested to make him all the recompense in
her power for the disappointment and chagrin which he had undergone.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

BUT AT LENGTH SUCCEEDS IN HIS ATTEMPT UPON BOTH.


Having thus gained a complete victory over the affections of these two
ladies, he began to convert his good fortune to the purposes of that
principle, from which his view was never, no, not for a moment,
detached. In other words, he used them as ministers and purveyors to
his avarice and fraud. As for the mother-in-law, she was of herself so
liberal as to anticipate the wishes of any moderate adventurer, and
presented him with sundry valuable jewels, as memorials of her esteem;
nor was the daughter backward in such expressions of regard; she
already considered his interest as her own, and took frequent
opportunities of secreting for his benefit certain stray trinkets that
she happened to pick up in her excursions within doors.

All these gratifications he received with demonstrations of infinite
constraint and reluctance, and, in the midst of his rapacious
extortion, acted so cunningly as to impose himself upon both for a
miracle of disinterested integrity. Yet, not contented with what he
thus could earn, and despairing of being able to steer the bark of his
fortune for any length of time between two such dangerous quicksands,
he resolved to profit by the occasion while it lasted, and strike some
considerable stroke at once. A plan was formed in consequence of this
determination, and, at an appointment with the mother in the house of
their female friend, our adventurer appeared with an air of dejection,
which he veiled with a thin cover of forced pleasantry, that his
mistress might suppose he endeavoured to conceal some mortal chagrin
that preyed upon his heart.

The stratagem succeeded to his wish. She observed his countenance
between whiles overcast, took notice of the involuntary sighs he
heaved; and, with the most tender expressions of sympathy, conjured him
to make her acquainted with the cause of his affliction. Instead of
gratifying her request immediately, he evaded her questions with a
respectful reserve, implying, that his love would not suffer him to
make her a partner in his sorrow; and this delicacy on his part whetted
her impatience and concern to such a degree, that, rather than keep her
in such an agony of doubt and apprehension, he was prevailed upon to
tell her, that he had been, the preceding night, engaged with a company
of his fellow-students, where he had made too free with the champagne,
so that his caution forsook him, and he had been decoyed into play by a
Tyrolese gamester, who stripped him of all his ready money, and
obtained from him an obligation for two hundred florins, which he could
not possibly pay without having recourse to his relation the Count de
Melvil, who would have just cause to be incensed at his extravagance.

This information he concluded, by declaring that, cost what it would,
he was resolved to make a candid confession of the truth, and throw
himself entirely upon the generosity of his patron, who could inflict
no other punishment than that of discarding him from his favour and
protection,—a misfortune which, how grievous soever it might be, he
should be able to sustain with fortitude, could he fall upon some
method of satisfying the Tyrolese, who was very importunate and savage
in his demand. His kind mistress no sooner found out the source of his
inquietude, than she promised to dry it up, assuring him that next day,
at the same hour, she would enable him to discharge the debt; so that
he might set his heart at ease, and recollect that gaiety which was the
soul of her enjoyment.

He expressed the utmost astonishment at this generous proffer, which,
however, he declined, with an affected earnestness of refusal,
protesting, that he should be extremely mortified, if he thought she
looked upon him as one of those mercenary gallants who could make such
a sordid use of a lady’s affection. “No, madam,” cried our politician
in a pathetic strain, “whatever happens, I shall never part with that
internal consolation, that conscious honour never fails to yield in the
deepest scenes of solitary distress. The attachment I have the honour
to profess for your amiable person, is not founded on such inglorious
motives, but is the genuine result of that generous passion which none
but the noble-minded feel, and the only circumstance of this misfortune
that I dread to encounter, is the necessity of withdrawing myself for
ever from the presence of her whose genial smiles could animate my soul
against all the persecution of adverse fortune.”

This declamation, accompanied with a profound sigh, served only to
inflame her desire of extricating him from the difficulty in which he
was involved. She exhausted all her eloquence in attempting to persuade
him that his refusal was an outrage against her affection. He pretended
to refute her arguments, and remained unshaken by all the power of her
solicitations, until she had recourse to the most passionate
remonstrances of love, and fell at his feet in the posture of a forlorn
shepherdess. What he refused to her reason, he granted to her tears,
because his heart was melted by her affliction, and next day
condescended to accept of her money, out of pure regard to her
happiness and peace.

Encouraged by the success of this achievement, he resolved to practise
the same experiment upon Wilhelmina, in hope of extracting an equal
share of profit from her simplicity and attachment, and, at their very
next nocturnal rendezvous in her chamber, reacted the farce already
rehearsed, with a small variation, which he thought necessary to
stimulate the young lady in his behalf. He rightly concluded, that she
was by no means mistress of such a considerable sum as he had already
extorted from her mother, and therefore thought proper to represent
himself in the most urgent predicament, that her apprehension, on his
account, might be so alarmed as to engage her in some enterprise for
his advantage, which otherwise she would never have dreamed of
undertaking. With this view, after having described his own calamitous
situation, in consequence of her pressing entreaties, which he affected
to evade, he gave her to understand, that there was no person upon
earth to whom he would have recourse in this emergency; for which
reason he was determined to rid himself of all his cares at once, upon
the friendly point of his own faithful sword.

Such a dreadful resolution could not fail to operate upon the tender
passions of his Dulcinea; she was instantly seized with an agony of
fear and distraction. Her grief manifested itself in a flood of tears,
while she hung round his neck, conjuring him in the most melting terms,
by their mutual love, in which they had been so happy, to lay aside
that fatal determination, which would infallibly involve her in the
same fate; for, she took Heaven to witness, that she would not one
moment survive the knowledge of his death.

He was not deficient in expressions of reciprocal regard. He extolled
her love and tenderness with a most extravagant eulogium, and seemed
wrung with mortal anguish at the prospect of parting for ever from his
lovely Wilhelmina; but his honour was a stern and rigid creditor, that
could not be appeased, except with his blood; and all the boon she
could obtain, by dint of the most woful supplication, was a promise to
defer the execution of his baleful purpose for the space of
four-and-twenty hours, during which she hoped Heaven would
compassionate her sufferings, and inspire her with some contrivance for
their mutual relief. Thus he yielded to her fervent request, rather
with a view to calm the present transports of her sorrow, than with any
expectation of seeing himself redeemed from his fate by her
interposition; such at least were his professions when he took his
leave, assuring her, that he would not quit his being before he should
have devoted a few hours to another interview with the dear object of
his love.

Having thus kindled the train, he did not doubt that the mine of his
craft would take effect, and repaired to his own lodging, in full
persuasion of seeing his aim accomplished, before the time fixed for
their last assignation. His prognostic was next morning verified by the
arrival of a messenger, who brought to him a small parcel, to which was
cemented, with sealing wax, the following epistle:—

“JEWEL OF MY SOUL!—Scarce had you, last night, quitted my disconsolate
arms, when I happily recollected that there was in my possession a gold
chain, of value more than sufficient to answer the exigence of your
present occasions. It was pledged to my grandfather for two hundred
crowns by a knight of Malta, who soon after perished in a sea
engagement with the enemies of our faith, so that it became the
property of our house, and was bequeathed to me by the old gentleman,
as a memorial of his particular affection. Upon whom can I more
properly bestow it, than him who is already master of my heart! Receive
it, therefore, from the bearer of this billet, and convert it, without
scruple, to that use which shall be most conducive to your ease and
satisfaction; nor seek, from a true romantic notion of honour, which I
know you entertain, to excuse yourself from accepting this testimony of
my affection. For I have already sworn before an image of our blessed
Lady, that I will no longer own you as the sovereign of my heart, nor
even indulge you with another interview, if you reject this mark of
tenderness and concern from your ever faithful WILHELMINA.”

The heart of our adventurer began to bound with joy when he surveyed
the contents of this letter; and his eyes sparkled with transport at
sight of the chain, which he immediately perceived to be worth twice
the sum she had mentioned. Nevertheless, he would not avail himself,
without further question, of her generosity; but, that same night,
repairing to her apartment at the usual hour of meeting, he prostrated
himself before her, and counterfeiting extreme agitation of spirit,
begged, in the most urgent terms, not even unaccompanied with tears,
that she would take back the present, which he tendered for her
acceptance, and spare him the most insufferable mortification of
thinking himself exposed to the imputation of being mercenary in his
love. Such, he said, was the delicacy of his passion, that he could not
possibly exist under the apprehension of incurring a censure so
unworthy of his sentiments; and he would a thousand times sooner
undergo the persecution of his rancorous creditor, than bear the
thought of being in the smallest consideration lessened in her esteem;
nay, so far did he carry his pretensions to punctilio, as to protest,
that, should she refuse to quiet the scruples of his honour on this
score, her unyielding beneficence would serve only to hasten the
execution of his determined purpose, to withdraw himself at once from a
life of vanity and misfortune.

The more pathetically he pleaded for her compliance, the more
strenuously did she resist his remonstrances. She advanced all the
arguments her reason, love, and terror could suggest, reminded him of
her oath, from which he could not suppose she would recede, whatever
the consequence might be; and in conclusion vowed to Heaven, with great
solemnity and devotion, that she would not survive the news of his
death. Thus the alternative she offered was either to retain the chain
and be happy in her affection, or forfeit all title to her love, and
die in the conviction of having brought his innocent mistress to an
untimely grave.

His fortitude was not proof against this last consideration. “My savage
honour,” said he, “would enable me to endure the pangs of eternal
separation in the confidence of being endowed with the power of ending
these tortures by the energy of my own hand; but the prospect of
Wilhelmina’s death, and that too occasioned by my inflexibility,
disarms my soul of all her resolution, swallows up the dictates of my
jealous pride, and fills my bosom with such a gush of tenderness and
sorrow, as overwhelms the whole economy of my purpose! Yes, enchanting
creature! I sacrifice my glory to that irresistible reflection; and,
rather than know myself the cruel instrument of robbing the world of
such perfection, consent to retain the fatal testimony of your love.”

So saying, he pocketed the chain, with an air of ineffable
mortification, and was rewarded for his compliance with the most
endearing caresses of his Dulcinea, who, amidst the tumults of her joy,
ejaculated a thousand acknowledgments to Heaven for having blessed her
with the affection of such a man, whose honour was unrivalled by
anything but his love.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

HIS SUCCESS BEGETS A BLIND SECURITY, BY WHICH HE IS ONCE AGAIN
WELL-NIGH ENTRAPPED IN HIS DULCINEA’S APARTMENT.


In this manner did the crafty Fathom turn to account those ingratiating
qualifications he inherited from nature, and maintain, with incredible
assiduity and circumspection, an amorous correspondence with two
domestic rivals, who watched the conduct of each other with the most
indefatigable virulence of envious suspicion, until an accident
happened, which had well-nigh overturned the bark of his policy, and
induced him to alter the course, that he might not be shipwrecked on
the rocks that began to multiply in the prosecution of his present
voyage.

The jeweller, who, as a German, wanted neither pride nor ostentation,
never failed to celebrate the anniversary of his birth by an annual
feast granted to his neighbours and friends; and on these occasions was
accustomed to wear that chain which, though bequeathed to his daughter,
he considered as an ornament appertaining to the family, whereof he
himself was head. Accordingly, when the time of this festival revolved,
he, as usual, ordered Wilhelmina to surrender it for the day. This
injunction, the reader will perceive, our young lady was in no
condition to obey; she had, however, foreseen the demand, and contrived
a scheme of behaviour for the occasion, which she forthwith put in
execution.

With an air of uncommon cheerfulness, purposely assumed, she retired to
her closet, on pretence of complying with his desire, and, having
employed a few minutes in rummaging her drawers and disordering her
moveables, uttered a loud shriek, that brought her father instantly
into the apartment, where he found his daughter tossing about her
clothes and trinkets with violent demonstrations of disorder and
affright, and heard her, in a lamentable strain, declare that she was
robbed of her chain, and for ever undone. This was so far from being an
agreeable intimation to the jeweller, that he was struck dumb with
astonishment and vexation, and it was not till after a long pause that
he pronounced the word Sacrament! with an emphasis denoting the most
mortifying surprise.

Soon as that exclamation escaped from his lips, he flew to the
escritoire as if instinctively, and, joining Wilhelmina in her
occupation, tumbled its whole contents upon the floor in a trice.

While he was thus employed, in the most expressive silence, the wife of
his bosom chanced to pass that way, and seeing them both occupied with
such violence and trepidation, believed at first that they were
certainly actuated by the spirit of frenzy; but, when she interposed,
by asking, with great earnestness, the cause of such transports and
distracted behaviour, and heard her husband reply, with an accent of
despair, “The chain! the chain of my forefathers is no more!” she
immediately justified his emotion, by undergoing the same alarm, and,
without further hesitation, engaged herself in the search, beginning
with a song, which might be compared to the hymn of battle among the
Greeks, or rather more aptly to that which the Spartan females sung
round the altar of Diana, surnamed Orthian; for it was attended with
strange gesticulations, and, in the course of utterance, became so loud
and shrill, that the guests, who were by this time partly assembled,
being confounded at the clamour, rushed towards the place from whence
it seemed to proceed, and found their landlord, with his wife and
daughter, in the attitudes of distraction and despair.

When they understood the nature of the case, they condoled the family
on their misfortune, and would have retired, on the supposition that it
would defeat the mirthful intent of their meeting; but the jeweller,
mustering up his whole temper and hospitality, entreated them to excuse
his disorder, and favour him with their company, which, he observed,
was now more than ever wanted, to dispel the melancholy ideas inspired
by his loss. Notwithstanding this apology, and the efforts he made in
the sequel to entertain his friends with jollity and good-humour, his
heart was so linked to the chain, that he could not detach himself from
the thoughts of it, which invaded him at short intervals in such qualms
as effectually spoiled his appetite, and hindered his digestion.

He revolved within himself the circumstances of his disaster, and, in
canvassing all the probable means by which the chain would be stolen,
concluded that the deed must have been done by some person in the
family, who, in consequence of having access to his daughter’s chamber,
had either found the drawer left open by her carelessness and neglect,
or found means to obtain a false key, by some waxen impression; for the
locks of the escritoire were safe and uninjured. His suspicion being
thus confined within his own house, sometimes pitched upon his workmen,
and sometimes upon his wife, who, he thought, was the more likely to
practise such finesse, as she considered Wilhelmina in the light of a
daughter-in-law, whose interest interfered with her own, and who had
often harangued to him in private on the folly of leaving this very
chain in the young lady’s possession.

The more he considered this subject, he thought he saw the more reason
to attribute the damage he had sustained to the machinations of his
spouse, who, he did not doubt, was disposed to feather her own nest, at
the expense of him and his heirs, and who, with the same honest
intention, had already secreted, for her private use, those
inconsiderable jewels which of late had at different times been
missing. Aroused by these sentiments, he resolved to retaliate her own
schemes, by contriving means to visit her cabinet in secret, and, if
possible, to rob the robber of the spoils she had gathered to his
prejudice, without coming to any explanation, which might end in
domestic turmoils and eternal disquiet.

While the husband exercised his reflection in this manner, his innocent
mate did not allow the powers of her imagination to rest in idleness
and sloth. Her observations touching the loss of the chain were such as
a suspicious woman, biassed by hatred and envy, would naturally make.
To her it seemed highly improbable, that a thing of such value, so
carefully deposited, should vanish without the connivance of its
keeper, and without much expense of conjecture, divined the true manner
in which it was conveyed. The sole difficulty that occurred in the
researches of her sagacity, was to know the gallant who had been
favoured with such a pledge of Wilhelmina’s affection; for, as the
reader will easily imagine, she never dreamed of viewing Ferdinand in
that odious perspective. In order to satisfy her curiosity, discover
this happy favourite, and be revenged on her petulant rival, she
prevailed upon the jeweller to employ a scout, who should watch all
night upon the stair, without the knowledge of any other person in the
family, alleging, that in all likelihood, the housemaid gave private
admittance to some lover who was the author of all the losses they had
lately suffered, and that they might possibly detect him in his
nocturnal adventures; and observing that it would be imprudent to
intimate their design to Wilhelmina, lest, through the heedlessness and
indiscretion of youth, she might chance to divulge the secret, so as to
frustrate their aim.

A Swiss, in whose honesty the German could confide, being hired for
this purpose, was posted in a dark corner of the staircase, within a
few paces of the door, which he was directed to watch, and actually
stood sentinel three nights, without perceiving the least object of
suspicion; but, on the fourth, the evil stars of our adventurer
conducted him to the spot, on his voyage to the apartment of his
Dulcinea, with whom he had preconcerted the assignation. Having made
the signal, which consisted of two gentle taps on her door, he was
immediately admitted; and the Swiss no sooner saw him fairly housed,
than he crept softly to the other door, that was left open for the
purpose, and gave immediate intimation of what he had perceived. This
intelligence, however, he could not convey so secretly, but the lovers,
who were always vigilant upon these occasions, overheard a sort of
commotion in the jeweller’s chamber, the cause of which their
apprehension was ingenious enough to comprehend.

We have formerly observed that our adventurer could not make his
retreat by the door, without running a very great risk of being
detected, and the expedient of the chimney he had no inclination to
repeat; so that he found himself in a very uncomfortable dilemma, and
was utterly abandoned by all his invention and address, when his
mistress, in a whisper, desired him to begin a dialogue, aloud, in an
apology, importing, that he had mistaken the door, and that his
intention was to visit her father, touching a ring belonging to the
young Count Melvil, which she knew Fathom had put into his hands, in
order to be altered.

Ferdinand, seizing the hint, availed himself of it without delay, and,
unbolting the door, pronounced in an audible voice, “Upon my honour,
Mademoiselle, you wrong my intention, if you imagine I came hither with
any disrespectful or dishonourable motive. I have business with your
father, which cannot be delayed till to-morrow, without manifest
prejudice to my friend and myself; therefore I took the liberty of
visiting him at these untimely hours, and it has been my misfortune to
mistake the door in the dark. I beg pardon for my involuntary
intrusion, and again assure you, that nothing was farther from my
thoughts than any design to violate that respect which I have always
entertained for you and your father’s family.”

To this remonstrance, which was distinctly heard by the German and his
wife, who by this time stood listening at the door, the young lady
replied, in a shrill accent of displeasure, “Sir, I am bound to believe
that all your actions are conducted by honour; but you must give me
leave to tell you, that your mistake is a little extraordinary, and
your visit, even to my father, at this time of the night, altogether
unseasonable, if not mysterious. As for the interruption I have
suffered in my repose, I impute it to my own forgetfulness, in leaving
my door unlocked, and blame myself so severely for the omission, that I
shall, to-morrow, put it out of my own power to be guilty of the like
for the future, by ordering the passage to be nailed up; meanwhile, if
you would persuade me of your well-meaning, you will instantly
withdraw, lest my reputation should suffer by your continuance in my
apartment.”

“Madam,” answered our hero, “I will not give you an opportunity to
repeat the command, which I shall forthwith obey, after having
entreated you once more to forgive the disturbance I have given.” So
saying, he gently opened the door, and, at sight of the German and his
wife, who, he well knew, waited for his exit, started back, and gave
tokens of confusion, which was partly real and partly affected. The
jeweller, fully satisfied with Fathom’s declaration to his daughter,
received him with a complaisant look, and, in order to alleviate his
concern, gave him to understand, that he already knew the reason of his
being in that apartment, and desired to be informed of what had
procured him the honour to see him at such a juncture.

“My dear friend,” said our adventurer, pretending to recollect himself
with difficulty, “I am utterly ashamed and confounded to be discovered
in this situation; but, as you have overheard what passed between
Mademoiselle and me, I know you will do justice to my intention, and
forgive my mistake. After begging pardon for having intruded upon your
family at these hours, I must now tell you that my cousin, Count
Melvil, was some time ago so much misrepresented to his mother by
certain malicious informers, who delight in sowing discord in private
families, that she actually believed her son an extravagant
spendthrift, who had not only consumed his remittances in the most
riotous scenes of disorder, but also indulged a pernicious appetite for
gaming, to such a degree, that he had lost all his clothes and jewels
at play. In consequence of such false information, she expostulated
with him in a severe letter, and desired he would transmit to her that
ring which is in your custody, it being a family stone, for which she
expressed an inestimable value. The young gentleman, in his answer to
her reproof, endeavoured to vindicate himself from the aspersions which
had been cast upon his character, and, with regard to the ring, told
her it was at present in the hands of a jeweller, in order to be new
set according to her own directions, and that, whenever it should be
altered, he would send it home to her by some safe conveyance. This
account the good lady took for an evasion, and upon that supposition
has again written to him, in such a provoking style, that, although the
letter arrived but half an hour ago, he is determined to despatch a
courier before morning with the mischievous ring, for which, in
compliance with the impetuosity of his temper, I have taken the freedom
to disturb you at this unseasonable hour.”

The German paid implicit faith to every circumstance of his story,
which indeed could not well be supposed to be invented extempore; the
ring was immediately restored, and our adventurer took his leave,
congratulating himself upon his signal deliverance from the snare in
which he had fallen.




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

THE STEP-DAME’S SUSPICIONS BEING AWAKENED, SHE LAYS A SNARE FOR OUR
ADVENTURER, FROM WHICH HE IS DELIVERED BY THE INTERPOSITION OF HIS GOOD
GENIUS.


Though the husband swallowed the bait without further inquiry, the
penetration of the wife was not so easily deceived. That same dialogue
in Wilhelmina’s apartment, far from allaying, rather inflamed her
suspicion; because, in the like emergency, she herself had once
profited by the same, or nearly the same contrivance. Without
communicating her doubts to the father, she resolved to double her
attention to the daughter’s future conduct, and keep such a strict eye
over the behaviour of our gallant, that he should find it very
difficult, if not impossible, to elude her observation. For this
purpose she took into her pay an old maiden, of the right sour
disposition, who lived in a house opposite to her own, and directed her
to follow the young lady in all her outgoings, whenever she should
receive from the window a certain signal, which the mother-in-law
agreed to make for the occasion. It was not long before this scheme
succeeded to her wish. The door of communication betwixt Wilhelmina’s
apartment and the staircase being nailed up by the jeweller’s express
order, our adventurer was altogether deprived of those opportunities he
had hitherto enjoyed, and was not at all mortified to find himself so
restricted in a correspondence which began to be tiresome and
disagreeable. But the case was far otherwise with his Dulcinea, whose
passion, the more it was thwarted, raged with greater violence, like a
fire, that, from the attempts that are made to extinguish it, gathers
greater force, and flames with double fury.

Upon the second day of her misfortune, she had written a very tender
billet, lamenting her unhappiness in being deprived of those meetings
which constituted the chief joy of her life, and entreating him to
contrive some means of renewing the delicious commerce in an
unsuspected place. This intimation she proposed to convey privately
into the hand of her lover, during his next visit to the family; but
both were so narrowly eyed by the mother, that she found the execution
of her design impracticable; and next forenoon, on pretence of going to
church, repaired to the house of a companion, who, being also her
confidant, undertook to deliver the billet with her own hand.

The she-dragon employed by her mother, in obedience to the sign which
was displayed from the window immediately put on her veil, and followed
Wilhelmina at a distance, until she saw her fairly housed. She would
not even then return from her excursion, but hovered about in sight of
the door, with a view of making further observations. In less than five
minutes after the young lady disappeared, the scout perceived her
coming out, accompanied by her comrade, from whom she instantly parted,
and bent her way towards the church in good earnest, while the other
steered her course in another direction. The duenna, after a moment’s
suspense and consideration, divined the true cause of this short visit,
and resolved to watch the motions of the confidant, whom she traced to
the academy in which our hero lodged, and from which she saw her
return, after the supposed message was delivered.

Fraught with this intelligence, the rancorous understrapper hied her
home to the jeweller’s wife, and made a faithful recital of what she
had seen, communicating at the same time her own conjectures on that
subject. Her employer was equally astonished and incensed at this
information. She was seized with all that frenzy which takes possession
of a slighted woman, when she finds herself supplanted by a detested
rival; and, in the first transports of her indignation, devoted them as
sacrifices to her vengeance. Nor was her surprise so much the effect of
his dissimulation, as of his want of taste and discernment. She
inveighed against him, not as the most treacherous lover, but as the
most abject wretch, in courting the smiles of such an awkward dowdy,
while he enjoyed the favours of a woman who had numbered princes in the
train of her admirers. For the brilliancy of her attractions, such as
they at present shone, she appealed to the decision of her minister,
who consulted her own satisfaction and interest, by flattering the
other’s vanity and resentment; and so unaccountable did the depravity
of our hero’s judgment appear to this conceited dame, that she began to
believe there was some mistake in the person, and to hope that
Wilhelmina’s gallant was not in reality her professed admirer, Mr.
Fathom, but rather one of his fellow-lodgers, whose passion he favoured
with his mediation and assistance.

On this notion, which nothing but mere vanity could have inspired, in
opposition to so many more weighty presumptions, she took the
resolution of bringing the affair to a fuller explanation, before she
would concert any measures to the prejudice of our adventurer, and
forthwith despatched her spy back to his lodgings, to solicit, on the
part of Wilhelmina, an immediate answer to the letter he had received.
This was an expedition with which the old maiden would have willingly
dispensed, because it was founded upon an uncertainty, which might be
attended with troublesome consequences; but, rather than be the means
of retarding a negotiation so productive of that sort of mischief which
is particularly agreeable to all of her tribe, she undertook to manage
and effect the discovery, in full confidence of her own talents and
experience.

With such a fund of self-sufficiency and instigation, she repaired to
the academy on the instant, and inquiring for Mr. Fathom, was
introduced to his apartment, where she found him in the very act of
writing a billet to the jeweller’s daughter. The artful agent having
asked, with the mysterious air of an expert go-between, if he had not
lately received a message from a certain young lady, and, being
answered in the affirmative, gave him to understand, that she herself
was a person favoured with the friendship and confidence of Wilhelmina,
whom she had known from her cradle, and often dandled on her knee;
then, in the genuine style of a prattling dry nurse, she launched out
in encomiums on his Dulcinea’s beauty and sweetness of temper,
recounting many simple occurrences of her infancy and childhood; and,
finally, desiring a more circumstantial answer to that which she had
sent to him by her friend Catherina. In the course of her loquacity she
had also, according to her instructions, hinted at the misfortune of
the door; and, on the whole, performed her cue with such dexterity and
discretion that our politician was actually overreached, and, having
finished his epistle, committed it to her care, with many verbal
expressions of eternal love and fidelity to his charming Wilhelmina.

The messenger, doubly rejoiced at her achievement, which not only
recommended her ministry, but also gratified her malice, returned to
her principal with great exultation, and, delivering the letter, the
reader will easily conceive the transports of that lady when she read
the contents of it in these words:—

“ANGELIC WILHELMINA!—To forget those ecstatic scenes we have enjoyed
together, or even live without the continuation of that mutual bliss,
were to quit all title to perception, and resign every hope of future
happiness. No! my charmer, while my head retains the least spark of
invention, and my heart glows with the resolution of a man, our
correspondence shall not be cut off by the machinations of an envious
stepmother, who never had attractions to inspire a generous passion;
and, now that age and wrinkles have destroyed what little share of
beauty she once possessed, endeavours, like the fiend in paradise, to
blast those joys in others, from which she is herself eternally
excluded. Doubt not, dear sovereign of my soul! that I will study, with
all the eagerness of desiring love, how to frustrate her malicious
intention, and renew those transporting moments, the remembrance of
which now warms the breast of your ever constant FATHOM.”

Had our hero murdered her father, or left her a disconsolate widow, by
effecting the death of her dear husband, there might have been a
possibility of her exerting the Christian virtues of resignation and
forgiveness; but such a personal outrage as that contained in this
epistle precluded all hope of pardon, and rendered penitence of no
signification. His atrocious crime being now fully ascertained, this
virago gave a loose to her resentment, which became so loud and
tempestuous, that her informer shuddered at the storm she had raised,
and began to repent of having communicated the intelligence which
seemed to have such a violent effect upon hex brain.

She endeavoured, however, to allay the agitation, by flattering her
fancy with the prospect of revenge, and gradually soothed her into a
state of deliberate ire; during which she determined to take ample
vengeance on the delinquent. In the zenith of her rage, she would have
had immediate recourse to poison or steel, had she not been diverted
from her mortal purpose by her counsellor, who represented the danger
of engaging in such violent measures, and proposed a more secure
scheme, in the execution of which she would see the perfidious wretch
sufficiently punished, without any hazard to her own person or
reputation. She advised her to inform the jeweller of Fathom’s efforts
to seduce her conjugal fidelity, and impart to him a plan, by which he
would have it in his power to detect our adventurer in the very act of
practising upon her virtue.

The lady relished her proposal, and actually resolved to make an
assignation with Ferdinand, as usual, and give notice of the
appointment to her husband, that he might personally discover the
treachery of his pretended friend, and inflict upon him such
chastisement as the German’s brutal disposition should suggest, when
inflamed by that species of provocation. Had this project been brought
to bear, Ferdinand, in all likelihood, would have been disqualified
from engaging in any future intrigue; but fate ordained that the design
should be defeated, in order to reserve him for more important
occasions.

Before the circumstances of the plan could be adjusted, it was his good
fortune to meet his Dulcinea in the street, and, in the midst of their
mutual condolence on the interruption they had suffered in their
correspondence, he assured her, that he would never give his invention
respite, until he should have verified the protestations contained in
the letter he had delivered to her discreet agent. This allusion to a
billet she had never received, did not fail to alarm her fears, and
introduce a very mortifying explanation, in which he so accurately
described the person of the messenger, that she forthwith comprehended
the plot, and communicated to our hero her sentiments on that subject.

Though he expressed infinite anxiety and chagrin at this misfortune,
which could not fail to raise new obstacles to their love, his heart
was a stranger to the uneasiness he affected; and rather pleased with
the occasion, which would furnish him with pretences to withdraw
himself gradually from an intercourse by this time become equally
cloying and unprofitable. Being well acquainted with the mother’s
temperament, he guessed the present situation of her thoughts, and
concluding she would make the jeweller a party in her revenge, he
resolved from that moment to discontinue his visits, and cautiously
guard against any future interview with the lady whom he had rendered
so implacable.

It was well for our adventurer that his good fortune so seasonably
interposed; for that same day, in the afternoon, he was favoured with a
billet from the jeweller’s wife, couched in the same tender style she
had formerly used, and importing an earnest desire of seeing him next
day at the wonted rendezvous. Although his penetration was sufficient
to perceive the drift of this message, or at least to discern the risk
he should run in complying with her request, yet he was willing to be
more fully certified of the truth of his suspicion, and wrote an answer
to the billet, in which he assured her, that he would repair to the
place of appointment with all the punctuality of an impatient lover.
Nevertheless, instead of performing this promise, he, in the morning,
took post in a public-house opposite to the place of assignation, in
order to reconnoitre the ground, and about noon had the pleasure of
seeing the German, wrapped in a cloak, enter the door of his wife’s
she-friend, though the appointment was fixed at five in the evening.
Fathom blessed his good angel for having conducted him clear of this
conspiracy, and kept his station with great tranquillity till the hour
of meeting, when he beheld his enraged Thalestris take the same route,
and enjoyed her disappointment with ineffable satisfaction.

Thus favoured with a pretext, he took his leave of her, in a letter,
giving her to understand, that he was no stranger to the barbarous
snare she had laid for him; and upbraiding her with having made such an
ungrateful return for all his tenderness and attachment. She was not
backward in conveying a reply to this expostulation, which seemed to
have been dictated in all the distraction of a proud woman who sees her
vengeance baffled, as well as her love disdained. Her letter was
nothing but a succession of reproaches, menaces, and incoherent
execrations. She taxed him with knavery, insensibility, and
dissimulation; imprecated a thousand curses upon his head, and
threatened not only to persecute his life with all the arts that hell
and malice could inspire, but also to wound him in the person of her
daughter-in-law, who should be enclosed for life in a convent, where
she should have leisure to repent of those loose and disorderly
practices which he had taught her to commit, and of which she could not
pretend innocence, as they had it in their power to confront her with
the evidence of her lover’s own confession. Yet all this denunciation
was qualified with an alternative, by which he was given to understand,
that the gates of mercy were still open, and that penitence was capable
of washing out the deepest stain of guilt.

Ferdinand read the whole remonstrance with great composure and
moderation, and was content to incur the hazard of her hate, rather
than put her to the trouble of making such an effort of generosity, as
would induce her to forgive the heinous offence he had committed; nor
did his apprehension for Wilhelmina in the least influence his
behaviour on this occasion. So zealous was he for her spiritual
concerns, that he would have been glad to hear she had actually taken
the veil; but he knew such a step was not at all agreeable to her
disposition, and that no violence would be offered to her inclinations
on that score, unless her stepmother should communicate to the father
that letter of Fathom’s which she had intercepted, and by which the
German would be convinced of his daughter’s backsliding; but this
measure, he rightly supposed, the wife would not venture to take, lest
the husband, instead of taking her advice touching the young lady,
should seek to compromise the affair, by offering her in marriage to
her debaucher, a proffer which, if accepted, would overwhelm the mother
with vexation and despair. He therefore chose to trust to the effects
of lenient time, which he hoped would gradually weaken the resentment
of this Penthesilea, and dissolve his connexion with the other parts of
the family, from which he longed to be totally detached.

How well soever he might have succeeded in his attempts to shake off
the yoke of the mother, who by her situation in life was restrained
from prosecuting those measures her resentment had planned against his
fortitude and indifference, he would have found greater difficulty than
he had foreseen, in disengaging himself from the daughter, whose
affections he had won under the most solemn professions of honour and
fidelity, and who, now she was debarred of his company and
conversation, and in danger of losing him for ever, had actually taken
the resolution of disclosing the amour to her father, that he might
interpose in behalf of her peace and reputation, and secure her
happiness by the sanction of the church.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

OUR HERO DEPARTS FROM VIENNA, AND QUITS THE DOMAIN OF VENUS FOR THE
ROUGH FIELD OF MARS.


Luckily for our adventurer, before she adhered to this determination,
the young Count de Melvil was summoned to Presburg by his father, who
desired to see him, before he should take the field, in consequence of
a rupture between the Emperor and the French King; and Fathom of course
quitted Vienna, in order to attend his patron, after he and Renaldo had
resided two whole years in that capital, where the former had made
himself perfect in all the polite exercises, become master of the
French tongue, and learned to speak the Italian with great facility;
over and above those other accomplishments in which we have represented
him as an inimitable original.

As for the young Count, his exteriors were so much improved by the
company to which he had access, since his departure from his father’s
house, that his parents were equally surprised and overjoyed at the
alteration. All that awkwardness and rusticity, which hung upon his
deportment, was, like the rough coat of a diamond, polished away; the
connexion and disposition of his limbs seemed to have been adjusted
anew; his carriage was become easy, his air perfectly genteel, and his
conversation gay and unrestrained. The merit of this reformation was in
a great measure ascribed to the care and example of Mr. Fathom, who was
received by the old Count and his lady with marks of singular
friendship and esteem; nor was he overlooked by Mademoiselle, who still
remained in a state of celibacy, and seemed to have resigned all hope
of altering her condition; she expressed uncommon satisfaction at the
return of her old favourite, and readmitted him into the same degree of
familiarity with which he had been honoured before his departure.

The joy of Teresa was so excessive at his arrival, that she could
scarce suppress her raptures, so as to conceal them from the notice of
the family; and our hero, upon this occasion, performed the part of an
exquisite actor, in dissembling those transports which his bosom never
knew. So well had this pupil retained the lessons of her instructor,
that, in the midst of those fraudulent appropriations, which she still
continued to make, she had found means to support her interest and
character with Mademoiselle, and even to acquire such influence in the
family, that no other servant, male or female, could pretend to live
under the same roof, without paying incessant homage to this artful
waiting-woman, and yielding the most abject submission to her will.

The young gentlemen having tarried at Presburg about six weeks, during
which a small field equipage was prepared for Renaldo, they repaired to
the camp at Heilbron, under the auspices of Count Melvil, in whose
regiment they carried arms as volunteers, with a view to merit
promotion in the service by their own personal behaviour. Our
adventurer would have willingly dispensed with this occasion of
signalising himself, his talents being much better adapted to another
sphere of life; nevertheless, he affected uncommon alacrity at the
prospect of gathering laurels in the field, and subscribed to his
fortune with a good grace; foreseeing, that even in a campaign, a man
of his art and ingenuity might find means to consult his corporal
safety, without any danger to his reputation. Accordingly, before he
had lived full three weeks in camp, the damp situation, and sudden
change in his way of life, had such a violent effect upon his
constitution, that he was deprived of the use of all his limbs, and
mourned, without ceasing, his hard fate, by which he found himself
precluded from all opportunity of exerting his diligence, courage, and
activity, in the character of a soldier, to which he now aspired.

Renaldo, who was actually enamoured of a martial life, and missed no
occasion of distinguishing himself, consoled his companion with great
cordiality, encouraged him with the hope of seeing his constitution
familiarised to the inconveniences of a camp, and accommodated him with
everything which he thought would alleviate the pain of his body, as
well as the anxiety of his mind. The old Count, who sincerely
sympathised with his affliction, would have persuaded him to retire
into quarters, where he could be carefully nursed, and provided with
everything necessary to a person in his condition; but such was his
desire of glory, that he resisted his patron’s importunities with great
constancy, till at length, seeing the old gentleman obstinately
determined to consult his health by removing him from the field, he
gradually suffered himself to recover the use of his hands, made shift
to sit up in his bed, and amuse himself with cards or backgammon, and,
notwithstanding the feeble condition of his legs, ventured to ride out
on horseback to visit the lines, though the Count and his son would
never yield to his solicitations so far, as to let him accompany
Renaldo in those excursions and reconnoitring parties, by which a
volunteer inures himself to toil and peril, and acquires that knowledge
in the operations of war, which qualifies him for a command in the
service.

Notwithstanding this exemption from all duty, our adventurer managed
matters so as to pass for a youth of infinite mettle, and even rendered
his backwardness and timidity subservient to the support of that
character, by expressing an impatience of lying inactive, and a desire
of signalising his prowess, which even the disabled condition of his
body could scarce restrain. He must be a man of very weak nerves and
excessive irresolution, who can live in the midst of actual service,
without imbibing some portion of military fortitude: danger becomes
habitual, and loses a great part of its terror; and as fear is often
caught by contagion, so is courage communicated among the individuals
of an army. The hope of fame, desire of honours and preferment, envy,
emulation, and the dread of disgrace, are motives which co-operate in
suppressing that aversion to death or mutilation, which nature hath
implanted in the human mind; and therefore it is not to be wondered at,
if Fathom, who was naturally chicken-hearted, gained some advantages
over his disposition before the end of the campaign, which happened to
be neither perilous nor severe.

During the winter, while both armies remained in quarters, our
adventurer attended his patron to Presburg, and, before the troops were
in motion, Renaldo obtained a commission, in consequence of which he
went into garrison at Philipsburg, whither he was followed by our hero,
while the old Count’s duty called him to the field in a different
place. Ferdinand for some time had no reason to be dissatisfied with
this disposition, by which he was at once delivered from the fatigues
of a campaign, and the inspection of a severe censor, in the person of
Count Melvil; and his satisfaction was still increased by an accidental
meeting with the Tyrolese who had been his confederate at Vienna, and
now chanced to serve in garrison on the same footing with himself.
These two knights-errant renewed their former correspondence, and, as
all soldiers are addicted to gaming, levied contributions upon all
those officers who had money to lose, and temerity to play.

However, they had not long pursued this branch of traffic, when their
success was interrupted by a very serious occurrence, that for the
present entirely detached the gentlemen in the garrison from such
amusements. The French troops invested Fort Kehl, situated on the
Rhine, opposite to Strasburg; and the Imperialists, dreading that the
next storm would fall upon Philipsburg, employed themselves with great
diligence to put that important fortress in a proper posture of
defence. If the suspension of play was displeasing to our hero, the
expectation of being besieged was by no means more agreeable. He knew
the excellence of the French engineers, the power of their artillery,
and the perseverance of their general. He felt, by anticipation, the
toils of hard duty upon the works, the horrors of night-alarms,
cannonading, bombardment, sallies, and mines blown up; and deliberated
with himself whether or not he should privately withdraw, and take
refuge among the besiegers; but, when he reflected that such a step,
besides the infamy that must attend it, would be like that of running
upon Scylla, seeking to avoid Charybdis, as he would be exposed to more
danger and inconvenience in the trenches than he could possibly undergo
in the town, and after all run the risk of being taken and treated as a
deserter; upon these considerations he resolved to submit himself to
his destiny, and endeavoured to mitigate the rigour of his fate by
those arts he had formerly practised with success. He accordingly found
means to enjoy a very bad state of health during the whole siege, which
lasted about six weeks after the trenches were opened; and then the
garrison marched out by capitulation, with all the honours of war.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

HE PUTS HIMSELF UNDER THE GUIDANCE OF HIS ASSOCIATE, AND STUMBLES UPON
THE FRENCH CAMP, WHERE HE FINISHES HIS MILITARY CAREER.


Nothing else of moment was transacted during that campaign; and in the
winter our adventurer, with the young Count, and his friend the
Tyrolese, were disposed in quarters of cantonment, where Ferdinand made
himself amends for the chagrin he had undergone, by the exercise of
those talents in which he excelled. Not that he was satisfied with the
sphere of life in which he acted; though he knew himself consummate in
the art of play, he was not at all ambitious of a gamester’s name; nor
did he find himself disposed to hazard those discoveries and
explanations to which heroes of that class are sometimes necessarily
exposed. His aim was to dwell among the tents of civil life,
undisturbed by quarrels and the din of war, and render mankind
subservient to his interest, not by stratagems which irritate, but by
that suppleness of insinuation, which could not fail to soothe the
temper of those on whom he meant to prey.

He saw that all his expectations of Count Melvil’s future favour were
connected with his choice of a military life; and that his promotion in
the service would, in a great measure, depend upon his personal
behaviour in such emergencies as he did not at all wish to encounter.
On the other hand, he confided so much in his own dexterity and
address, that he never doubted of being able to rear a splendid fortune
for himself, provided he could once obtain a fixed and firm foundation.
He had in fancy often enjoyed a prospect of England, not only as his
native country, to which, like a true citizen, he longed to be united;
but also as the land of promise, flowing with milk and honey, and
abounding with subjects on which he knew his talents would be properly
exercised.

These reflections never occurred, without leaving a strong impression
upon the mind of our adventurer, which influenced his deliberations in
such a manner, as at length amounted to a perfect resolution of
withdrawing himself privately from a service that teemed with
disagreeable events, and of transporting himself into the country of
his ancestors, which he considered as the Canaan of all able
adventurers. But, previous to his appearance on that stage, he was
desirous of visiting the metropolis of France, in which he hoped to
improve himself in the knowledge of men and things, and acquire such
intelligence as would qualify him to act a more important part upon the
British scene. After having for some time indulged these prospects in
secret, he determined to accommodate himself with the company and
experience of the Tyrolese, whom, under the specious title of an
associate, he knew he could convert into a very serviceable tool, in
forwarding the execution of his own projects.

Accordingly, the inclination of this confederate was sounded by distant
hints, and being found apt, our hero made him privy to his design of
decamping without beat of drum; though, at the same time, he begged his
advice touching the method of their departure, that he might retire
with as much delicacy as the nature of such a step would permit. Divers
consultations were held upon this subject, before they adhered to the
resolution of making their escape from the army, after it should have
taken the field in the spring; because, in that case, they would have
frequent opportunities of going abroad on foraging parties, and, during
one of these excursions, might retire in such a manner as to persuade
their companions that they had fallen into the enemy’s hands.

Agreeable to this determination, the camp was no sooner formed in
Alsace than our associates began to make preparations for their march,
and had already taken all the previous measures for their departure,
when an accident happened, which our hero did not fail to convert to
his own advantage. This was no other than the desertion of Renaldo’s
valet, who, in consequence of a gentle chastisement, which he had
richly merited, thought proper to disappear, after having plundered his
master’s portmanteau, which he had forced open for the purpose.
Ferdinand, who was the first person that discovered the theft,
immediately comprehended the whole adventure, and, taking it for
granted that the delinquent would never return, resolved to finish what
the fugitive had imperfectly performed.

Being favoured with the unreserved confidence of the young Count, he
instantly had recourse to his bureau, the locks of which he found means
to burst open, and, examining a private drawer, contrived with great
art to conceal Renaldo’s jewels and cash, made himself master of the
contents without hesitation; then cutting open his cloak-bag, and
strewing the tent with his linen and clothes, began to raise his voice,
and produce such a clamour as alarmed the whole neighbourhood, and
brought a great many officers into the tent.

He on this, as on all other occasions, performed his cue to a miracle,
expressing confusion and concern so naturally in his gestures and
exclamation, that no man could possibly suspect his sincerity; nay, to
such a degree of finesse did his cunning amount, that when his friend
and patron entered, in consequence of an intimation he soon received of
his loss, our adventurer exhibited undoubted signs of distraction and
delirium, and, springing upon Renaldo with all the frantic fury of a
bedlamite, “Villain,” cried he, “restore the effects you have stole
from your master, or you shall be immediately committed to the care of
the prevot.” However mortified M. de Melvil might be at his own
misfortune, the condition of his friend seemed to touch him more
nearly; he undervalued his own loss as a trifle that could be easily
repaired; said everything which he thought would tend to soothe and
compose the agitation of Ferdinand; and finally prevailed upon him to
retire to rest. The calamity was wholly attributed to the deserter; and
Renaldo, far from suspecting the true author, took occasion, from his
behaviour on this emergency, to admire him as a mirror of integrity and
attachment; in such an exquisite manner did he plan all his designs,
that almost every instance of his fraud furnished matter of triumph to
his reputation.

Having thus profitably exercised his genius, this subtle politician
thought it high time to relinquish his military expectations, and
securing all his valuable acquisitions about his own person, rode out
with his understrapper, in the midst of fifty dragoons, who went in
quest of forage. While the troopers were employed in making up their
trusses, the two adventurers advanced towards the skirt of a wood, on
pretence of reconnoitring, and the Tyrolese, who undertook to be our
hero’s guide, directing him to a path which leads towards Strasburg,
they suddenly vanished from the eyes of their companions, who in a few
minutes hearing the report of several pistols, which the confederates
purposely fired, conjectured that they had fallen in with a party of
French, by whom they were made prisoners of war.

The Tyrolese had overrated his own knowledge when he took upon himself
the charge of conducting our hero; for upon their arrival at a certain
place, where two roads crossed each other, he chanced to follow that
which not only frustrated their intention, but even led them directly
to the French camp; so that, in the twilight, they fell in upon one of
the outguards before they were aware of their mistake.

Whatever confusion and perplexity they might undergo, when they heard
themselves questioned by the sentinel on the advanced post, certain it
is, they betrayed no symptoms of fear or disorder; but while Ferdinand
endeavoured to recollect himself, his fellow-traveller, with the
appearance of admirable intrepidity and presence of mind, told the
soldier that he and his companion were two gentlemen of family, who had
quitted the Austrian army, on account of having sustained some
ill-usage, which they had no opportunity of resenting in any other way,
and that they were come to offer their services to the French general,
to whose quarters they desired to be immediately conveyed.

The sentinel, to whom such an instance of desertion was neither rare,
nor indeed uncommon, directed them without scruple to the next post,
where they found a serjeant’s party, from which, at their request, they
were transmitted to the officer of the grand guard, and by him next
morning introduced to Count Coigny, who very politely received them as
volunteers in the army of France. Though this translation was not at
all to our hero’s liking, he was forced to acquiesce in his fate, glad
to find himself, on these terms, in possession of his effects, of which
he would otherwise have been infallibly rifled.

This campaign, however, was the most disagreeable period of his whole
life; because the manner in which he had entered into the service
subjected him to the particular observation and notice of the French
officers; so that he was obliged to be very alert in his duty, and
summon all his fortitude to maintain the character he had assumed. What
rendered his situation still more unpalatable, was the activity of both
armies in the course of this season, during which, over and above
sundry fatiguing marches and countermarches, he was personally engaged
in the affair of Halleh, which was very obstinate; where, being in the
skirts of the detachment, he was actually wounded in the face by the
sword of an hussar; but this was, luckily for him, the last time he
found himself under the necessity of exerting his military prowess, for
a cessation of arms was proclaimed before he was cured of his wound,
and peace concluded about the end of the campaign.

During his sojourn in the French camp, he assumed the character of a
man of family, who being disgusted at some supercilious treatment he
had met with in the German service, and at the same time ambitious of
carrying arms under the banners of France, took the opportunity of
retreating by stealth from his friends, accompanied only by one with
whom he could intrust his intention. In this capacity he had managed
his matters to such advantage, that many French officers of rank were
very well disposed to contribute their interest in his behalf, had his
inclination verged towards promotion in the army; but he thought proper
to conceal his real design, under the specious pretext of longing to
see the metropolis of France, that centre of pleasure and politeness,
in which he proposed to spend some time for the improvement of his
address and understanding. These were motives too laudable to be
opposed by his new patrons, some of whom furnished him with letters of
recommendation to certain noblemen of the first rank at the court of
Versailles, for which place he and his companion set out from the banks
of the Rhine, very well satisfied with the honourable dismission they
had obtained from a life of inconvenience, danger, and alarm.




CHAPTER TWENTY

HE PREPARES A STRATAGEM BUT FINDS HIMSELF COUNTERMINED—PROCEEDS ON HIS
JOURNEY, AND IS OVERTAKEN BY A TERRIBLE TEMPEST.


In the course of this journey, Ferdinand, who was never deficient in
his political capacity, held a secret conclave with his own thoughts,
not only touching the plan of his own future conduct, but also
concerning his associate, of whose fidelity and adherence he began to
entertain such doubts as discouraged him from the prosecution of that
design in which the Tyrolese had been at first included; for he had
lately observed him practise the arts of his occupation among the
French officers, with such rapacity and want of caution, as indicated a
dangerous temerity of temper, as well as a furious rage of acquiring,
which might be some time or other satiated upon his own friends. In
other words, our adventurer was afraid that his accomplice would profit
by his knowledge of the road and countries through which they
travelled, and, after having made free with his most valuable effects,
in consequence of the familiarity subsisting between them, leave him
some morning without the ceremony of a formal adieu.

Aroused by this suspicion, he resolved to anticipate the supposed
intention of the Tyrolese, by taking his own departure in the same
abrupt manner; and this scheme he actually put in execution, upon their
arrival in Bar-le-duc, where it was agreed they should spend a day to
repose and refresh themselves from the fatigue of hard riding.
Ferdinand, therefore, taking the advantage of his companion’s
absence—for the Tyrolese had walked abroad to view the town—found means
to hire a peasant, who undertook to conduct him through a by-road as
far as Chalons, and with his guide he accordingly set out on horseback,
after having discharged the bill, left a blank paper sealed up in form
of a letter, directed to his friend, and secured behind his own saddle
a pair of leathern bags, in which his jewels and cash were usually
contained. So eager was our hero to leave the Tyrolese at a
considerable distance behind, that he rode all night at a round pace
without halting, and next morning found himself at a village distant
thirteen good leagues from any part of the route which he and his
companion had at first resolved to pursue.

Here, thinking himself safely delivered from the cause of all his
apprehension, he determined to lie incognito for a few days, so as that
he might run no risk of an accidental meeting upon the road with the
person whose company he had forsaken; and accordingly took possession
of an apartment, in which he went to rest, desiring his guide to wake
him when dinner should be ready. Having enjoyed a very comfortable
refreshment of sleep, with his bags under his pillow, he was summoned,
according to his direction, and ate a very hearty meal, with great
tranquillity and internal satisfaction. In the afternoon he amused
himself with happy presages and ideal prospects of his future fortune,
and, in the midst of these imaginary banquets, was seized with an
inclination of realising his bliss, and regaling his eyesight with the
fruits of that success which had hitherto attended his endeavours. Thus
inflamed, he opened the repository, and, O reader! what were his
reflections, when, in lieu of Mademoiselle Melvil’s ear-rings and
necklace, the German’s golden chain, divers jewels of considerable
value, the spoils of sundry dupes, and about two hundred ducats in
ready money, he found neither more nor less than a parcel of rusty
nails, disposed in such a manner as to resemble in weight and bulk the
moveables he had lost.

It is not to be supposed our adventurer made this discovery without
emotion. If the eternal salvation of mankind could have been purchased
for the tenth part of his treasure, he would have left the whole
species in a state of reprobation, rather than redeem them at that
price, unless he had seen in the bargain some evident advantage to his
own concerns. One may, therefore, easily conceive with what milkiness
of resignation he bore the loss of the whole, and saw himself reduced
from such affluence to the necessity of depending upon about twenty
ducats, and some loose silver, which he carried in his pocket, for his
expense upon the road. However bitter this pill might be in swallowing,
he so far mastered his mortification, as to digest it with a good
grace. His own penetration at once pointed out the canal through which
this misfortune had flowed upon him; he forthwith placed the calamity
to the account of the Tyrolese, and never doubting that he had retired
with the booty across the Rhine, into some place to which he knew
Fathom would not follow his footsteps, he formed the melancholy
resolution of pursuing with all despatch his journey to Paris, that he
might, with all convenient expedition, indemnify himself for the
discomfiture he had sustained.

With regard to his confederate, his conjecture was perfectly right;
that adventurer, though infinitely inferior to our hero in point of
genius and invention, had manifestly the advantage of him in the
articles of age and experience; he was no stranger to Fathom’s
qualifications, the happy exertion of which he had often seen. He knew
him to be an economist of the most frugal order, consequently concluded
his finances were worthy of examination; and, upon the true principles
of a sharper, eased him of the encumbrance, taking it for granted,
that, in so doing, he only precluded Ferdinand from the power of acting
the same tragedy upon him, should ever opportunity concur with his
inclination. He had therefore concerted his measures with the dexterity
of an experienced conveyancer, and, snatching the occasion, while our
hero, travel-tainted, lay sunk in the arms of profound repose, he
ripped up the seams of the leather depository, withdrew the contents,
introduced the parcel of nails, which he had made up for the purpose,
and then repaired the breach with great deliberation.

Had Fathom’s good genius prompted him to examine his effects next
morning, the Tyrolese, in all probability, would have maintained his
acquisition by force of arms; for his personal courage was rather more
determined than that of our adventurer, and he was conscious of his own
ascendency in this particular; but his good fortune prevented such
explanation. Immediately after dinner, he availed himself of his
knowledge, and, betaking himself to a remote part of the town, set out
in a post-chaise for Luneville, while our hero was meditating his own
escape.

Fathom’s conception was sufficient to comprehend the whole of this
adventure, as soon as his chagrin would give his sagacity fair play;
nor would he allow his resolution to sink under the trial; on the
contrary, he departed from the village that same afternoon, under the
auspices of his conductor, and found himself benighted in the midst of
a forest, far from the habitations of men. The darkness of the night,
the silence and solitude of the place, the indistinct images of the
trees that appeared on every side, “stretching their extravagant arms
athwart the gloom,” conspired, with the dejection of spirits occasioned
by his loss, to disturb his fancy, and raise strange phantoms in his
imagination. Although he was not naturally superstitious, his mind
began to be invaded with an awful horror, that gradually prevailed over
all the consolations of reason and philosophy; nor was his heart free
from the terrors of assassination. In order to dissipate these
disagreeable reveries, he had recourse to the conversation of his
guide, by whom he was entertained with the history of divers travellers
who had been robbed and murdered by ruffians, whose retreat was in the
recesses of that very wood.

In the midst of this communication, which did not at all tend to the
elevation of our hero’s spirits, the conductor made an excuse for
dropping behind, while our traveller jogged on in expectation of being
joined again by him in a few minutes. He was, however, disappointed in
that hope; the sound of the other horse’s feet by degrees grew more and
more faint, and at last altogether died away. Alarmed at this
circumstance, Fathom halted in the middle of the road, and listened
with the most fearful attention; but his sense of hearing was saluted
with nought but the dismal sighings of the trees, that seemed to
foretell an approaching storm. Accordingly, the heavens contracted a
more dreary aspect, the lightning began to gleam, and the thunder to
roll, and the tempest, raising its voice to a tremendous roar,
descended in a torrent of rain.

In this emergency, the fortitude of our hero was almost quite overcome.
So many concurring circumstances of danger and distress might have
appalled the most undaunted breast; what impression then must they have
made upon the mind of Ferdinand, who was by no means a man to set fear
at defiance! Indeed, he had well-nigh lost the use of his reflection,
and was actually invaded to the skin, before he could recollect himself
so far as to quit the road, and seek for shelter among the thickets
that surrounded him. Having rode some furlongs into the forest, he took
his station under a tuft of tall trees, that screened him from the
storm, and in that situation called a council within himself, to
deliberate upon his next excursion. He persuaded himself that his guide
had deserted him for the present, in order to give intelligence of a
traveller to some gang of robbers with whom he was connected; and that
he must of necessity fall a prey to those banditti, unless he should
have the good fortune to elude their search, and disentangle himself
from the mazes of the wood.

Harrowed with these apprehensions, he resolved to commit himself to the
mercy of the hurricane, as of two evils the least, and penetrate
straightforwards through some devious opening, until he should be
delivered from the forest. For this purpose he turned his horse’s head
in a line quite contrary to the direction of the high road which he had
left, on the supposition that the robbers would pursue that track in
quest of him, and that they would never dream of his deserting the
highway, to traverse an unknown forest, amidst the darkness of such a
boisterous night. After he had continued in this progress through a
succession of groves, and bogs, and thorns, and brakes, by which not
only his clothes, but also his skin suffered in a grievous manner,
while every nerve quivered with eagerness and dismay, he at length
reached an open plain, and pursuing his course, in full hope of
arriving at some village, where his life would be safe, he descried a
rush-light at a distance, which he looked upon as the star of his good
fortune, and riding towards it at full speed, arrived at the door of a
lone cottage, into which he was admitted by an old woman, who,
understanding he was a bewildered traveller, received him with great
hospitality.

When he learned from his hostess, that there was not another house
within three leagues; that she could accommodate him with a tolerable
bed, and his horse with lodging and oats, he thanked Heaven for his
good fortune, in stumbling upon this homely habitation, and determined
to pass the night under the protection of the old cottager, who gave
him to understand, that her husband, who was a faggot-maker, had gone
to the next town to dispose of his merchandise; and that, in all
probability, he would not return till next morning, on account of the
tempestuous night. Ferdinand sounded the beldame with a thousand artful
interrogations, and she answered with such appearance of truth and
simplicity, that he concluded his person was quite secure; and, after
having been regaled with a dish of eggs and bacon, desired she would
conduct him into the chamber where she proposed he should take his
repose. He was accordingly ushered up by a sort of ladder into an
apartment furnished with a standing-bed, and almost half filled with
trusses of straw. He seemed extremely well pleased with his lodging,
which in reality exceeded his expectation; and his kind landlady,
cautioning him against letting the candle approach the combustibles,
took her leave, and locked the door on the outside.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

HE FALLS UPON SCYLLA, SEEKING TO AVOID CHARYBDIS.


Fathom, whose own principles taught him to be suspicious, and ever upon
his guard against the treachery of his fellow-creatures, could have
dispensed with this instance of her care, in confining her guest to her
chamber, and began to be seized with strange fancies, when he observed
that there was no bolt on the inside of the door, by which he might
secure himself from intrusion. In consequence of these suggestions, he
proposed to take an accurate survey of every object in the apartment,
and, in the course of his inquiry, had the mortification to find the
dead body of a man, still warm, who had been lately stabbed, and
concealed beneath several bundles of straw.

Such a discovery could not fail to fill the breast of our hero with
unspeakable horror; for he concluded that he himself would undergo the
same fate before morning, without the interposition of a miracle in his
favour. In the first transports of his dread, he ran to the window,
with a view to escape by that outlet, and found his flight effectually
obstructed by divers strong bars of iron. Then his heart began to
palpitate, his hair to bristle up, and his knees to totter; his
thoughts teemed with presages of death and destruction; his conscience
rose up in judgment against him, and he underwent a severe paroxysm of
dismay and distraction. His spirits were agitated into a state of
fermentation that produced a species of resolution akin to that which
is inspired by brandy or other strong liquors, and, by an impulse that
seemed supernatural, he was immediately hurried into measures for his
own preservation.

What upon a less interesting occasion his imagination durst not
propose, he now executed without scruple or remorse. He undressed the
corpse that lay bleeding among the straw, and, conveying it to the bed
in his arms, deposited it in the attitude of a person who sleeps at his
ease; then he extinguished the light, took possession of the place from
whence the body had been removed, and, holding a pistol ready cocked in
each hand, waited for the sequel with that determined purpose which is
often the immediate production of despair. About midnight he heard the
sound of feet ascending the ladder; the door was softly opened; he saw
the shadow of two men stalking towards the bed, a dark lanthorn being
unshrouded, directed their aim to the supposed sleeper, and he that
held it thrust a poniard to his heart; the force of the blow made a
compression on the chest, and a sort of groan issued from the windpipe
of the defunct; the stroke was repeated, without producing a repetition
of the note, so that the assassins concluded the work was effectually
done, and retired for the present with a design to return and rifle the
deceased at their leisure.

Never had our hero spent a moment in such agony as he felt during this
operation; the whole surface of his body was covered with a cold sweat,
and his nerves were relaxed with an universal palsy. In short, he
remained in a trance that, in all probability, contributed to his
safety; for, had he retained the use of his senses, he might have been
discovered by the transports of his fear. The first use he made of his
retrieved recollection, was to perceive that the assassins had left the
door open in their retreat; and he would have instantly availed himself
of this their neglect, by sallying out upon them, at the hazard of his
life, had he not been restrained by a conversation he overheard in the
room below, importing, that the ruffians were going to set out upon
another expedition, in hopes of finding more prey. They accordingly
departed, after having laid strong injunctions upon the old woman to
keep the door fast locked during their absence; and Ferdinand took his
resolution without farther delay. So soon as, by his conjecture, the
robbers were at a sufficient distance from the house, he rose from his
lurking-place, moved softly towards the bed, and, rummaging the pockets
of the deceased, found a purse well stored with ducats, of which,
together with a silver watch and a diamond ring, he immediately
possessed himself without scruple; then, descending with great care and
circumspection into the lower apartment, stood before the old beldame,
before she had the least intimation of his approach.

Accustomed as she was to the trade of blood, the hoary hag did not
behold this apparition without giving signs of infinite terror and
astonishment, believing it was no other than the spirit of her second
guest, who had been murdered; she fell upon her knees and began to
recommend herself to the protection of the saints, crossing herself
with as much devotion as if she had been entitled to the particular
care and attention of Heaven. Nor did her anxiety abate, when she was
undeceived in this her supposition, and understood it was no phantom,
but the real substance of the stranger, who, without staying to upbraid
her with the enormity of her crimes, commanded her, on pain of
immediate death, to produce his horse, to which being conducted, he set
her upon the saddle without delay, and, mounting behind, invested her
with the management of the reins, swearing, in a most peremptory tone,
that the only chance she had for her life, was in directing him safely
to the next town; and that, so soon as she should give him the least
cause to doubt her fidelity in the performance of that task, he would
on the instant act the part of her executioner.

This declaration had its effect upon the withered Hecate, who, with
many supplications for mercy and forgiveness, promised to guide him in
safety to a certain village at the distance of two leagues, where he
might lodge in security, and be provided with a fresh horse, or other
convenience, for pursuing his intended route. On these conditions he
told her she might deserve his clemency; and they accordingly took
their departure together, she being placed astride upon the saddle,
holding the bridle in one hand and a switch in the other; and our
adventurer sitting on the crupper, superintending her conduct, and
keeping the muzzle of a pistol close at her ear. In this equipage they
travelled across part of the same wood in which his guide had forsaken
him; and it is not to be supposed that he passed his time in the most
agreeable reverie, while he found himself involved in the labyrinth of
those shades, which he considered as the haunts of robbery and
assassination.

Common fear was a comfortable sensation to what he felt in this
excursion. The first steps he had taken for his preservation were the
effects of mere instinct, while his faculties were extinguished or
suppressed by despair; but now, as his reflection began to recur, he
was haunted by the most intolerable apprehensions. Every whisper of the
wind through the thickets was swelled into the hoarse menaces of
murder, the shaking of the boughs was construed into the brandishing of
poniards, and every shadow of a tree became the apparition of a ruffian
eager for blood. In short, at each of these occurrences he felt what
was infinitely more tormenting than the stab of a real dagger; and at
every fresh fillip of his fear, he acted as a remembrancer to his
conductress, in a new volley of imprecations, importing, that her life
was absolutely connected with his opinion of his own safety.

Human nature could not longer subsist under such complicated terror. At
last he found himself clear of the forest, and was blessed with the
distant view of an inhabited place. He then began to exercise his
thoughts upon a new subject. He debated with himself, whether he should
make a parade of his intrepidity and public spirit, by disclosing his
achievement, and surrendering his guide to the penalty of the law; or
leave the old hag and her accomplices to the remorse of their own
consciences, and proceed quietly on his journey to Paris in undisturbed
possession of the prize he had already obtained. This last step he
determined to take, upon recollecting, that, in the course of his
information, the story of the murdered stranger would infallibly
attract the attention of justice, and, in that case, the effects he had
borrowed from the defunct must be refunded for the benefit of those who
had a right to the succession. This was an argument which our
adventurer could not resist; he foresaw that he should be stripped of
his acquisition, which he looked upon as the fair fruits of his valour
and sagacity; and, moreover, be detained as an evidence against the
robbers, to the manifest detriment of his affairs. Perhaps too he had
motives of conscience, that dissuaded him from bearing witness against
a set of people whose principles did not much differ from his own.

Influenced by such considerations, he yielded to the first importunity
of the beldame, whom he dismissed at a very small distance from the
village, after he had earnestly exhorted her to quit such an atrocious
course of life, and atone for her past crimes, by sacrificing her
associates to the demands of justice. She did not fail to vow a perfect
reformation, and to prostrate herself before him for the favour she had
found; then she betook herself to her habitation, with full purpose of
advising her fellow-murderers to repair with all despatch to the
village, and impeach our hero, who, wisely distrusting her professions,
stayed no longer in the place than to hire a guide for the next stage,
which brought him to the city of Chalons-sur-Marne.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

HE ARRIVES AT PARIS, AND IS PLEASED WITH HIS RECEPTION.


He was not so smitten with the delightful situation of this ancient
town, but that he abandoned it as soon as he could procure a
post-chaise, in which he arrived at Paris, without having been exposed
to any other troublesome adventure upon the road. He took lodgings at a
certain hotel in the Fauxbourg de St. Germain, which is the general
rendezvous of all the strangers that resort to this capital; and now
sincerely congratulated himself upon his happy escape from his
Hungarian connexions, and from the snares of the banditti, as well as
upon the spoils of the dead body, and his arrival at Paris, from whence
there was such a short conveyance to England, whither he was attracted,
by far other motives than that of filial veneration for his native
soil.

He suppressed all his letters of recommendation, which he justly
concluded would subject him to a tedious course of attendance upon the
great, and lay him under the necessity of soliciting preferment in the
army, than which nothing was farther from his inclination; and resolved
to make his appearance in the character of a private gentleman, which
would supply him with opportunities of examining the different scenes
of life in such a gay metropolis, so as that he should be able to
choose that sphere in which he could move the most effectually to his
own advantage. He accordingly hired an occasional domestic, and under
the denomination of Count Fathom, which he had retained since his
elopement from Renaldo, repaired to dinner at an ordinary, to which he
was directed as a reputable place, frequented by fashionable strangers
of all nations.

He found this piece of information perfectly just; for he no sooner
entered the apartment, than his ears were saluted with a strange
confusion of sounds, among which he at once distinguished the High and
Low Dutch, barbarous French, Italian, and English languages. He was
rejoiced at this occasion of displaying his own qualifications, took
his place at one of the three long tables, betwixt a Westphalian count
and a Bolognian marquis, insinuated himself into the conversation with
his usual address, and in less than half an hour, found means to accost
a native of each different country in his own mother-tongue.

Such extensive knowledge did not pass unobserved. A French abbe, in a
provincial dialect, complimented him upon his retaining that purity in
pronunciation, which is not to be found in the speech of a Parisian.
The Bolognian, mistaking him for a Tuscan, “Sir,” said he, “I presume
you are from Florence. I hope the illustrious house of Lorrain leaves
you gentlemen of that famous city no room to regret the loss of your
own princes.” The castle of Versailles becoming the subject of
conversation, Monsieur le Compte appealed to him, as to a native
German, whether it was not inferior in point of magnificence to the
chateau of Grubenhagen. The Dutch officer, addressing himself to
Fathom, drank to the prosperity of Faderland, and asked if he had not
once served in garrison at Shenkenschans; and an English knight swore,
with great assurance, that he had frequently rambled with him at
midnight among the hundreds of Drury.

To each person he replied in a polite, though mysterious manner, which
did not fail to enhance their opinion of his good breeding and
importance; and, long before the dessert appeared, he was by all the
company supposed to be a personage of great consequence, who for some
substantial reasons, found it convenient to keep himself incognito.
This being the case, it is not to be doubted that particular civilities
were poured upon him from all quarters. He perceived their sentiments,
and encouraged them, by behaving with that sort of complaisance which
seems to be the result of engaging condescension in a character of
superior dignity and station. His affability was general but his chief
attention limited to those gentlemen already mentioned, who chanced to
sit nearest him at table; and he no sooner gave them to understand that
he was an utter stranger in Paris, than they unanimously begged to have
the honour of making him acquainted with the different curiosities
peculiar to that metropolis.

He accepted of their hospitality, accompanied them to a coffee-house in
the afternoon, from whence they repaired to the opera, and afterwards
adjourned to a noted hotel, in order to spend the remaining part of the
evening. It was here that our hero secured himself effectually in the
footing he had gained in their good graces. He in a moment saw through
all the characters of the party, and adapted himself to the humour of
each individual, without descending from that elevation of behaviour
which he perceived would operate among them in his behalf. With the
Italian he discoursed on music, in the style of a connoisseur; and
indeed had a better claim to that title than the generality of those
upon whom it is usually conferred; for he understood the art in theory
as well as in practice, and would have made no contemptible figure
among the best performers of the age.

He harangued upon taste and genius to the abbe, who was a wit and
critic, ex officio, or rather ex vestitu for a young pert Frenchman,
the very moment he puts on the petit collet, or little band, looks upon
himself as an inspired son of Apollo; and every one of the fraternity
thinks it incumbent upon him to assert the divinity of his mission. In
a word, the abbes are a set of people that bear a strong analogy to the
templars in London. Fools of each fabric, sharpers of all sorts, and
dunces of every degree, profess themselves of both orders. The templar
is, generally speaking, a prig, so is the abbe: both are distinguished
by an air of petulance and self-conceit, which holds a middle rank
betwixt the insolence of a first-rate buck and the learned pride of a
supercilious pedant. The abbe is supposed to be a younger brother in
quest of preferment in the church—the Temple is considered as a
receptacle or seminary for younger sons intended for the bar; but a
great number of each profession turn aside into other paths of life,
long before they reach these proposed goals. An abbe is often
metamorphosed into a foot soldier; a templar sometimes sinks into an
attorney’s clerk. The galleys of France abound with abbes; and many
templars may be found in our American plantations; not to mention those
who have made a public exit nearer home. Yet I would not have it
thought that my description includes every individual of those
societies. Some of the greatest scholars, politicians, and wits, that
ever Europe produced, have worn the habit of an abbe; and many of our
most noble families in England derive their honours from those who have
studied law in the Temple. The worthy sons of every community shall
always be sacred from my censure and ridicule; and, while I laugh at
the folly of particular members, I can still honour and revere the
institution.

But let us return from this comparison, which some readers may think
impertinent and unseasonable, and observe, that the Westphalian count,
Dutch officer, and English knight, were not excepted from the
particular regard and attention of our adventurer. He pledged the
German in every bumper; flattered the Hollander with compliments upon
the industry, wealth, and policy of the Seven United Provinces; but he
reserved his chief battery for his own countryman, on the supposition
that he was, in all respects, the best adapted for the purposes of a
needy gamester. Him, therefore, he cultivated with extraordinary care
and singular observance; for he soon perceived him to be a humourist,
and, from that circumstance, derived an happy presage of his own
success. The baronet’s disposition seemed to be cast in the true
English mould. He was sour, silent, and contemptuous; his very looks
indicated a consciousness of superior wealth; and he never opened his
mouth, except to make some dry, sarcastic, national reflection. Nor was
his behaviour free from that air of suspicion which a man puts on when
he believes himself in a crowd of pick-pockets, whom his caution and
vigilance set at defiance. In a word, though his tongue was silent on
the subject, his whole demeanour was continually saying, “You are all a
pack of poor lousy rascals, who have a design upon my purse. ’Tis true,
I could buy your whole generation, but I won’t be bubbled, d’ye see; I
am aware of your flattery, and upon my guard against all your knavish
pranks; and I come into your company for my own amusement only.”

Fathom having reconnoitred this peculiarity of temper, instead of
treating him with that assiduous complaisance, which he received from
the other gentlemen of the party, kept aloof from him in the
conversation, with a remarkable shyness of distant civility, and seldom
took notice of what he said, except with a view to contradict him, or
retort some of his satirical observations. This he conceived to be the
best method of acquiring his good opinion; because the Englishman would
naturally conclude he was a person who could have no sinister views
upon his fortune, else he would have chosen quite a different manner of
deportment. Accordingly, the knight seemed to bite at the hook. He
listened to Ferdinand with uncommon regard; he was even heard to
commend his remarks, and at length drank to their better acquaintance.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

ACQUITS HIMSELF WITH ADDRESS IN A NOCTURNAL RIOT.


The Italian and the abbe were the first who began to grow whimsical
under the influence of the burgundy; and, in the heat of their
elevation, proposed that the company should amuse themselves during the
remaining part of the night, at the house of an obliging dame, who
maintained a troop of fair nymphs for the accommodation of the other
sex. The proposal was approved by all, except the Hollander, whose
economy the wine had not as yet invaded; and, while he retreated
soberly to his own lodgings, the rest of the society adjourned in two
coaches to the temple of love, where they were received by the
venerable priestess, a personage turned of seventy, who seemed to
exercise the functions of her calling, in despite of the most cruel
ravages of time; for age had bent her into the form of a Turkish bow.
Her head was agitated by the palsy, like the leaf of the poplar tree;
her hair fell down in scanty parcels, as white as the driven snow; her
face was not simply wrinkled, but ploughed into innumerable furrows;
her jaws could not boast of one remaining tooth; one eye distilled a
large quantity of rheum, by virtue of the fiery edge that surrounded
it; the other was altogether extinguished, and she had lost her nose in
the course of her ministration. The Delphic sibyl was but a type of
this hoary matron, who, by her figure, might have been mistaken for the
consort of Chaos, or mother of Time. Yet there was something
meritorious in her appearance, as it denoted her an indefatigable
minister to the pleasure of mankind, and as it formed an agreeable
contrast with the beauty and youth of the fair damsels that wantoned in
her train. It resembled those discords in music, which, properly
disposed, contribute to the harmony of the whole piece; or those
horrible giants, who, in the world of romance, used to guard the gates
of the castle in which the enchanted damsel was confined.

This Urganda seemed to be aware of her own importance, and perfectly
well acquainted with the human appetite; for she compelled the whole
company to undergo her embrace. Then a lacquey, in magnificent livery,
ushered them into a superb apartment, where they waited some minutes,
without being favoured with the appearance of the ladies, to the
manifest dissatisfaction of the abbe, who, sending for the gouvernante,
reprimanded her severely for her want of politesse. The old lady, who
was by no means a pattern of patience and submission, retorted his
reproaches with great emphasis and vivacity. Her eloquence flowed
altogether in the Covent Garden strain; and I question whether the
celebrated Mother Douglas herself could have made such a figure in an
extemporaneous altercation.

After having bestowed upon the abbe the epithets of saucy insignificant
pimp, she put him in mind of the good offices which he had received at
her hands; how she had supplied him with bed, board, and bedfellow, in
his greatest necessity; sent him abroad with money in his pockets—and,
in a word, cherished him in her bosom, when his own mother had
abandoned him to distress. She then reviled him for presuming to
affront her before strangers, and gave the company to understand, that
the young ladies would wait upon them as soon as they could be
confessed and receive absolution from a worthy cordelier, who was now
employed in performing that charitable office. The gentlemen were
satisfied with this remonstrance, which argued the old lady’s pious
concern for the souls that were under her care, and our adventurer
proposed an accommodation betwixt her and the abbe, who was prevailed
upon to ask her pardon, and received her blessing upon his knees.

This affair had not been long adjusted, when five damsels were
introduced in a very gay dishabille, and our hero was complimented with
the privilege of choosing his Amanda from the whole bevy. When he was
provided, the others began to pair themselves, and, unhappily, the
German count chanced to pitch upon the same nymph who had captivated
the desires of the British knight. A dispute immediately ensued; for
the Englishman made his addresses to the lady, without paying the least
regard to the priority of the other’s claim; and she, being pleased
with his attachment, did not scruple to renounce his rival, who swore
by the thunder, lightning, and sacrament, that he would not quit his
pretensions for any prince in Christendom, much less for a little
English cavalier, whom he had already honoured too much in
condescending to be his companion.

The knight, provoked at this stately declaration, which was the
immediate effect of anger and ebriety, eyed his antagonist with a most
contemptuous aspect, and advised him to avoid such comparisons for the
future. “We all know,” said he, “the importance of a German count; I
suppose your revenue amounts to three hundred rix-dollars; and you have
a chateau that looks like the ruins of an English gaol. I will bind
myself to lend you a thousand pounds upon a mortgage of your estate,
(and a bad bargain I am sure I shall have,) if I do not, in less than
two months, find a yeoman of Kent, who spends more in strong ale than
the sum-total of your yearly income; and, were the truth known, I
believe that lace upon your coat is no better than tinsel, and those
fringed ruffles, with fine Holland sleeves, tacked to a shirt of brown
canvas, so that, were you to undress yourself before the lady, you
would only expose your own poverty and pride.”

The count was so much enraged at these sarcastic observations, that his
faculty of speech was overwhelmed by his resentment; though, in order
to acquit himself of the Englishman’s imputation, he forthwith pulled
off his clothes with such fury, that his brocade waistcoat was tore
from top to bottom. The knight, mistaking his meaning, considered this
demeanour as a fair challenge, to try which was the better man in the
exercise of boxing; and, on that supposition, began to strip in his
turn, when he was undeceived by Fathom, who put the right
interpretation upon the count’s behaviour, and begged that the affair
might be compromised. By this time the Westphalian recovered the use of
his tongue, and with many threats and imprecations, desired they would
take notice how falsely he had been aspersed, and do him justice in
espousing his claim to the damsel in question.

Before the company had time or inclination to interest themselves in
the quarrel, his opponent observed that no person who was not a mere
German, would ever dream of forcing the inclinations of a pretty girl,
whom the accidents of fortune had subjected to his power; that such
compulsion was equivalent to the most cruel rape that could be
committed; and that the lady’s aversion was not at all surprising; for,
to speak his own sentiments, were he a woman of pleasure, he would as
soon grant favours to a Westphalian hog, as to the person of his
antagonist. The German, enraged at this comparison, was quite abandoned
by his patience and discretion. He called the knight an English clown,
and, swearing he was the most untoward beast of a whole nation of
mules, snatched up one of the candlesticks, which he launched at him
with such force and violence, that it sung through the air, and,
winging its flight into the ante-chamber, encountered the skull of his
own valet, who with immediate prostration received the message of his
master.

The knight, that he might not be behindhand with the Westphalian in
point of courtesy, returned the compliment with the remaining
chandelier, which also missed its mark, and, smiting a large mirror
that was fixed behind them, emitted such a crash as one might expect to
hear if a mine were sprung beneath a manufacture of glass. Both lights
being thus extinguished, a furious combat ensued in the dark; the
Italian scampered off with infinite agility, and, as he went
downstairs, desired that nobody would interpose, because it was an
affair of honour, which could not be made up. The ladies consulted
their safety in flight; Count Fathom slyly retired to one corner of the
room; while the abbe, having upon him the terrors of the commissaire,
endeavoured to appease and part the combatants, and, in the attempt,
sustained a random blow upon his nose, which sent him howling into the
other chamber, where, finding his band besmeared with his own blood, he
began to caper about the apartment, in a transport of rage and
vexation.

Meanwhile, the old gentlewoman being alarmed with the noise of the
battle, and apprehensive that it would end in murder, to the danger and
discredit of herself and family, immediately mustered up her myrmidons,
of whom she always retained a formidable band, and, putting herself at
their head, lighted them to the scene of uproar. Ferdinand, who had
hitherto observed a strict neutrality, no sooner perceived them
approach, than he leaped in between the disputants, that he might be
found acting in the character of a peacemaker; and, indeed, by this
time, victory had declared for the baronet, who had treated his
antagonist with a cross-buttock, which laid him almost breathless on
the floor. The victor was prevailed upon, by the entreaties of Fathom,
to quit the field of battle, and adjourn into another room, where, in
less than half an hour, he received a billet from the count, defying
him to single combat on the frontiers of Flanders, at an appointed time
and place. The challenge was immediately accepted by the knight, who,
being flushed with conquest, treated his adversary with great contempt.

But, next day, when the fumes of the burgundy were quite exhaled, and
the adventure recurred to his remembrance and sober reflection, he
waited upon our adventurer at his lodgings, and solicited his advice in
such a manner, as gave him to understand that he looked upon what had
happened as a drunken brawl, which ought to have no serious
consequences. Fathom foreseeing that the affair might be managed for
his own interest, professed himself of the baronet’s opinion; and,
without hesitation, undertook the office of a mediator, assuring his
principal, that his honour should suffer no stain in the course of his
negotiation.

Having received the Englishman’s acknowledgments for this instance of
friendship, he forthwith set out for the place of the German’s
habitation, and understanding he was still asleep, insisted upon his
being immediately waked, and told, that a gentleman from the chevalier
desired to see him, upon business of importance which could not be
delayed. Accordingly, his valet-de-chambre, pressed by Fathom’s
importunities and remonstrances, ventured to go in and shake the count
by the shoulder; when this furious Teutonian, still agitated by the
fever of the preceding night, leaped out of bed in a frenzy, and
seizing his sword that lay upon a table, would have severely punished
the presumption of his servant, had not he been restrained by the
entrance of Ferdinand, who, with a peremptory countenance, gave him to
understand that the valet had acted at his immediate instigation; and
that he was come, as the Englishman’s friend, to concert with him
proper measures for keeping the appointment they had made at their last
meeting.

This message effectually calmed the German, who was not a little
mortified to find himself so disagreeably disturbed. He could not help
cursing the impatience of his antagonist, and even hinting that he
would have acted more like a gentleman and good Christian, in
expressing a desire of seeing the affair accommodated, as he knew
himself to be the aggressor, consequently the first offender against
the laws of politeness and good-fellowship. Fathom, finding him in a
fit temper of mind, took the opportunity of assenting to the
reasonableness of his observation. He ventured to condemn the
impetuosity of the baronet, who, he perceived, was extremely nice and
scrupulous in the punctilios of honour; and said it was a pity that two
gentlemen should forfeit each other’s friendship, much less expose
their lives, for such a frivolous cause. “My dear count,” cried the
Westphalian, “I am charmed to find your sentiments so conformable to my
own. In an honourable cause, I despise all danger; my courage, thank
Heaven! has been manifested in many public engagements as well as in
private rencounters; but, to break with my friend, whose eminent
virtues I admire, and even to seek his life, on such a scandalous
occasion, for a little insignificant w—-e, who, I suppose, took the
advantage of our intoxication, to foment the quarrel: by Heaven! my
conscience cannot digest it.”

Having expressed himself to this purpose, he waited impatiently for the
reply of Ferdinand, who, after a pause of deliberation, offered his
services in the way of mediation; though, he observed, it was a matter
of great delicacy, and the event altogether uncertain. “Nevertheless,”
added our adventurer, “I will strive to appease the knight, who, I
hope, will be induced by my remonstrances to forget the unlucky
accident, which hath so disagreeably interrupted your mutual
friendship.” The German thanked him for this proof of his regard, which
yielded him more satisfaction on account of the chevalier than of
himself. “For, by the tombs of my fathers,” cried he, “I have so little
concern for my personal safety, that, if my honour were interested, I
durst oppose myself singly to the whole ban of the empire; and I am now
ready, if the chevalier requires it, to give him the rendezvous in the
forest of Senlis, either on horseback or on foot, where this contest
may be terminated with the life of one or both of us.”

Count Fathom, with a view to chastise the Westphalian for this
rhodomontade, told him, with a mortifying air of indifference, that if
they were both bent upon taking the field, he would save himself the
trouble of interposing farther in the affair; and desired to know the
hour at which it would suit him to take the air with the baronet. The
other, not a little embarrassed by this question, said, with a
faltering tongue, he should be proud to obey the chevalier’s orders;
but, at the same time, owned he should be much better pleased if our
hero would execute the pacific proposal he had made. Fathom accordingly
promised to exert himself for that purpose, and returned to the knight,
with whom he assumed the merit of having tranquillised the rage of an
incensed barbarian, who was now disposed to a reconciliation upon equal
terms. The baronet overwhelmed him with caresses and compliments upon
his friendship and address; the parties met that same forenoon, as if
by accident, in Fathom’s apartment, where they embraced each other
cordially, exchanged apologies, and renewed their former
correspondence.

Our adventurer thought he had good reason to congratulate himself upon
the part he had acted in this pacification. He was treated by both with
signal marks of particular affection and esteem. The count pressed him
to accept, as a token of his attachment, a sword of very curious
workmanship, which he had received in a present from a certain prince
of the empire. The knight forced upon his finger a very splendid
diamond ring, as a testimony of his gratitude and esteem. But there was
still another person to be appeased, before the peace of the whole
company could be established. This was no other than the abbe, from
whom each of the reconciled friends received at dinner a billet couched
in these words:—

“I have the honour to lament the infinite chagrin and mortification
that compels me to address myself in this manner to a person of your
rank and eminence, whom I should do myself the pleasure of waiting upon
in person, were I not prevented by the misfortune of my nose, which was
last night most cruelly disarranged, by a violent contusion I had the
honour to receive, in attempting to compose that unhappy fracas, at the
house of Madame la Maquerelle; and what puts the finishing stroke to my
mishap, is my being rendered incapable of keeping three or four
assignations with ladies of fashion, by whom I have the honour to be
particularly esteemed. The disfiguration of my nose, the pain I have
undergone, with the discomposure of brain which it produced, I could
bear as a philosopher; but the disappointment of the ladies, my glory
will not permit me to overlook. And as you know the injury was
sustained in your service, I have the pleasure to hope you will not
refuse to grant such reparation as will be acceptable to a gentleman,
who has the honour to be with inviolable attachment,—


Sir, your most devoted slave,
PEPIN CLOTHAIRE CHARLE HENRI LOOUIS BARNABE DE FUMIER.”


This epistle was so equivocal, that the persons to whom it was
addressed did not know whether or not they ought to interpret the
contents into a challenge; when our hero observed, that the ambiguity
of his expressions plainly proved there was a door left open for
accommodation; and proposed that they should forthwith visit the writer
at his own apartment. They accordingly followed his advice, and found
the abbe in his morning gown and slippers, with three huge nightcaps on
his head, and a crape hat-band tied over the middle of his face, by way
of bandage to his nose. He received his visitors with the most
ridiculous solemnity, being still a stranger to the purport of their
errand; but soon as the Westphalian declared they were come in
consequence of his billet, in order to ask pardon for the undesigned
offence they had given, his features retrieved their natural vivacity,
and he professed himself perfectly satisfied with their polite
acknowledgment. Then they condoled him upon the evil plight of his
nose, and seeing some marks upon his shirt, asked with seeming concern,
if he had lost any blood in the fray? To this interrogation he replied,
that he had still a sufficient quantity left for the occasions of his
friends; and that he should deem it his greatest glory to expend the
last drop of it in their service.

Matters being thus amicably adjusted, they prevailed upon him to unease
his nose, which retained no signs of the outrage he had suffered; and
the amusements of the day were concerted. It was in consequence of this
plan, that, after the comedy, they were entertained at the count’s
lodgings, where quadrille was proposed by the abbe, as the most
innocent pastime, and the proposal was immediately embraced by all
present, and by none with more alacrity than by our adventurer, who,
without putting forth a moiety of his skill, went home with twenty
louis clear gain. Though, far from believing himself greatly superior
to the rest of the party, in the artifices of play, he justly suspected
that they had concealed their skill, with a view of stripping him on
some other occasion; for he could not suppose that persons of their
figure and character should be, in reality, such novices as they
affected to appear.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

HE OVERLOOKS THE ADVANCES OF HIS FRIENDS, AND SMARTS SEVERELY FOR HIS
NEGLECT.


Steeled with this cautious maxim, he guarded himself from their united
endeavours, in sundry subsequent attacks, by which his first conjecture
was confirmed, and still came off conqueror, by virtue of his
unparalleled finesse and discretion; till at length they seemed to
despair of making him their prey, and the count began to drop some
hints, importing a desire of seeing him more closely united to the
views and interest of their triumvirate. But Ferdinand, who was
altogether selfish, and quite solitary in his prospects, discouraged
all those advances, being resolved to trade upon his own bottom only,
and to avoid all such connexions with any person or society whatever;
much more, with a set of raw adventurers whose talents he despised.
With these sentiments, he still maintained the dignity and reserve of
his first appearance among them, and rather enhanced than diminished
that idea of importance which he had inspired at the beginning;
because, besides his other qualifications, they gave him credit for the
address with which he kept himself superior to their united designs.

While he thus enjoyed his pre-eminence, together with the fruits of his
success at play, which he managed so discreetly as never to incur the
reputation of an adventurer, he one day chanced to be at the ordinary,
when the company was surprised by the entrance of such a figure as had
never appeared before in that place. This was no other than a person
habited in the exact uniform of an English jockey. His leathern cap,
cut bob, fustian frock, flannel waistcoat, buff breeches, hunting-boots
and whip, were sufficient of themselves to furnish out a phenomenon for
the admiration of all Paris. But these peculiarities were rendered
still more conspicuous by the behaviour of the man who owned them. When
he crossed the threshold of the outward door, he produced such a sound
from the smack of his whip, as equalled the explosion of an ordinary
cohorn; and then broke forth into the halloo of a foxhunter, which he
uttered with all its variations, in a strain of vociferation that
seemed to astonish and confound the whole assembly, to whom he
introduced himself and his spaniel, by exclaiming, in a tone something
less melodious than the cry of mackerel or live cod, “By your leave,
gentlevolks, I hope there’s no offence, in an honest plain Englishman’s
coming with money in his pocket, to taste a bit of your Vrench frigasee
and ragooze.”

This declaration was made in such a wild, fantastical manner, that the
greatest part of the company mistook him for some savage monster or
maniac, and consulted their safety by starting up from table, and
drawing their swords. The Englishman, seeing such a martial apparatus
produced against him, recoiled two or three steps, saying, “Waunds! a
believe the people are all bewitched. What, do they take me for a beast
of prey? is there nobody here that knows Sir Stentor Stile, or can
speak to me in my own lingo?” He had no sooner pronounced these words,
than the baronet, with marks of infinite surprise, ran towards him,
crying, “Good Heaven! Sir Stentor, who expected to meet with you in
Paris?” Upon which, the other eyeing him very earnestly, “Odds
heartlikins!” cried he, “my neighbour, Sir Giles Squirrel, as I am a
living soul!” With these words he flew upon him like a tiger, kissed
him from ear to ear, demolished his periwig, and disordered the whole
economy of his dress, to the no small entertainment of the company.

Having well-nigh stifled his countryman with embraces, and besmeared
himself with pulville from head to foot, he proceeded in this manner,
“Mercy upon thee, knight, thou art so transmographied, and bedaubed,
and bedizened, that thou mought rob thy own mother without fear of
information. Look ye here now, I will be trussed, if the very bitch
that was brought up in thy own bosom knows thee again. Hey, Sweetlips,
here hussy, d—n the tuoad, dos’t n’t know thy old measter? Ey, ey, thou
may’st smell till Christmas, I’ll be bound to be hanged, knight, if the
creature’s nose an’t foundered by the d——d stinking perfumes you have
got among you.”

These compliments being passed, the two knights sat down by one
another, and Sir Stentor being asked by his neighbour, upon what errand
he had crossed the sea, gave him to understand, that he had come to
France, in consequence of a wager with Squire Snaffle, who had laid a
thousand pounds, that he, Sir Stentor, would not travel to Paris by
himself, and for a whole month appear every day at a certain hour in
the public walks, without wearing any other dress than that in which he
saw him. “The fellor has got no more stuff in his pate,” continued this
polite stranger, “than a jackass, to think I could not find my way
hither thof I could not jabber your French lingo. Ecod! the people of
this country are sharp enough to find out your meaning, when you want
to spend anything among them; and, as for the matter of dress,
bodikins! for a thousand pound, I would engage to live in the midst of
them, and show myself without any clothes at all. Odds heart! a
true-born Englishman needs not be ashamed to show his face, nor his
backside neither, with the best Frenchman that ever trod the ground.
Thof we Englishmen don’t beplaister our doublets with gold and silver,
I believe as how we have our pockets better lined than most of our
neighbours; and for all my bit of a fustian frock, that cost me in all
but forty shillings, I believe, between you and me, knight, I have more
dust in my fob, than all those powdered sparks put together. But the
worst of the matter is this; here is no solid belly-timber in this
country. One can’t have a slice of delicate sirloin, or nice buttock of
beef, for love nor money. A pize upon them! I could get no eatables
upon the ruoad, but what they called bully, which looks like the flesh
of Pharaoh’s lean kine stewed into rags and tatters; and then their
peajohn, peajohn, rabbet them! One would think every old woman of this
kingdom hatched pigeons from her own body.”

It is not to be supposed that such an original sat unobserved. The
French and other foreigners, who had never been in England, were struck
dumb with amazement at the knight’s appearance and deportment; while
the English guests were overwhelmed with shame and confusion, and kept
a most wary silence, for fear of being recognised by their countryman.
As for our adventurer, he was inwardly transported with joy at sight of
this curiosity. He considered him as a genuine, rich country booby, of
the right English growth, fresh as imported; and his heart throbbed
with rapture, when he heard Sir Stentor value himself upon the lining
of his pockets. He foresaw, indeed, that the other knight would
endeavour to reserve him for his own game; but he was too conscious of
his own accomplishments to think he should find great difficulty in
superseding the influence of Sir Giles.

Meanwhile, the new-comer was by his friend helped to some ragout, which
pleased his palate so well, that he declared he should now make a
hearty meal, for the first time since he had crossed the water; and,
while his good-humour prevailed, he drank to every individual around
the table. Ferdinand seized this opportunity of insinuating himself
into his favour, by saying in English, he was glad to find there was
anything in France that was agreeable to Sir Stentor. To this
compliment the knight replied with an air of surprise: “Waunds! I find
here’s another countryman of mine in this here company. Sir, I am proud
to see you with all my heart.” So speaking, he thrust out his right
hand across the table, and shook our hero by the fist, with such
violence of civility, as proved very grievous to a French marquis, who,
in helping himself to soup, was jostled in such a manner, as to
overturn the dividing-spoon in his own bosom. The Englishman, seeing
the mischief he had produced, cried, “No offence, I hope,” in a tone of
vociferation, which the marquis in all probability misconstrued; for he
began to model his features into a very sublime and peremptory look,
when Fathom interpreted the apology, and at the same time informed Sir
Stentor, that although he himself had not the honour of being an
Englishman, he had always entertained a most particular veneration for
the country, and learned the language in consequence of that esteem.

“Blood!” answered the knight, “I think myself the more obliged to you
for your kind opinion, than if you was my countryman in good earnest.
For there be abundance of we English—no offence, Sir Giles—that seem to
be ashamed of their own nation, and leave their homes to come and spend
their fortunes abroad, among a parcel of—you understand me, sir—a word
to the wise, as the saying is.”—Here he was interrupted by an article
of the second course, that seemed to give him great disturbance. This
was a roasted leveret, very strong of the fumet, which happened to be
placed directly under his nose. His sense of smelling was no sooner
encountered by the effluvia of this delicious fare, than he started up
from table, exclaiming, “Odd’s my liver! here’s a piece of carrion,
that I would not offer to e’er a hound in my kennel; ’tis enough to
make any Christian vomit both gut and gall;” and indeed by the wry
faces he made while he ran to the door, his stomach seemed ready to
justify this last assertion.

The abbe, who concluded, from these symptoms of disgust, that the
leveret was not sufficiently stale, began to exhibit marks of
discontent, and desired that it might be brought to the other end of
the table for his examination. He accordingly hung over it with the
most greedy appetite, feasting his nostrils with the steams of animal
putrefaction; and at length declared that the morceau was passable,
though he owned it would have been highly perfect, had it been kept
another week. Nevertheless, mouths were not wanting to discuss it,
insipid as it was; for in three minutes there was not a vestige to be
seen of that which had offended the organs of Sir Stentor, who now
resumed his place, and did justice to the dessert. But what he seemed
to relish better than any other part of the entertainment, was the
conversation of our adventurer, whom, after dinner, he begged to have
the honour of treating with a dish of coffee, to the seeming
mortification of his brother knight, over which Fathom exulted in his
own heart.

In short, our hero, by his affability and engaging deportment,
immediately gained possession of Sir Stentor’s good graces, insomuch,
that he desired to crack a bottle with him in the evening, and they
repaired to an auberge, whither his fellow-knight accompanied him, not
without manifest signs of reluctance. There the stranger gave a loose
to jollity; though at first he d—-ed the burgundy as a poor thin
liquor, that ran through him in a twinkling, and, instead of warming,
cooled his heart and bowels. However, it insensibly seemed to give the
lie to his imputation; for his spirits rose to a more elevated pitch of
mirth and good-fellowship; he sung, or rather roared, the Early Horn,
so as to alarm the whole neighbourhood, and began to slabber his
companions with a most bear-like affection. Yet whatever haste he made
to the goal of ebriety, he was distanced by his brother baronet, who
from the beginning of the party had made little other use of his mouth
than to receive the glass, and now sunk down upon the floor, in a state
of temporary annihilation.

He was immediately carried to bed by the direction of Ferdinand, who
now saw himself in a manner possessor of that mine to which he had made
such eager and artful advances. That he might, therefore, carry on the
approaches in the same cautious manner, he gradually shook off the
trammels of sobriety, gave a loose to that spirit of freedom which good
liquor commonly inspires, and, in the familiarity of drunkenness, owned
himself head of a noble family of Poland, from which he had been
obliged to absent himself on account of an affair of honour, not yet
compromised.

Having made this confession, and laid strong injunctions of secrecy
upon Sir Stentor, his countenance seemed to acquire from every
succeeding glass a new symptom of intoxication. They renewed their
embraces, swore eternal friendship from that day, and swallowed fresh
bumpers, till both being in all appearance quite overpowered, they
began to yawn in concert, and even nod in their chairs. The knight
seemed to resent the attacks of slumber, as so many impertinent
attempts to interrupt their entertainment; he cursed his own propensity
to sleep, imputing it to the d—-ed French climate, and proposed to
engage in some pastime that would keep them awake. “Odd’s flesh!” cried
the Briton, “when I’m at home, I defy all the devils in hell to fasten
my eyelids together, if so be as I’m otherwise inclined. For there’s
mother and sister Nan, and brother Numps and I, continue to divert
ourselves at all-fours, brag, cribbage, tetotum, husslecap, and
chuck-varthing, and, thof I say it, that should n’t say it, I won’t
turn my back to e’er a he in England, at any of these pastimes. And so,
Count, if you are so disposed, I am your man, that is, in the way of
friendship, at which of these you shall please to pitch upon.”

To this proposal Fathom replied, he was quite ignorant of all the games
he had mentioned; but, in order to amuse Sir Stentor, he would play
with him at lansquenet, for a trifle, as he had laid it down for a
maxim, to risk nothing considerable at play. “Waunds!” answered the
knight, “I hope you don’t think I come here in quest of money. Thank
God! I have a good landed estate worth five thousand a year, and owe no
man a halfpenny; and I question whether there be many counts in your
nation—no offence, I hope—that can say a bolder word. As for your
lambskin net, I know nothing of the matter; but I will toss up with you
for a guinea, cross or pile, as the saying is; or, if there’s such a
thing in this country as a box and dice, I love to hear the bones
rattle sometimes.”

Fathom found some difficulty in concealing his joy at the mention of
this last amusement, which had been one of his chief studies, and in
which he had made such progress, that he could calculate all the
chances with the utmost exactness and certainty. However, he made shift
to contain himself within due bounds, and, with seeming indifference,
consented to pass away an hour at hazard, provided the implements could
be procured. Accordingly, the landlord was consulted, and their desire
gratified; the dice were produced, and the table resounded with the
effects of their mutual eagerness. Fortune, at first, declared for the
Englishman, who was permitted by our adventurer to win twenty broad
pieces; and he was so elated with his success, as to accompany every
lucky throw with a loud burst of laughter, and other savage and simple
manifestations of excessive joy, exclaiming, in a tone something less
sweet than the bellowing of a bull, “Now for the main, Count,—odd! here
they come—here are the seven black stars, i’faith. Come along, my
yellow boys—odd’s heart! I never liked the face of Lewis before.”

Fathom drew happy presages from these boyish raptures, and, after
having indulged them for some time, began to avail himself of his
arithmetic, in consequence of which the knight was obliged to refund
the greatest part of his winning. Then he altered his note, and became
as intemperate in his chagrin, as he had been before immoderate in his
mirth. He cursed himself and his whole generation, d—-ed his bad luck,
stamped with his feet upon the floor, and challenged Ferdinand to
double stakes. This was a very welcome proposal to our hero, who found
Sir Stentor just such a subject as he had long desired to encounter
with; the more the Englishman laid, the more he lost, and Fathom took
care to inflame his passions, by certain well-timed sarcasms upon his
want of judgment, till at length he became quite outrageous, swore the
dice were false, and threw them out at the window; pulled off his
periwig, and committed it to the flames, spoke with the most rancorous
contempt of his adversary’s skill, insisted upon his having stripped
many a better man, for all he was a Count, and threatening that, before
they parted, he should not only look like a Pole, but also smell like a
pole-cat.

This was a spirit which our adventurer industriously kept up, observing
that the English were dupes to all the world; and that, in point of
genius and address, they were no more than noisy braggadocios. In
short, another pair of dice was procured, the stakes were again raised,
and, after several vicissitudes, fortune declared so much in favour of
the knight, that Fathom lost all the money in his pocket, amounting to
a pretty considerable sum. By this time he was warmed into uncommon
eagerness and impatience; being equally piqued at the success and
provoking exultations of his antagonist, whom he now invited to his
lodgings, in order to decide the contest. Sir Stentor complied with
this request; the dispute was renewed with various success, till,
towards daylight, Ferdinand saw this noisy, raw, inexperienced
simpleton, carry off all his ready cash, together with his jewels, and
almost everything that was valuable about his person; and, to crown the
whole, the victor at parting told him with a most intolerable sneer,
that as soon as the Count should receive another remittance from
Poland, he would give him his revenge.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

HE BEARS HIS FATE LIKE A PHILOSOPHER; AND CONTRACTS ACQUAINTANCE WITH A
VERY REMARKABLE PERSONAGE.


This was a proper subject for our hero to moralise upon; and
accordingly it did not pass without his remarks; he found himself
fairly foiled at his own weapons, reduced to indigence in a foreign
land, and, what he chiefly regretted, robbed of all those gay
expectations he had indulged from his own supposed excellence in the
wiles of fraud; for, upon a little recollection, he plainly perceived
he had fallen a sacrifice to the confederacy he had refused to join;
and did not at all doubt that the dice were loaded for his destruction.
But, instead of beating his head against the wall, tearing his hair,
imprecating vain curses upon himself, or betraying other frantic
symptoms of despair, he resolved to accommodate himself to his fate,
and profit by the lesson he had so dearly bought.

With this intention, he immediately dismissed his valet, quitted his
lodgings, retired to an obscure street on the other side of the river,
and, covering one eye with a large patch of black silk, presented
himself in quality of a musician to the director of the opera, who,
upon hearing a trial of his skill, received him into the band without
further question. While he continued in this situation, he not only
improved his taste and execution in music, but likewise found frequent
opportunities to extend his knowledge of mankind; for, besides the
employment he exercised in public, he was often concerned in private
concerts that were given in the hotels of noblemen; by which means he
became more and more acquainted with the persons, manners, and
characters of high life, which he contemplated with the most
industrious attention, as a spectator, who, being altogether
unconcerned in the performance, is at more liberty to observe and enjoy
the particulars of the entertainment.

It was in one of those assemblies he had the pleasure of seeing his
friend Sir Stentor, dressed in the most fashionable manner, and
behaving with all the overstrained politesse of a native Frenchman. He
was accompanied by his brother knight and the abbe; and this
triumvirate, even in Fathom’s hearing, gave a most ludicrous detail of
the finesse they had practised upon the Polish Count, to their
entertainer, who was ambassador from a certain court, and made himself
extremely merry with the particulars of the relation. Indeed, they made
shift to describe some of the circumstances in such a ridiculous light,
that our adventurer himself, smarting as he was with the disgrace,
could not help laughing in secret at the account. He afterwards made it
his business to inquire into the characters of the two British knights,
and understood they were notorious sharpers, who had come abroad for
the good of their country, and now hunted in couple among a French
pack, that dispersed themselves through the public ordinaries, walks,
and spectacles, in order to make a prey of incautious strangers.

The pride of Ferdinand was piqued at this information; and he was even
animated with the desire of making reprisals upon this fraternity, from
which he ardently longed to retrieve his honour and effects. But the
issue of his last adventure had reinforced his caution; and, for the
present, he found means to suppress the dictates of his avarice and
ambition; resolving to employ his whole penetration in reconnoitring
the ground, before he should venture to take the field again. He
therefore continued to act the part of a one-eyed fiddler, under the
name of Fadini, and lived with incredible frugality, that he might save
a purse for his future operations. In this manner had he proceeded for
the space of ten months, during which he acquired a competent knowledge
of the city of Paris, when his curiosity was attracted by certain
peculiarities in the appearance of a man who lived in one of the upper
apartments belonging to the house in which he himself had fixed his
habitation.

This was a tall, thin, meagre figure, with a long black beard, an
aquiline nose, a brown complexion, and a most piercing vivacity in his
eyes. He seemed to be about the age of fifty, wore the Persian habit,
and there was a remarkable severity in his aspect and demeanour. He and
our adventurer had been fellow-lodgers for some time, and, according to
the laudable custom in these days, had hitherto remained as much
estranged to one another, as if they had lived on opposite sides of the
globe; but of late the Persian seemed to regard our hero with
particular attention; when they chanced to meet on the staircase, or
elsewhere, he bowed to Ferdinand with great solemnity, and complimented
him with the pas. He even proceeded, in the course of this
communication, to open his mouth, and salute him with a good-morrow,
and sometimes made the common remarks upon the weather. Fathom, who was
naturally complaisant, did not discourage these advances. On the
contrary, he behaved to him with marks of particular respect, and one
day desired the favour of his company to breakfast.

This invitation the stranger declined with due acknowledgment, on
pretence of being out of order; and, in the meantime, our adventurer
bethought himself of questioning the landlord concerning his outlandish
guest. His curiosity was rather inflamed than satisfied with the
information he could obtain from this quarter; for all he learned was,
that the Persian went by the name of Ali Beker, and that he had lived
in the house for the space of four months, in a most solitary and
parsimonious manner, without being visited by one living soul; that,
for some time after his arrival, he had been often heard to groan
dismally in the night, and even to exclaim in an unknown language, as
if he had laboured under some grievous affliction; and though the first
transports of his grief had subsided, it was easy to perceive he still
indulged a deep-rooted melancholy; for the tears were frequently
observed to trickle down his beard. The commissaire of the quarter had
at first ordered this Oriental to be watched in his outgoings,
according to the maxims of the French police; but his life was found so
regular and inoffensive, that this precaution was soon set aside.

Any man of humane sentiments, from the knowledge of these particulars,
would have been prompted to offer his services to the forlorn stranger;
but as our hero was devoid of all these infirmities of human nature, it
was necessary that other motives should produce the same effect. His
curiosity, therefore, joined with the hopes of converting the
confidence of Ali to his own emolument, effectually impelled him
towards his acquaintance; and, in a little time, they began to relish
the conversation of each other. For, as the reader may have already
observed, Fathom possessed all the arts of insinuation, and had
discernment enough to perceive an air of dignity in the Persian, which
the humility of his circumstances could not conceal. He was, moreover,
a man of good understanding, not without a tincture of letters,
perfectly well bred, though in a ceremonious style, extremely moral in
his discourse, and scrupulously nice in his notions of honour.

Our hero conformed himself in all respects to the other’s opinions, and
managed his discretion so as to pass upon him for a gentleman reduced
by misfortunes to the exercise of an employment which was altogether
unsuitable to his birth and quality. He made earnest and repeated
tenders of his good offices to the stranger, and pressed him to make
use of his purse with such cordial perseverance, that, at length, Ali’s
reserve was overcome, and he condescended to borrow of him a small sum,
which in all probability, saved his life; for he had been driven to the
utmost extremity of want before he would accept of this assistance.

Fathom, having gradually stole into his good graces, began to take
notice of many piteous sighs that escaped him in the moments of their
intercourse, and seemed to denote an heart fraught with woe; and, on
pretence of administering consolation and counsel, begged leave to know
the cause of his distress, observing, that his mind would be
disburdened by such communication, and, perhaps, his grief alleviated
by some means which they might jointly concert and execute in his
behalf.

Ali, thus solicited, would often shake his head, with marks of extreme
sorrow and despondence, and, while the tears gushed from his eyes,
declared that his distress was beyond the power of any remedy but
death, and that, by making our hero his confidant, he should only
extend his unhappiness to a friend, without feeling the least remission
of his own torture. Notwithstanding these repeated declarations,
Ferdinand, who was well enough acquainted with the mind of man to know
that such importunity is seldom or never disagreeable, redoubled his
instances, together with his expressions of sympathy and esteem, until
the stranger was prevailed upon to gratify his curiosity and
benevolence. Having, therefore, secured the chamber door one night,
while all the rest of the family were asleep, the unfortunate Ali
disclosed himself in these words.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

THE HISTORY OF THE NOBLE CASTILIAN.


I should be ungrateful, as well as unwise, did I longer resist the
desire you express to know the particulars of that destiny which hath
driven me to this miserable disguise, and rendered me in all
considerations the most wretched of men. I have felt your friendship,
am confident of your honour, and though my misfortunes are such as can
never be repaired, because I am utterly cut off from hope, which is the
wretch’s last comfort, yet I may, by your means, be enabled to bear
them with some degree of fortitude and resignation.

Know then, my name is not Ali; neither am I of Persian extraction. I
had once the honour to own myself a Castilian, and was, under the
appellation of Don Diego de Zelos, respected as the head of one of the
most ancient families of that kingdom. Judge, then, how severe that
distress must be, which compels a Spaniard to renounce his country, his
honours, and his name. My youth was not spent in inglorious ease,
neither did it waste unheeded in the rolls of fame. Before I had
attained the age of nineteen, I was twice wounded in battle. I once
fortunately recovered the standard of the regiment to which I belonged,
after it had been seized by the enemy; and, at another occasion, made
shift to save the life of my colonel, when he lay at the mercy of an
enraged barbarian.

He that thinks I recapitulate these particulars out of ostentation,
does wrong to the unhappy Don Diego de Zelos, who, in having performed
these little acts of gallantry, thinks he has done nothing, but simply
approved himself worthy of being called a Castilian. I mean only to do
justice to my own character, and to make you acquainted with one of the
most remarkable incidents of my life. It was my fate, during my third
campaign, to command a troop of horse in the regiment of Don Gonzales
Orgullo, between whom and my father a family feud had long been
maintained with great enmity; and that gentleman did not leave me
without reason to believe he rejoiced at the opportunity of exercising
his resentment upon his adversary’s son; for he withheld from me that
countenance which my fellow-officers enjoyed, and found means to
subject me to divers mortifications, of which I was not at liberty to
complain. These I bore in silence for some time, as part of my
probation in the character of a soldier; resolved, nevertheless, to
employ my interest at court for a removal into another corps, and to
take some future opportunity of explaining my sentiments to Don
Gonzales upon the injustice of his behaviour.

While I animated myself with these sentiments against the
discouragements I underwent, and the hard duty to which I was daily
exposed, it was our fate to be concerned in the battle of Saragossa,
where our regiment was so severely handled by the English infantry,
that it was forced to give ground with the loss of one half of its
officers and men. Don Gonzales, who acted as brigadier in another wing,
being informed of our fate, and dreading the disgrace of his corps,
which had never turned back to the enemy, put spurs to his horse, and,
riding across the field at full speed, rallied our broken squadrons,
and led us back to the charge with such intrepidity of behaviour, as
did not fail to inspire us all with uncommon courage and alacrity. For
my own part, I thought myself doubly interested to distinguish my
valour, not only on account of my own glory, but likewise on the
supposition, that, as I was acting under the eye of Gonzales, my
conduct would be narrowly observed.

I therefore exerted myself with unusual vigour, and as he began the
attack with the remains of my troop, fought close by his side during
the rest of the engagement. I even acquired his applause in the very
heat of battle. When his hat was struck off, and his horse fell under
him, I accommodated and remounted him upon my own, and, having seized
for my own use another that belonged to a common trooper, attended this
stern commander as before, and seconded him in all his repeated
efforts; but it was impossible to withstand the numbers and impetuosity
of the foe, and Don Gonzales having had the mortification to see his
regiment cut in pieces, and the greatest part of the army routed, was
fain to yield to the fortune of the day; yet he retired as became a man
of honour and a Castilian; that is, he marched off with great
deliberation in the rear of the Spanish troops, and frequently faced
about to check the pursuit of the enemy. Indeed, this exercise of his
courage had well-nigh cost him his life; for, in one of those
wheelings, he was left almost alone, and a small party of the
Portuguese horse had actually cut off our communication with the
retreating forces of Spain.

In this dilemma, we had no other chance of saving our lives and
liberty, than that of opening a passage sword in hand; and this was
what Gonzales instantly resolved to attempt. We accordingly recommended
our souls to God, and, charging the line abreast of one another, bore
down all opposition, and were in a fair way of accomplishing our
retreat without further danger; but the gallant Orgullo, in crossing a
ditch, had the misfortune to be thrown from his horse, and was almost
the same instant overtaken by one of the Portuguese dragoons, whose
sword was already suspended over his head, as he lay half stunned with
his fall; when I rode up, discharged a pistol in the ruffian’s brain,
and, seating my colonel on his horse, had the good fortune to conduct
him to a place of safety.

Here he was provided with such accommodation as his case required; for
he had been wounded in the battle, and dangerously bruised by his fall,
and, when all the necessary steps were taken towards his recovery, I
desired to know if he had any further commands for his service, being
resolved to join the army without delay. I thought proper to
communicate this question by message, because he had not spoke one word
to me during our retreat, notwithstanding the good office he had
received at my hands; a reserve which I attributed to his pride, and
resented accordingly. He no sooner understood my intention, than he
desired to see me in his apartment, and, as near as I can remember,
spoke to this effect:—

“Were your father Don Alonzo alive, I should now, in consequence of
your behaviour, banish every suggestion of resentment, and solicit his
friendship with great sincerity. Yes, Don Diego, your virtue hath
triumphed over that enmity I bore your house, and I upbraid myself with
the ungenerous treatment you have suffered under my command. But it is
not enough for me to withdraw that rigour which it was unjust to
exercise, and would be wicked to maintain. I must likewise atone for
the injuries you have sustained, and make some suitable acknowledgment
for that life which I have twice to-day owed to your valour and
generosity. Whatever interest I have at court shall be employed in your
behalf; and I have other designs in your favour, which shall be
disclosed in due season. Meanwhile, I desire you will still add one
obligation to the debt which I have already incurred, and carry this
billet in person to my Estifania, who, from the news of this fatal
overthrow must be in despair upon my account.”

So saying, he presented a letter, directed to his lady, which I
received in a transport of joy, with expressions suitable to the
occasion, and immediately set out for his country house, which happened
to be about thirty leagues from the spot. This expedition was equally
glorious and interesting; for my thoughts upon the road were engrossed
by the hope of seeing Don Orgullo’s daughter and heiress Antonia, who
was reported to be a young lady of great beauty, and the most amiable
accomplishments. However ridiculous it may seem for a man to conceive a
passion for an object which he hath never beheld, certain it is, my
sentiments were so much prepossessed by the fame of her qualifications,
that I must have fallen a victim to her charms, had they been much less
powerful than they were. Notwithstanding the fatigues I had undergone
in the field, I closed not an eye until I arrived at the gate of
Gonzales, being determined to precede the report of the battle, that
Madame d’Orgullo might not be alarmed for the life of her husband.

I declared my errand, and was introduced into a saloon, where I had not
waited above three minutes, when my colonel’s lady appeared, and in
great confusion received the letter, exclaiming, “Heaven grant that Don
Gonzales be well!” In reading the contents, she underwent a variety of
agitations; but, when she had perused the whole, her countenance
regained its serenity, and, regarding me with an air of ineffable
complacency, “Don Diego,” said she, “while I lament the national
calamity, in the defeat of our army, I at the same time feel the most
sincere pleasure on seeing you upon this occasion, and, according to
the directions of my dear lord, bid you heartily welcome to this house,
as his preserver and friend. I was not unacquainted with your character
before this last triumph of your virtue, and have often prayed to
Heaven for some lucky determination of that fatal quarrel which raged
so long between the family of Gonzales and your father’s house. My
prayers have been heard, the long-wished-for reconciliation is now
effected, and I hope nothing will ever intervene to disturb this happy
union.”

To this polite and affectionate declaration, I made such a reply as
became a young man, whose heart overflowed with joy and benevolence,
and desired to know how soon her answer to my commander would be ready,
that I might gratify his impatience with all possible despatch. After
having thanked me for this fresh proof of my attachment, she begged I
would retire into a chamber, and repose myself from the uncommon
fatigues I must have undergone; but, finding I persisted in the
resolution of returning to Don Gonzales, without allowing myself the
least benefit of sleep, she left me engaged in conversation with an
uncle of Don Gonzales, who lodged in the house, and gave orders that a
collation should be prepared in another apartment, while she retired to
her closet, and wrote a letter to her husband.

In less than an hour from my first arrival, I was introduced into a
most elegant dining-room, where a magnificent entertainment was served
up, and where we were joined by Donna Estifania, and her beautiful
daughter the fair Antonia, who, advancing with the most amiable
sweetness, thanked me in very warm expressions of acknowledgment, for
the generosity of my conduct towards her father. I had been ravished
with her first appearance, which far exceeded my imagination, and my
faculties were so disordered by this address, that I answered her
compliment with the most awkward confusion. But this disorder did not
turn to my prejudice in the opinion of that lovely creature, who has
often told me in the sequel, that she gave herself credit for that
perplexity in my behaviour, and that I never appeared more worthy of
her regard and affection than at that juncture, when my dress was
discomposed, and my whole person disfigured by the toils and duty of
the preceding day; for this very dishabille presented itself to her
reflection as the immediate effect of that very merit by which I was
entitled to her esteem.

Wretch that I am! to survive the loss of such an excellent woman,
endeared to my remembrance by the most tender offices of wedlock,
happily exercised for the space of five-and-twenty years! Forgive these
tears; they are not the drops of weakness, but remorse. Not to trouble
you with idle particulars, suffice it is to say, I was favoured with
such marks of distinction by Madame d’Orgullo, that she thought it
incumbent upon her to let me know she had not overacted her
hospitality, and, while we sat at table, accosted me in these words:
“You will not be surprised, Don Diego, at my expressions of regard,
which I own are unusual from a Spanish lady to a young cavalier like
you, when I communicate the contents of this letter from Don Gonzales.”
So saying, she put the billet into my hand, and I read these words, or
words to this effect:—

“AMIABLE ESTIFANIA,—You will understand that I am as well as a person
can possibly be who hath this day lived to see the army of his king
defeated. If you would know the particulars of this unfortunate action,
your curiosity will be gratified by the bearer, Don Diego de Zelos, to
whose virtue and bravery I am twice indebted for my life. I therefore
desire you will receive him with that respect and gratitude which you
shall think due for such an obligation; and, in entertaining him,
dismiss that reserve which often disgraces the Spanish hospitality. In
a word, let your own virtue and beneficence conduct you upon this
occasion, and let my Antonia’s endeavours be joined with your own in
doing honour to the preserver of her father! Adieu.”

Such a testimonial could not fail of being very agreeable to a young
soldier, who by this time had begun to indulge the transporting hope of
being happy in the arms of the adorable Antonia. I professed myself
extremely happy in having met with an opportunity of acquiring such a
degree of my colonel’s esteem, entertained them with a detail of his
personal prowess in the battle, and answered all their questions with
that moderation which every man ought to preserve in speaking of his
own behaviour. Our repast being ended, I took my leave of the ladies,
and at parting received a letter from Donna Estifania to her husband,
together with a ring of great value, which she begged I would accept,
as a token of her esteem. Thus loaded with honour and caresses, I set
out on my return for the quarters of Don Gonzales, who could scarce
credit his own eyes when I delivered his lady’s billet; for he thought
it impossible to perform such a journey in so short a time.

When he had glanced over the paper, “Don Diego,” said he, “by your
short stay one would imagine you had met with indifferent reception at
my house. I hope Estifania has not been deficient in her duty?” I
answered this question, by assuring him my entertainment had been so
agreeable in all respects, that nothing but my duty to him could have
induced me to give it up so soon. He then turned the conversation upon
Antonia, and hinted his intention of giving her in marriage to a young
cavalier, for whom he had a particular friendship. I was so much
affected by this insinuation, which seemed at once to blast all my
hopes of love and happiness, that the blood forsook my face; I was
seized with an universal trepidation, and even obliged to retire, on
pretence of being suddenly taken ill.

Though Gonzales seemed to impute this disorder to fatigue and want of
rest, he in his heart ascribed it to the true cause; and, after having
sounded my sentiments to his own satisfaction, blessed me with a
declaration, importing, that I was the person upon whom he had pitched
for a son-in-law. I will not trouble you with a repetition of what
passed on this interesting occasion, but proceed to observe, that his
intention in my favour was far from being disagreeable to his lady; and
that, in a little time, I had the good fortune to espouse the charming
Antonia, who submitted to the will of her father without reluctance.

Soon after this happy event, I was, by the influence of Don Gonzales,
joined to my own interest, promoted to the command of a regiment, and
served with honour during the remaining part of the war. After the
treaty of Utrecht, I was employed in reducing the Catalans to their
allegiance; and, in an action with those obstinate rebels had the
misfortune to lose my father-in-law, who by that time was preferred to
the rank of a major-general. The virtuous Estifania did not long
survive this melancholy accident; and the loss of these indulgent
parents made such a deep impression upon the tender heart of my
Antonia, that I took the first opportunity of removing her from a place
in which every object served to cherish her grief, to a pleasant villa
near the city of Seville, which I purchased on account of its agreeable
situation. That I might the more perfectly enjoy the possession of my
amiable partner, who could no longer brook the thoughts of another
separation, peace was no sooner re-established than I obtained leave to
resign my commission, and I wholly devoted myself to the joys of a
domestic life.

Heaven seemed to smile upon our union, by blessing us with a son, whom,
however, it was pleased to recall in his infancy, to our unspeakable
grief and mortification; but our mutual chagrin was afterwards
alleviated by the birth of a daughter, who seemed born with every
accomplishment to excite the love and admiration of mankind. Why did
nature debase such a masterpiece with the mixture of an alloy, which
hath involved herself and her whole family in perdition? But the ways
of Providence are unsearchable. She hath paid the debt of her
degeneracy; peace be with her soul! The honour of my family is
vindicated; though by a sacrifice which hath robbed me of everything
else that is valuable in life, and ruined my peace past all redemption.
Yes, my friend, all the tortures that human tyranny can inflict would
be ease, tranquillity, and delight, to the unspeakable pangs and
horrors I have felt.

But, to return from this digression.—Serafina, which was the name of
that little darling, as she grew up, not only disclosed all the natural
graces of external beauty, but likewise manifested the most engaging
sweetness of disposition, and a capacity for acquiring with ease all
the accomplishments of her sex. It is impossible to convey any adequate
idea of a parent’s raptures in the contemplation of such a fair
blossom. She was the only pledge of our love, she was presumptive
heiress to a large fortune, and likely to be the sole representative of
two noble Castilian families. She was the delight of all who saw her,
and a theme of praise for every tongue. You are not to suppose that the
education of such a child was neglected. Indeed, it wholly engrossed
the attention of me and my Antonia, and her proficiency rewarded our
care. Before she had attained the age of fifteen, she was mistress of
every elegant qualification, natural and acquired. Her person was, by
that time, the confessed pattern of beauty. Her voice was enchantingly
sweet, and she touched the lute with the most ravishing dexterity.
Heaven and earth! how did my breast dilate with joy at the thoughts of
having given birth to such perfection! how did my heart gush with
paternal fondness, whenever I beheld this ornament of my name! and what
scenes of endearing transport have I enjoyed with my Antonia, in mutual
congratulation upon our parental happiness!

Serafina, accomplished as she was, could not fail to make conquests
among the Spanish cavaliers, who are famous for sensibility in love.
Indeed, she never appeared without a numerous train of admirers; and
though we had bred her up in that freedom of conversation and
intercourse which holds a middle space between the French licence and
Spanish restraint, she was now so much exposed to the addresses of
promiscuous gallantry, that we found it necessary to retrench the
liberty of our house, and behave to our male visitants with great
reserve and circumspection, that our honour and peace might run no risk
from the youth and inexperience of our daughter.

This caution produced overtures from a great many young gentlemen of
rank and distinction, who courted my alliance, by demanding Serafina in
marriage; and from the number I had actually selected one person, who
was in all respects worthy the possession of such an inestimable prize.
His name was Don Manuel de Mendoza. His birth was noble, and his
character dignified with repeated acts of generosity and virtue. Yet,
before I would signify to him my approbation of his suit, I resolved to
inform myself whether or not the heart of Serafina was totally
unengaged, and indifferent to any other object, that I might not lay a
tyrannical restraint upon her inclinations. The result of my inquiry
was a full conviction of her having hitherto been deaf to the voice of
love; and this piece of information, together with my own sentiments in
his favour, I communicated to Don Manuel, who heard these tidings with
transports of gratitude and joy. He was immediately favoured with
opportunities of acquiring the affection of my daughter, and his
endeavours were at first received with such respectful civility, as
might have been easily warmed into a mutual passion, had not the evil
genius of our family interposed.

O my friend! how shall I describe the depravity of that unhappy
virgin’s sentiments! how recount the particulars of my own dishonour! I
that am descended from a long line of illustrious Castilians, who never
received an injury they did not revenge, but washed away every blemish
in their fame with the blood of those who attempted to stain it! In
that circumstance I have imitated the example of my glorious
progenitors, and that consideration alone hath supported me against all
the assaults of despair.

As I grudged no pains and expense in perfecting the education of
Serafina, my doors were open to every person who made an extraordinary
figure in the profession of those amusing sciences in which she
delighted. The house of Don Diego de Zelos was a little academy for
painting, poetry, and music; and Heaven decreed that it should fall a
sacrifice to its regard for these fatal and delusive arts. Among other
preceptors, it was her fate to be under the instruction of a cursed
German, who, though his profession was drawing, understood the elements
and theory of music, possessed a large fund of learning and taste, and
was a person remarkable for his agreeable conversation. This traitor,
who like you had lost one eye, I not only admitted into my house for
the improvement of my daughter, but even distinguished with particular
marks of confidence and favour, little thinking he had either
inclination or capacity to debauch the sentiments of my child. I was
rejoiced beyond measure to see with what alacrity she received his
lessons, with what avidity she listened to his discourse, which was
always equally moral, instructing, and entertaining.

Antonia seemed to vie with me in expressions of regard for this
accomplished stranger, whom she could not help supposing to be a person
of rank and family, reduced to his present situation by some
unfortunate vicissitude of fate. I was disposed to concur with this
opinion, and actually conjured him to make me his confidant, with such
protestations as left him no room to doubt my honour and beneficence;
but he still persisted in declaring himself the son of an obscure
mechanic in Bohemia; an origin to which surely no man would pretend who
had the least claim to nobility of birth. While I was thus undeceived
in my conjecture touching his birth and quality, I was confirmed in an
opinion of his integrity and moderation, and looked upon him as a man
of honour, in despite of the lowness of his pedigree. Nevertheless, he
was at bottom a most perfidious wretch, and all this modesty and
self-denial were the effects of the most villanous dissimulation, a
cloak under which he, unsuspected, robbed me of my honour and my peace.

Not to trouble you with particulars, the recital of which would tear my
heart-strings with indignation and remorse, I shall only observe, that,
by the power of his infernal insinuation, he fascinated the heart of
Serafina, brought over Antonia herself to the interests of his passion,
and at once detached them both from their duty and religion. Heaven and
earth! how dangerous, how irresistible is the power of infatuation!
While I remained in the midst of this blind security, waiting for the
nuptials of my daughter, and indulging myself with the vain prospect of
her approaching felicity, Antonia found means to protract the
negotiations of the marriage, by representing that it would be a pity
to deprive Serafina of the opportunity she then had of profiting by the
German’s instructions; and, upon that account, I prevailed upon Don
Manuel to bridle the impatience of his love.

During this interval, as I one evening enjoyed the cool air in my own
garden, I was accosted by an old duenna, who had been my nurse and
lived in the family since the time of my childhood.—“My duty,” said
she, “will no longer permit me to wink in silence at the wrongs I see
you daily suffer. Dismiss that German from your house without delay, if
you respect the glory of your name, and the rights of our holy
religion; the stranger is an abominable heretic; and, grant Heaven! he
may not have already poisoned the minds of those you hold most dear.” I
had been extremely alarmed at the beginning of this address; but,
finding the imputation limited to the article of religion, in which,
thank God, I am no bigot, I recovered my serenity of disposition,
thanked the old woman for her zeal, commended her piety, and encouraged
her to persevere in making observations on such subjects as should
concern my honour and my quiet.

We live in such a world of wickedness and fraud, that a man cannot be
too vigilant in his own defence: had I employed such spies from the
beginning, I should in all probability have been at this day in
possession of every comfort that renders life agreeable. The duenna,
thus authorised, employed her sagacity with such success, that I had
reason to suspect the German of a design upon the heart of Serafina;
but, as the presumptions did not amount to conviction, I contented
myself with exiling him from my house, under the pretext of having
discovered that he was an enemy to the Catholic church; and forthwith
appointed a day for the celebration of my daughter’s marriage with Don
Manuel de Mendoza. I could easily perceive a cloud of melancholy
overspread the faces of Serafina and her mother, when I declared these
my resolutions; but, as they made no objection to what I proposed, I
did not at that time enter into an explanation of the true motives that
influenced my conduct. Both parties were probably afraid of such
expostulation.

Meanwhile, preparations were made for the espousals of Serafina; and,
notwithstanding the anxiety I had undergone, on account of her
connexion with the German, I began to think that her duty, her glory,
had triumphed over all such low-born considerations, if ever they had
been entertained; because she, and even Antonia, seemed to expect the
ceremony with resignation, though the features of both still retained
evident marks of concern, which I willingly imputed to the mutual
prospect of their separation. This, however, was but a faithless calm,
that soon, ah! too soon, brought forth a tempest which hath wrecked my
hopes.

Two days before the appointed union of Don Manuel and Serafina, I was
informed by the duenna, that, while she accompanied Antonia’s
waiting-maid at church, she had seen her receive a billet from an old
woman, who, kneeling at her side, had conveyed it in such a mysterious
manner, as awakened the duenna’s apprehensions about her young lady;
she had therefore hastened home to communicate this piece of
intelligence, that I might have an opportunity of examining the
messenger before she could have time to deposit her trust. I could not
help shivering with fearful presages upon this occasion, and even
abhorring the person to whose duty and zeal I was beholden for the
intelligence, even while I endeavoured to persuade myself that the
inquiry would end in the detection of some paltry intrigue between the
maid and her own gallant. I intercepted her in returning from church,
and, commanding her to follow me to a convenient place, extorted from
her, by dint of threats, the fatal letter, which I read to this
effect:—

“The whole business of my life, O divine Serafina! will be to repay
that affection I have been so happy as to engage. With what transport
then shall I obey your summons, in performing that enterprise, which
will rescue you from the bed of a detested rival, and put myself in
full possession of a jewel which I value infinitely more than life!
Yes, adorable creature! I have provided everything for our escape, and
at midnight will attend you in your own apartment, from whence you
shall be conveyed into a land of liberty and peace, where you will,
unmolested, enjoy the purity of that religion you have espoused, and in
full security bless the arms of your ever faithful, ORLANDO.”

Were you a fond parent, a tender husband, and a noble Castilian, I
should not need to mention the unutterable horrors that took possession
of my bosom, when I perused this accursed letter, by which I learned
the apostasy, disobedience, and degeneracy of my idolised Serafina, who
had overthrown and destroyed the whole plan of felicity which I had
erected, and blasted all the glories of my name; and when the wretched
messenger, terrified by my menaces and agitation, confessed that
Antonia herself was privy to the guilt of her daughter, whom she had
solemnly betrothed to that vile German, in the sight of Heaven, and
that by her connivance this plebeian intended, that very night, to
bereave me of my child, I was for some moments stupefied with grief and
amazement, that gave way to an ecstasy of rage, which had well-nigh
terminated in despair and distraction.

I now tremble, and my head grows giddy with the remembrance of that
dreadful occasion. Behold how the drops trickle down my forehead; this
agony is a fierce and familiar visitant; I shall banish it anon. I
summoned my pride, my resentment, to my assistance; these are the
cordials that support me against all other reflections; those were the
auxiliaries that enabled me, in the day of trial, to perform that
sacrifice which my honour demanded, in a strain so loud as to drown the
cries of nature, love, and compassion. Yes, they espoused that glory
which humanity would have betrayed, and my revenge was noble, though
unnatural.

My scheme was soon laid, my resolution soon taken; I privately confined
the wretch who had been the industrious slave of this infamous
conspiracy, that she might take no step to frustrate or interrupt the
execution of my design. Then repairing to the house of an apothecary
who was devoted to my service, communicated my intention, which he
durst not condemn, and could not reveal, without breaking the oath of
secrecy I had imposed; and he furnished me with two vials of poison for
the dismal catastrophe I had planned. Thus provided, I, on pretence of
sudden business at Seville, carefully avoided the dear, the wretched
pair, whom I had devoted to death, that my heart might not relent, by
means of those tender ideas which the sight of them would have
infallibly inspired; and, when daylight vanished, took my station near
that part of the house through which the villain must have entered on
his hellish purpose. There I stood, in a state of horrid expectation,
my soul ravaged with the different passions that assailed it, until the
fatal moment arrived; when I perceived the traitor approach the window
of a lower apartment, which led into that of Serafina, and gently
lifting the casement, which was purposely left unsecured, insinuated
half of his body into the house. Then rushing upon him, in a transport
of fury, I plunged my sword into his heart, crying, “Villain! receive
the reward of thy treachery and presumption.”

The steel was so well aimed as to render a repetition of the stroke
unnecessary; he uttered one groan, and fell breathless at my feet.
Exulting with this first success of my revenge, I penetrated into the
chamber where the robber of my peace was expected by the unhappy
Serafina and her mother, who, seeing me enter with a most savage
aspect, and a sword reeking with the vengeance I had taken, seemed
almost petrified with fear. “Behold,” said I, “the blood of that base
plebeian, who made an attempt upon the honour of my house; your
conspiracy against the unfortunate Don Diego de Zelos is now
discovered; that presumptuous slave, the favoured Orlando, is now no
more.”

Scarce had I pronounced these words, when a loud scream was uttered by
both the unhappy victims. “If Orlando is slain,” cried the infatuated
Serafina, “what have I to do with life? O my dear lord! my husband, and
my lover! how are our promised joys at once cut off! here, strike, my
father! complete your barbarous sacrifice! the spirit of the murdered
Orlando still hovers for his wife.” These frantic exclamations, in
which she was joined by Antonia, kept up the fury of my resentment,
which by meekness and submission might have been weakened and rendered
ineffectual. “Yes, hapless wretches,” I replied, “ye shall enjoy your
wish: the honour of my name requires that both shall die; yet I will
not mangle the breast of Antonia, on which I have so often reposed; I
will not shed the blood of Zelos, nor disfigure the beauteous form of
Serafina, on which I have so often gazed with wonder and unspeakable
delight. Here is an elixir, to which I trust the consummation of my
revenge.”

So saying, I emptied the vials into separate cups, and, presenting one
in each hand, the miserable, the fair offenders instantly received the
destined draughts, which they drank without hesitation; then praying to
heaven for the wretched Don Diego, sunk upon the same couch, and
expired without a groan. O well-contrived beverage! O happy
composition, by which all the miseries of life are so easily cured!

Such was the fate of Antonia and Serafina; these hands were the
instruments that deprived them of life, these eyes beheld them the
richest prize that death had ever won. Powers supreme! does Don Diego
live to make this recapitulation? I have done my duty; but ah! I am
haunted by the furies of remorse; I am tortured with the incessant
stings of remembrance and regret; even now the images of my wife and
daughter present themselves to my imagination. All the scenes of
happiness I have enjoyed as a lover, husband, and parent, all the
endearing hopes I have cherished, now pass in review before me,
embittering the circumstances of my inexpressible woe; and I consider
myself as a solitary outcast from all the comforts of society. But,
enough of these unmanly complaints; the yearnings of nature are too
importunate.

Having completed my vengeance, I retired into my closet, and,
furnishing myself with some ready money and jewels of considerable
value, went into the stable, saddled my favourite steed, which I
instantly mounted, and, before the tumults of my breast subsided, found
myself at the town of St. Lucar. There I learned from inquiry, that
there was a Dutch bark in the harbour ready to sail; upon which I
addressed myself to the master, who, for a suitable gratification, was
prevailed upon to weigh anchor that same night; so that, embarking
without delay, I soon bid eternal adieu to my native country. It was
not from reason and reflection that I took these measures for my
personal safety; but, in consequence of an involuntary instinct, that
seems to operate in the animal machine, while the faculty of thinking
is suspended.

To what a dreadful reckoning was I called, when reason resumed her
function! You may believe me, my friend, when I assure you, that I
should not have outlived those tragedies I acted, had I not been
restrained from doing violence upon myself by certain considerations,
which no man of honour ought to set aside. I could not bear the thought
of falling ingloriously by the hand of an executioner, and entailing
disgrace upon a family that knew no stain; and I was deterred from
putting an end to my own misery, by the apprehension of posthumous
censure, which would have represented me as a desponding wretch,
utterly destitute of that patience, fortitude, and resignation, which
are the characteristics of a true Castilian. I was also influenced by
religious motives that suggested to me the necessity of living to
atone, by my sufferings and sorrow, for the guilt I had incurred in
complying with a savage punctilio, which is, I fear, displeasing in the
sight of Heaven.

These were the reasons that opposed my entrance into that peaceful
harbour which death presented to my view; and they were soon reinforced
by another principle that sanctioned my determination to continue at
the servile oar of life. In consequence of unfavourable winds, our
vessel for some days made small progress in her voyage to Holland, and
near the coast of Gallicia we were joined by an English ship from Vigo,
the master of which gave us to understand, that before he set sail, a
courier had arrived from Madrid at that place, with orders for the
corregidore to prevent the escape of any native Spaniard by sea from
any port within his district; and to use his utmost endeavours to
apprehend the person of Don Diego de Zelos, who was suspected of
treasonable practices against the state. Such an order, with a minute
description of my person, was at the same time despatched to all the
seaports and frontier places in Spain.

You may easily suppose how I, who was already overwhelmed with
distress, could bear this aggravation of misfortune and disgrace: I,
who had always maintained the reputation of loyalty, which was acquired
at the hazard of my life, and the expense of my blood. To deal
candidly, I must own, that this intelligence roused me from a lethargy
of grief which had begun to overpower my faculties. I immediately
imputed this dishonourable charge to the evil offices of some villain,
who had basely taken the advantage of my deplorable situation, and I
was inflamed, inspirited with the desire of vindicating my fame, and
revenging the injury. Thus animated, I resolved to disguise myself
effectually from the observation of those spies which every nation
finds its account in employing in foreign countries; I purchased this
habit from the Dutch navigator, in whose house I kept myself concealed,
after our arrival at Amsterdam, until my beard was grown to a
sufficient length to favour my design, and then appeared as a Persian
dealer in jewels. As I could gain no satisfactory information touching
myself in this country, had no purpose to pursue, and was extremely
miserable among a people, who, being mercenary and unsocial, were very
ill adapted to alleviate the horrors of my condition, I gratified my
landlord for his important services, with the best part of my effects;
and having, by his means, procured a certificate from the magistracy,
repaired to Rotterdam, from whence I set out in a travelling carriage
for Antwerp, on my way to this capital; hoping, with a succession of
different objects, to mitigate the anguish of my mind, and by the most
industrious inquiry, to learn such particulars of that false
impeachment, as would enable me to take measures for my own
justification, as well as for projecting a plan of revenge against the
vile perfidious author.

This, I imagined, would be no difficult task, considering the
friendship and intercourse subsisting between the Spanish and French
nations, and the communicative disposition for which the Parisians are
renowned; but I have found myself egregiously deceived in my
expectation. The officers of police in this city are so inquisitive and
vigilant that the most minute action of a stranger is scrutinised with
great severity; and, although the inhabitants are very frank in
discoursing on indifferent subjects, they are at the same time
extremely cautious in avoiding all conversation that turns upon state
occurrences and maxims of government. In a word, the peculiarity of my
appearance subjects me so much to particular observation, that I have
hitherto thought proper to devour my griefs in silence, and even to
bear the want of almost every convenience, rather than hazard a
premature discovery, by offering my jewels to sale.

In this emergency I have been so far fortunate as to become acquainted
with you, whom I look upon as a man of honour and humanity. Indeed, I
was at first sight prepossessed in your favour, for, notwithstanding
the mistakes which men daily commit in judging from appearances, there
is something in the physiognomy of a stranger from which one cannot
help forming an opinion of his character and disposition. For once, my
penetration hath not failed me; your behaviour justifies my decision;
you have treated me with that sympathy and respect which none but the
generous will pay to the unfortunate. I have trusted you accordingly. I
have put my life, my honour, in your power; and I must beg leave to
depend upon your friendship, for obtaining that satisfaction for which
alone I seek to live. Your employment engages you in the gay world; you
daily mingle with the societies of men; the domestics of the Spanish
ambassador will not shun your acquaintance; you may frequent the
coffee-houses to which they resort; and, in the course of these
occasions, unsuspected inform yourself of that mysterious charge which
lies heavy on the fame of the unfortunate Don Diego. I must likewise
implore your assistance in converting my jewels into money, that I may
breathe independent of man, until Heaven shall permit me to finish this
weary pilgrimage of life.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

A FLAGRANT INSTANCE OF FATHOM’S VIRTUE, IN THE MANNER OF HIS RETREAT TO
ENGLAND.


Fathom, who had lent an attentive ear to every circumstance of this
disastrous story, no sooner heard it concluded, than, with an aspect of
generous and cordial compassion, not even unattended with tears, he
condoled the lamentable fate of Don Diego de Zelos, deplored the
untimely death of the gentle Antonia and the fair Serafina, and
undertook the interest of the wretched Castilian with such warmth of
sympathising zeal, as drew a flood from his eyes, while he wrung his
benefactor’s hand in a transport of gratitude. Those were literally
tears of joy, or at least of satisfaction, on both sides; as our hero
wept with affection and attachment to the jewels that were to be
committed to his care; but, far from discovering the true source of his
tenderness, he affected to dissuade the Spaniard from parting with the
diamonds, which he counselled him to reserve for a more pressing
occasion; and, in the meantime, earnestly entreated him to depend upon
his friendship for present relief.

This generous proffer served only to confirm Don Diego’s resolution,
which he forthwith executed, by putting into the hands of Ferdinand
jewels to the value of a thousand crowns, and desiring him to detain
for his own use any part of the sum they would raise. Our adventurer
thanked him for the good opinion he entertained of his integrity, an
opinion fully manifested in honouring him with such important
confidence, and assured him he would transact his affairs with the
utmost diligence, caution, and despatch. The evening being by this time
almost consumed, these new allies retired separately to rest; though
each passed the night without repose, in very different reflections,
the Castilian being, as usual, agitated with the unceasing pangs of his
unalterable misery, interspersed with gleaming hopes of revenge; and
Fathom being kept awake with revolving plans for turning his
fellow-lodger’s credulity to his own advantage. From the nature of the
Spaniard’s situation, he might have appropriated the jewels to himself,
and remained in Paris without fear of a prosecution, because the
injured party had, by the above narrative, left his life and liberty at
discretion.—But he did not think himself secure from the personal
resentment of an enraged desperate Castilian; and therefore determined
to withdraw himself privately into that country where he had all along
proposed to fix the standard of his finesse, which fortune had now
empowered him to exercise according to his wish.

Bent upon this retreat, he went abroad in the morning, on pretence of
acting in the concerns of his friend Don Diego, and having hired a
post-chaise to be ready at the dawning of next day, returned to his
lodgings, where he cajoled the Spaniard with a feigned report of his
negotiation; then, securing his most valuable effects about his person,
arose with the cock, repaired to the place at which he had appointed to
meet the postillion with the carriage, and set out for England without
further delay, leaving the unhappy Zelos to the horrors of indigence,
and the additional agony of this fresh disappointment. Yet he was not
the only person affected by the abrupt departure of Fathom, which was
hastened by the importunities, threats, and reproaches of his
landlord’s daughter, whom he had debauched under promise of marriage,
and now left in the fourth month of her pregnancy.

Notwithstanding the dangerous adventure in which he had been formerly
involved by travelling in the night, he did not think proper to make
the usual halts on this journey, for sleep or refreshment, nor did he
once quit the chaise till his arrival at Boulogne, which he reached in
twenty hours after his departure from Paris. Here he thought he might
safely indulge himself with a comfortable meal; accordingly he bespoke
a poulard for dinner, and while that was preparing, went forth to view
the city and harbour. When he beheld the white cliffs of Albion, his
heart throbbed with all the joy of a beloved son, who, after a tedious
and fatiguing voyage, reviews the chimneys of his father’s house. He
surveyed the neighbouring coast of England with fond and longing eyes,
like another Moses, reconnoitring the land of Canaan from the top of
Mount Pisgah; and to such a degree of impatience was he inflamed by the
sight, that, instead of proceeding to Calais, he resolved to take his
passage directly from Boulogne, even if he should hire a vessel for the
purpose. With these sentiments, he inquired if there was any ship bound
for England, and was so fortunate as to find the master of a small
bark, who intended to weigh anchor for Deal that same evening at high
water.

Transported with this information, he immediately agreed for his
passage, sold the post-chaise to his landlord for thirty guineas, as a
piece of furniture for which he could have no further use, purchased a
portmanteau, together with some linen and wearing apparel, and, at the
recommendation of his host, took into his service an extra postillion
or helper, who had formerly worn the livery of a travelling marquis.
This new domestic, whose name was Maurice, underwent, with great
applause, the examination of our hero, who perceived in him a fund of
sagacity and presence of mind, by which he was excellently qualified
for being the valet of an adventurer. He was therefore accommodated
with a second-hand suit and another shirt, and at once listed under the
banners of Count Fathom, who spent the whole afternoon in giving him
proper instructions for the regulation of his conduct.

Having settled these preliminaries to his own satisfaction, he and his
baggage were embarked about six o’clock in the month of September, and
it was not without emotion that he found himself benighted upon the
great deep, of which, before the preceding day, he had never enjoyed
even the most distant prospect. However, he was not a man to be afraid,
where there was really no appearance of danger; and the agreeable
presages of future fortune supported his spirits, amidst the
disagreeable nausea which commonly attends landsmen at sea, until he
was set ashore upon the beach at Deal, which he entered in good health
about seven o’clock in the morning.

Like Caesar, however, he found some difficulty in landing, on account
of the swelling surf, that tumbled about with such violence as had
almost overset the cutter that carried him on shore; and, in his
eagerness to jump upon the strand, his foot slipped from the side of
the boat, so that he was thrown forwards in an horizontal direction,
and his hands were the first parts of him that touched English ground.
Upon this occasion, he, in imitation of Scipio’s behaviour on the coast
of Africa, hailed the omen, and, grasping a handful of the sand, was
heard to exclaim, in the Italian language: “Ah, ah, Old England, I have
thee fast.”

As he walked up to the inn, followed by Maurice loaded with his
portmanteau, he congratulated himself upon his happy voyage, and the
peaceable possession of his spoil, and could not help snuffing up the
British air with marks of infinite relish and satisfaction. His first
care was to recompense himself for the want of sleep he had undergone,
and, after he had sufficiently recruited himself with several hours of
uninterrupted repose, he set out in a post-chaise for Canterbury, where
he took a place in the London stage, which he was told would depart
next morning, the coach being already full. On this very first day of
his arrival, he perceived between the English and the people among whom
he had hitherto lived, such essential difference in customs,
appearance, and way of living, as inspired him with high notions of
that British freedom, opulence, and convenience, on which he had often
heard his mother expatiate. On the road, he feasted his eyesight with
the verdant hills covered with flocks of sheep, the fruitful vales
parcelled out into cultivated enclosures; the very cattle seemed to
profit by the wealth of their masters, being large, sturdy, and sleek,
and every peasant breathed the insolence of liberty and independence.
In a word, he viewed the wide-extended plains of Kent with a lover’s
eye, and, his ambition becoming romantic, could not help fancying
himself another conqueror of the isle.

He was not, however, long amused by these vain chimeras, which soon
vanished before other reflections of more importance and solidity. His
imagination, it must be owned, was at all times too chaste to admit
those overweening hopes, which often mislead the mind of the projector.
He had studied mankind with incredible diligence, and knew perfectly
well how far he could depend on the passions and foibles of human
nature. That he might now act consistent with his former sagacity, he
resolved to pass himself upon his fellow-travellers for a French
gentleman, equally a stranger to the language and country of England,
in order to glean from their discourse such intelligence as might avail
him in his future operations; and his lacquey was tutored accordingly.




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS FELLOW-TRAVELLERS.


Those who had taken places for the coach, understanding the sixth seat
was engaged by a foreigner, determined to profit by his ignorance; and,
with that politeness which is peculiar to this happy island, fixed
themselves in the vehicle, in such a manner, before he had the least
intimation of their design, that he found it barely practicable to
insinuate himself sidelong between a corpulent quaker and a fat Wapping
landlady, in which attitude he stuck fast, like a thin quarto between
two voluminous dictionaries on a bookseller’s shelf. And, as if the
pain and inconvenience of such compression was not sufficient matter of
chagrin, the greatest part of the company entertained themselves with
laughing at his ludicrous station.

The jolly dame at his left hand observed, with a loud exclamation of
mirth, that monsieur would be soon better acquainted with a buttock of
English beef; and said, by that time they should arrive at their
dining-place, he might be spitted without larding. “Yes, verily,”
replied Obadiah, who was a wag in his way, “but the swine’s fat will be
all on one side.”—“So much the better for you,” cried mine hostess,
“for that side is all your own.” The quaker was not so much
disconcerted by the quickness of this repartee, but that he answered
with great deliberation, “I thank thee for thy love, but will not
profit by thy loss, especially as I like not the savour of these
outlandish fowls; they are profane birds of passage, relished only by
the children of vanity, like thee.”

The plump gentlewoman took umbrage at this last expression, which she
considered as a double reproach, and repeated the words, “Children of
vanity!” with an emphasis of resentment. “I believe, if the truth were
known,” said she, “there’s more vanity than midriff in that great belly
of yours, for all your pretending to humility and religion. Sirrah! my
corporation is made up of good, wholesome, English fat; but you are
puffed up with the wind of vanity and delusion; and when it begins to
gripe your entrails, you pretend to have a motion, and then get up and
preach nonsense. Yet you’ll take it upon you to call your betters
children. Marry come up, Mr. Goosecap, I have got children that are as
good men as you, or any hypocritical trembler in England.”

A person who sat opposite to the quaker, hearing this remonstrance,
which seemed pregnant with contention, interposed in the conversation
with a conscious leer, and begged there might be no rupture between the
spirit and the flesh. By this remonstrance he relieved Obadiah from the
satire of this female orator, and brought the whole vengeance of her
elocution upon his own head. “Flesh!” cried she, with all the ferocity
of an enraged Thalestris; “none of your names, Mr. Yellowchaps. What! I
warrant you have an antipathy to flesh, because you yourself are
nothing but skin and bone. I suppose you are some poor starved
journeyman tailor come from France, where you have been learning to
cabbage, and have not seen a good meal of victuals these seven years.
You have been living upon rye-bread and soup-maigre, and now you come
over like a walking atomy with a rat’s tail at your wig, and a tinsey
jacket. And so, forsooth, you set up for a gentleman, and pretend to
find fault with a sirloin of roast beef.”

The gentleman heard this address with admirable patience, and when she
had rung out her alarm, very coolly replied, “Anything but your
stinking fish madam. Since when, I pray, have you travelled in
stage-coaches, and left off your old profession of crying oysters in
winter, and rotten mackerel in June? You was then known by the name of
Kate Brawn, and in good repute among the ale-houses in Thames Street,
till that unlucky amour with the master of a corn-vessel, in which he
was unfortunately detected by his own spouse; but you seem to have
risen by that fall; and I wish you joy of your present plight. Though,
considering your education on Bear Quay, you can give but a sorry
account of yourself.”

The Amazon, though neither exhausted nor dismayed, was really
confounded at the temper and assurance of this antagonist, who had
gathered all these anecdotes from the fertility of his own invention;
after a short pause, however, she poured forth a torrent of obloquy
sufficient to overwhelm any person who had not been used to take up
arms against such seas of trouble; and a dispute ensued, which would
have not only disgraced the best orators on the Thames, but even have
made a figure in the celebration of the Eleusinian mysteries, during
which the Athenian matrons rallied one another from different waggons,
with that freedom of altercation so happily preserved in this our age
and country.

Such a redundancy of epithets, and variety of metaphors, tropes, and
figures were uttered between these well-matched opponents, that an epic
bard would have found his account in listening to the contest; which,
in all probability, would not have been confined to words, had it not
been interrupted for the sake of a young woman of an agreeable
countenance and modest carriage; who, being shocked at some of their
flowers of speech, and terrified by the menacing looks and gestures of
the fiery-featured dame, began to scream aloud, and beg leave to quit
the coach. Her perturbation put an end to the high debate. The sixth
passenger, who had not opened his mouth, endeavoured to comfort her
with assurances of protection; the quaker proposed a cessation of arms;
the male disputant acquiesced in the proposal, assuring the company he
had entered the lists for their entertainment only, without acquiring
the least grudge or ill-will to the fat gentlewoman, whom he protested
he had never seen before that day, and who, for aught he knew, was a
person of credit and reputation. He then held forth his hand in token
of amity, and asked pardon of the offended party, who was appeased by
his submission; and, in testimony of her benevolence, presented to the
other female, whom she had discomposed, an Hungary-water bottle filled
with cherry-brandy, recommending it as a much more powerful remedy than
the sal-volatile which the other held to her nose.

Peace being thus re-established, in a treaty comprehending Obadiah and
all present, it will not be improper to give the reader some further
information, touching the several characters assembled in this vehicle.
The quaker was a London merchant, who had been at Deal superintending
the repairs of a ship which had suffered by a storm in the Downs. The
Wapping landlady was on her return from the same place, where she had
attended the payment of a man-of-war, with sundry powers of attorney,
granted by the sailors, who had lived upon credit at her house. Her
competitor in fame was a dealer in wine, a smuggler of French lace, and
a petty gamester just arrived from Paris, in the company of an English
barber, who sat on his right hand, and the young woman was daughter of
a country curate, in her way to London, where she was bound apprentice
to a milliner.

Hitherto Fathom had sat in silent astonishment at the manners of his
fellow-travellers, which far exceeded the notions he had preconceived
of English plainness and rusticity. He found himself a monument of that
disregard and contempt which a stranger never fails to meet with from
the inhabitants of this island; and saw, with surprise, an agreeable
young creature sit as solitary and unheeded as himself.

He was, indeed, allured by the roses of her complexion, and the
innocence of her aspect, and began to repent of having pretended
ignorance of the language, by which he was restrained from exercising
his eloquence upon her heart; he resolved, however, to ingratiate
himself, if possible, by the courtesy and politeness of dumb show, and
for that purpose put his eyes in motion without farther delay.




CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

ANOTHER PROVIDENTIAL DELIVERANCE FROM THE EFFECTS OF THE SMUGGLER’S
INGENIOUS CONJECTURE.


During these deliberations, the wine merchant, with a view to make a
parade of his superior parts and breeding, as well as to pave the way
for a match at backgammon, made a tender of his snuff-box to our
adventurer, and asked, in bad French, how he travelled from Paris. This
question produced a series of interrogations concerning the place of
Ferdinand’s abode in that city, and his business in England, so that he
was fain to practise the science of defence, and answered with such
ambiguity, as aroused the suspicion of the smuggler, who began to
believe our hero had some very cogent reason for evading his curiosity;
he immediately set his reflection at work, and, after various
conjectures, fixed upon Fathom’s being the Young Pretender. Big with
this supposition, he eyed him with the most earnest attention,
comparing his features with those of the Chevalier’s portrait which he
had seen in France, and though the faces were as unlike as any two
human faces could be, found the resemblance so striking as to dispel
all his doubts, and persuade him to introduce the stranger to some
justice on the road; a step by which he would not only manifest his
zeal for the Protestant succession, but also acquire the splendid
reward proposed by parliament to any person who should apprehend that
famous adventurer.

These ideas intoxicated the brain of this man to such a pitch of
enthusiasm, that he actually believed himself in possession of the
thirty thousand pounds, and amused his fancy with a variety of
magnificent projects to be executed by means of that acquisition, until
his reverie was interrupted by the halting of the coach at the inn
where the passengers used to eat their breakfasts. Waked as he was from
the dream of happiness, it had made such impression upon his mind,
that, seeing Fathom rise up with an intention to alight, he took it for
granted his design was to escape, and seizing him by the collar, called
aloud for assistance in the King’s name.

Our hero, whose sagacity and presence of mind very often supplied the
place of courage, instead of being terrified at this assault, which
might have disturbed the tranquillity of an ordinary villain, was so
perfectly master of every circumstance of his own situation, as to know
at once that the aggressor could not possibly have the least cause of
complaint against him; and therefore, imputing this violence either to
madness or mistake, very deliberately suffered himself to be made
prisoner by the people of the house, who ran to the coach door in
obedience to the summons of the wine merchant. The rest of the company
were struck dumb with surprise and consternation at this sudden
adventure; and the quaker, dreading some fell resistance on the side of
the outlandish man, unpinned the other coach door in the twinkling of
an eye, and trundled himself into the mud for safety. The others,
seeing the temper and resignation of the prisoner, soon recovered their
recollection, and began to inquire into the cause of his arrest, upon
which, the captor, whose teeth chattered with terror and impatience,
gave them to understand that he was a state criminal, and demanded
their help in conveying him to justice.

Luckily for both parties, there happened to be at the inn a company of
squires just returned from the death of a leash of hares, which they
had ordered to be dressed for dinner, and among these gentlemen was one
of the quorum, to whom the accuser had immediate recourse, marching
before the captive, who walked very peaceably between the landlord and
one of his waiters, and followed by a crowd of spectators, some of whom
had secured the faithful Maurice, who in his behaviour closely imitated
the deliberation of his master. In this order did the procession
advance to the apartment in which the magistrate, with his fellows of
the chase, sat smoking his morning pipe over a tankard of strong ale,
and the smuggler being directed to the right person, “May it please
your worship,” said he, “I have brought this foreigner before you, on a
violent suspicion of his being a proclaimed outlaw; and I desire,
before these witnesses, that my title may be made good to the reward
that shall become due upon his conviction.”

“Friend,” replied the justice, “I know nothing of you or your titles;
but this I know, if you have any information to give in, you must come
to my house when I am at home, and proceed in a lawful way, that is,
d’ye mind me, if you swear as how this here person is an outlaw; then
if so be as he has nothing to say to the contrary, my clerk shall make
out a mittimus, and so to jail with him till next ’size.” “But, sir,”
answered the impeacher, “this is a case that admits of no delay; the
person I have apprehended is a prisoner of consequence to the state.”
“How, fellor!” cried the magistrate, interrupting him, “is there any
person of more consequence than one of his Majesty’s justices of the
peace, who is besides a considerable member of the landed interest!
D’ye know, sirrah, who you are talking to? If you don’t go about your
business, I believe I shall lay you by the heels.”

The smuggler, fearing his prize would escape through the ignorance,
pride, and obstinacy of this country justice, approached his worship,
and in a whisper which was overheard by all the company, assured him he
had indubitable reason to believe the foreigner was no other than the
Pretender’s eldest son. At mention of this formidable name, every
individual of the audience started, with signs of terror and amazement.
The justice dropped his pipe, recoiled upon his chair, and, looking
most ridiculously aghast, exclaimed, “Seize him, in the name of God and
his Majesty King George! Has he got no secret arms about him!”

Fathom being thus informed of the suspicion under which he stood, could
not help smiling at the eagerness with which the spectators flew upon
him, and suffered himself to be searched with great composure, well
knowing they would find no moveables about his person, but such as upon
examination would turn to his account; he therefore very calmly
presented to the magistrate his purse, and a small box that contained
his jewels, and in the French language desired they might be preserved
from the hands of the mob. This request was interpreted by the accuser,
who, at the same time, laid claim to the booty. The justice took charge
of the deposit, and one of his neighbours having undertaken the office
of clerk, he proceeded to the examination of the culprit, whose papers
were by this time laid on the table before him. “Stranger,” said he,
“you stand charged with being son of the Pretender to these realms;
what have you to say in your own defence?” Our hero assured him, in the
French language, that he was falsely impeached, and demanded justice on
the accuser, who, without the least reason, had made such a malicious
attack upon the life and honour of an innocent gentleman.

The smuggler, instead of acting the part of a faithful interpreter,
told his worship, that the prisoner’s answer was no more than a simple
denial, which every felon would make who had nothing else to plead in
his own behalf, and that this alone was a strong presumption of his
guilt, because, if he was not really the person they suspected him to
be, the thing would speak for itself, for, if he was not the Young
Pretender, who then was he? This argument had great weight with the
justice, who, assuming a very important aspect, observed, “Very true,
friend, if you are not the Pretender, in the name of God, who are you?
One may see with half an eye that he is no better than a promiscuous
fellow.”

Ferdinand now began to repent of having pretended ignorance of the
English language, as he found himself at the mercy of a rascal, who put
a false gloss upon all his words, and addressed himself to the audience
successively in French, High Dutch, Italian, and Hungarian Latin,
desiring to know if any person present understood any of these tongues,
that his answers might be honestly explained to the bench. But he might
have accosted them in Chinese with the same success: there was not one
person present tolerably versed in his mother-tongue, much less
acquainted with any foreign language, except the wine merchant, who,
incensed at this appeal, which he considered as an affront to his
integrity, gave the judge to understand, that the delinquent, instead
of speaking to the purpose, contumaciously insulted his authority in
sundry foreign lingos, which he apprehended was an additional proof of
his being the Chevalier’s son, inasmuch as no person would take the
pains to learn such a variety of gibberish, except with some sinister
intent.

This annotation was not lost upon the squire, who was too jealous of
the honour of his office to overlook such a flagrant instance of
contempt. His eyes glistened, his cheeks were inflated with rage. “The
case is plain,” said he; “having nothing of signification to offer in
his own favour, he grows refractory, and abuses the court in his base
Roman Catholic jargon; but I’ll let you know, for all you pretend to be
a prince, you are no better than an outlawed vagrant, and I’ll show you
what a thing you are when you come in composition with an English
justice, like me, who have more than once extinguished myself in the
service of my country. As nothing else accrues, your purse, black box,
and papers shall be sealed up before witnesses, and sent by express to
one of his Majesty’s secretaries of state; and, as for yourself, I will
apply to the military at Canterbury, for a guard to conduct you to
London.”

This was a very unwelcome declaration to our adventurer, who was on the
point of haranguing the justice and spectators in their own language,
when he was relieved from the necessity of taking that step by the
interposition of a young nobleman just arrived at the inn, who, being
informed of this strange examination, entered the court, and, at first
sight of the prisoner, assured the justice he was imposed upon; for
that he himself had often seen the Young Pretender in Paris, and that
there was no kind of resemblance between that adventurer and the person
now before him. The accuser was not a little mortified at his
lordship’s affirmation, which met with all due regard from the bench,
though the magistrate took notice, that, granting the prisoner was not
the Young Chevalier himself, it was highly probable he was an emissary
of that house, as he could give no satisfactory account of himself, and
was possessed of things of such value as no honest man could expose to
the accidents of the road.

Fathom, having thus found an interpreter, who signified to him, in the
French tongue, the doubts of the justice, told his lordship, that he
was a gentleman of a noble house in Germany, who, for certain reasons,
had come abroad incognito, with a view to see the world; and that,
although the letters they had seized would prove the truth of that
assertion, he should be loth to expose his private concerns to the
knowledge of strangers, if he could possibly be released without that
mortification. The young nobleman explained his desire to the court;
but, his own curiosity being interested, observed, at the same time,
that the justice could not be said to have discharged the duties of his
station, until he should have examined every circumstance relating to
the prisoner. Upon which remonstrance, he was requested by the bench to
peruse the papers, and accordingly communicated the substance of one
letter to this effect:—

“MY DEAR SON,
Though I am far from approving the rash step you have taken in
withdrawing yourself from your father’s house, in order to avoid an
engagement which would have been equally honourable and advantageous to
your family, I cannot so far suppress my affection, as to bear the
thought of your undergoing those hardships which, for your
disobedience, you deserve to suffer. I have therefore, without the
knowledge of your father, sent the bearer to attend you in your
peregrinations; his fidelity you know hath been tried in a long course
of service, and I have entrusted to his care, for your use, a purse of
two hundred ducats, and a box of jewels to the value of twice that sum,
which, though not sufficient to support an equipage suitable to your
birth, will, at least for some time, preserve you from the
importunities of want. When you are dutiful enough to explain your
designs and situation, you may expect further indulgence from your
tender and disconsolate mother,—


THE COUNTESS OF FATHOM.”


This letter, which, as well as the others, our hero had forged for the
purpose, effectually answered his intent, in throwing dust in the eyes
and understanding of the spectators, who now regarded the prisoner with
looks of respectful remorse, as a man of quality who had been falsely
accused. His lordship, to make a parade of his own politeness and
importance, assured the bench, he was no stranger to the family of the
Fathoms, and, with a compliment, gave Ferdinand to understand he had
formerly seen him at Versailles. There being no longer room for
suspicion, the justice ordered our adventurer to be set at liberty, and
even invited him to be seated, with an apology for the rude manner in
which he had been treated, owing to the misinformation of the accuser,
who was threatened with the stocks, for his malice and presumption.

But this was not the only triumph our hero obtained over the wine
merchant. Maurice was no sooner unfettered, than, advancing into the
middle of the room, “My lord,” said he, addressing himself in French to
his master’s deliverer, “since you have been so generous as to protect
a noble stranger from the danger of such a false accusation, I hope you
will still lay an additional obligation upon the Count, by retorting
the vengeance of the law upon his perfidious accuser, whom I know to be
a trader in those articles of merchandise which are prohibited by the
ordinances of this nation. I have seen him lately at Boulogne, and am
perfectly well acquainted with some persons who have supplied him with
French lace and embroidery; and, as a proof of what I allege, I desire
you will order him and this barber, who is his understrapper, to be
examined on the spot.”

This charge, which was immediately explained to the bench, yielded
extraordinary satisfaction to the spectators, one of whom, being an
officer of the customs, forthwith began to exercise his function upon
the unlucky perruquier, who, being stripped of his upper garments, and
even of his shirt, appeared like the mummy of an Egyptian king, most
curiously rolled up in bandages of rich figured gold shalloon, that
covered the skirts of four embroidered waistcoats. The merchant, seeing
his expectation so unhappily reversed, made an effort to retire with a
most rueful aspect, but was prevented by the officer, who demanded the
interposition of the civil power, that he might undergo the same
examination to which the other had been subjected. He was accordingly
rifled without loss of time, and the inquiry proved well worth the care
of him who made it; for a considerable booty of the same sort of
merchandise was found in his boots, breeches, hat, and between the
buckram and lining of his surtout. Yet, not contented with this prize,
the experienced spoiler proceeded to search his baggage, and,
perceiving a false bottom in his portmanteau, detected beneath it a
valuable accession to the plunder he had already obtained.




CHAPTER THIRTY

THE SINGULAR MANNER OF FATHOM’S ATTACK AND TRIUMPH OVER THE VIRTUE OF
THE FAIR ELENOR.


Proper cognisance being thus taken of these contraband effects, and the
informer furnished with a certificate, by which he was entitled to a
share of the seizure, the coachman summoned his passengers to the
carriage; the purse and jewels were restored to Count Fathom, who
thanked the justice, and his lordship in particular, for the candour
and hospitality with which he had been treated, and resumed his place
in the vehicle, amidst the congratulations of all his
fellow-travellers, except the two forlorn smugglers, who, instead of
re-embarking in the coach, thought proper to remain at the inn, with
view to mitigate, if possible, the severity of their misfortune.

Among those who felicitated Fathom upon the issue of this adventure,
the young maiden seemed to express the most sensible pleasure at that
event. The artful language of his eyes had raised in her breast certain
fluttering emotions, before she knew the value of her conquest; but now
that his rank and condition were discovered, these transports were
increased by the ideas of vanity and ambition, which are mingled with
the first seeds of every female constitution. The belief of having
captivated the heart of a man who could raise her to the rank and
dignity of a countess, produced such agreeable sensations in her fancy,
that her eyes shone with unusual lustre, and a continual smile played
in dimples on her rosy cheeks; so that her attractions, though not
powerful enough to engage the affection, were yet sufficient to inflame
the desire of our adventurer, who very honestly marked her chastity for
prey to his voluptuous passion. Had she been well seasoned with
knowledge and experience, and completely armed with caution against the
artifice and villany of man, her virtue might not have been able to
withstand the engines of such an assailant, considering the dangerous
opportunities to which she was necessarily exposed. How easy then must
his victory have been over an innocent, unsuspecting country damsel,
flushed with the warmth of youth, and an utter stranger to the ways of
life!

While Obadiah, therefore, and his plump companion, were engaged in
conversation, on the strange incidents which had passed, Fathom acted a
very expressive pantomime with this fair buxom nymph, who comprehended
his meaning with surprising facility, and was at so little pains to
conceal the pleasure she took in this kind of intercourse, that several
warm squeezes were interchanged between her and her lover, before they
arrived at Rochester, where they proposed to dine. It was during this
period, he learned from the answers she made to the inquisitive quaker,
that her sole dependence was upon a relation, to whom she had a letter,
and that she was a perfect stranger in the great city; circumstances on
which he soon formed the project of her ruin.

Upon their arrival at the Black Bull, he for the first time found
himself alone with his Amanda, whose name was Elenor, their
fellow-travellers being elsewhere employed about their own concerns;
and, unwilling to lose the precious opportunity, he began to act the
part of a very importunate lover, which he conceived to be a proper
sequel to the prelude which had been performed in the coach. The
freedoms which she, out of pure simplicity and good-humour, permitted
him to take with her hand, and even her rosy lips, encouraged him to
practise other familiarities upon her fair bosom, which scandalised her
virtue so much, that, in spite of the passion she had begun to indulge
in his behalf, she rejected his advances with all the marks of anger
and disdain; and he found it necessary to appease the storm he had
raised, by the most respectful and submissive demeanour; resolving to
change his operations, and carry on his attacks, so as to make her
yield at discretion, without alarming her religion or pride.
Accordingly, when the bill was called after dinner, he took particular
notice of her behaviour, and, perceiving her pull out a large leathern
purse that contained her money, reconnoitred the pocket in which it was
deposited, and, while they sat close to each other in the carriage,
conveyed it with admirable dexterity into an hole in the cushion.
Whether the corpulent couple, who sat opposite to these lovers, had
entered into an amorous engagement at the inn, or were severally
induced by other motives, is uncertain; but sure it is, both left the
coach on that part of the road which lies nearest to Gravesend, and
bade adieu to the other pair, on pretence of having urgent business at
that place.

Ferdinand, not a little pleased at their departure, renewed his most
pathetic expressions of love, and sung several French songs on that
tender subject, which seemed to thrill to the soul of his beauteous
Helen. While the driver halted at Dartford to water his horses, she was
smit with the appearance of some cheesecakes, which were presented by
the landlady of the house, and having bargained for two or three, put
her hand in her pocket, in order to pay for her purchase; but what was
her astonishment, when, after having rummaged her equipage, she
understood her whole fortune was lost! This mishap was, by a loud
shriek, announced to our hero, who affected infinite amazement and
concern; and no sooner learned the cause of her affliction, than he
presented her with his own purse, from which he, in emphatic dumb show,
begged she would indemnify herself for the damage she had sustained.
Although this kind proffer was some alleviation of her misfortunes, she
did not fail to pour forth a most piteous lamentation, importing that
she had not only lost all her money, amounting to five pounds, but also
her letter of recommendation, upon which she had altogether relied for
present employment.

The vehicle was minutely searched from top to bottom, by herself and
our adventurer, assisted by Maurice and the coachman, who, finding
their inquiry ineffectual, did not scruple to declare his suspicion of
the two fat turtles who had deserted the coach in such an abrupt
manner. In a word, he rendered this conjecture so plausible, by
wresting the circumstances of their behaviour and retreat, that poor
Elenor implicitly believed they were the thieves by whom she had
suffered; and was prevailed upon to accept the proffered assistance of
the generous Count, who, seeing her very much disordered by this
mischance, insisted upon her drinking a large glass of canary, to quiet
the perturbation of her spirits. This is a season, which of all others
is most propitious to the attempts of an artful lover; and justifies
the metaphorical maxim of fishing in troubled waters. There is an
affinity and short transition betwixt all the violent passions that
agitate the human mind. They are all false perspectives, which, though
they magnify, yet perplex and render indistinct every object which they
represent. And flattery is never so successfully administered, as to
those who know they stand in need of friendship, assent, and
approbation.

The cordial she swallowed, far from calming, increased the disturbance
of her thoughts, and produced an intoxication; during which, she talked
in an incoherent strain, laughed and wept by turns, and acted other
extravagances, which are known to be symptoms of the hysterical
affection. Fathom, though an utter stranger to the sentiments of
honour, pity, and remorse, would not perpetrate his vicious purpose,
though favoured by the delirium his villany had entailed upon this
unfortunate young maiden; because his appetite demanded a more perfect
sacrifice than that which she could yield in her present deplorable
situation, when her will must have been altogether unconcerned in his
success. Determined, therefore, to make a conquest of her virtue,
before he would take possession of her person, he mimicked that
compassion and benevolence which his heart had never felt, and, when
the coach arrived at London, not only discharged what she owed for her
place, but likewise procured for her an apartment in the house to which
he himself had been directed for lodgings, and even hired a nurse to
attend her during a severe fever, which was the consequence of her
disappointment and despondence. Indeed, she was supplied with all
necessaries by the generosity of this noble Count, who, for the
interest of his passion, and the honour of his name, was resolved to
extend his charity to the last farthing of her own money, which he had
been wise enough to secure for this purpose.

Her youth soon got the better of her distemper, and when she understood
her obligations to the Count, who did not fail to attend her in person
with great tenderness, her heart, which had been before prepossessed in
his favour, now glowed with all the warmth of gratitude, esteem, and
affection. She knew herself in a strange place, destitute of all
resource but in his generosity. She loved his person, she was dazzled
by his rank; and he knew so well how to improve the opportunities and
advantages he derived from her unhappy situation, that he gradually
proceeded in sapping from one degree of intimacy to another, until all
the bulwarks of her chastity were undermined, and she submitted to his
desire; not with the reluctance of a vanquished people, but with all
the transports of a joyful city, that opens its gates to receive a
darling prince returned from conquest. For by this time he had artfully
concentred and kindled up all the inflammable ingredients of her
constitution; and she now looked back upon the virtuous principles of
her education, as upon a disagreeable and tedious dream, from which she
had waked to the fruition of never-fading joy.




CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

HE BY ACCIDENT ENCOUNTERS HIS OLD FRIEND, WITH WHOM HE HOLDS A
CONFERENCE, AND RENEWS A TREATY.


Our hero, having thus provided himself with a proper subject for his
hours of dalliance, thought it was now high time to study the ground
which he had pitched upon for the scene of his exploits, and with that
view made several excursions to different parts of the town, where
there was aught of entertainment or instruction to be found. Yet he
always, on these occasions, appeared in an obscure ordinary dress, in
order to avoid singularity, and never went twice to the same
coffee-house, that his person might not be afterwards known, in case he
should shine forth to the public in a superior sphere. On his return
from one of those expeditions, while he was passing through Ludgate,
his eyes were suddenly encountered by the apparition of his old friend
the Tyrolese, who, perceiving himself fairly caught in the toil, made a
virtue of necessity, and, running up to our adventurer with an aspect
of eagerness and joy, clasped him in his arms, as some dear friend,
whom he had casually found after a most tedious and disagreeable
separation.

Fathom, whose genius never failed him in such emergencies, far from
receiving these advances with the threats and reproaches which the
other had deserved at his hands, returned the salute with equal warmth,
and was really overjoyed at meeting with a person who might one way or
other make amends for the perfidy of his former conduct. The Tyrolese,
whose name was Ratchcali, pleased with his reception, proposed they
should adjourn to the next tavern, in which they had no sooner taken
possession of an apartment, than he addressed himself to his old
companion in these words:—

“Mr. Fathom, by your frank and obliging manner of treating a man who
hath done you wrong, I am more and more confirmed in my opinion of your
sagacity, which I have often considered with admiration; I will not
therefore attempt to make an apology for my conduct at our last
parting; but only assure you that this meeting may turn out to our
mutual advantage, if we now re-enter into an unreserved union, the ties
of which we will soon find it our interest and inclination to preserve.
For my own part, as my judgment is ripened by experience, so are my
sentiments changed since our last association. I have seen many a rich
harvest lost, for want of a fellow-labourer in the vineyard; and I have
more than once fallen a sacrifice to a combination, which I could have
resisted with the help of one able auxiliary. Indeed, I might prove
what I allege by mathematical demonstration; and I believe nobody will
pretend to deny, that two heads are better than one, in all cases that
require discernment and deliberation.”

Ferdinand could not help owning the sanity of his observations, and
forthwith acquiesced in his proposal of the new alliance; desiring to
know the character in which he acted on the English stage, and the
scheme he would offer for their mutual emolument. At the same time he
resolved within himself to keep such a strict eye over his future
actions, as would frustrate any design he might hereafter harbour, of
repeating the prank he had so successfully played upon him, in their
journey from the banks of the Rhine.

“Having quitted you at Bar-le-duc,” resumed the Tyrolese, “I travelled
without ceasing, until I arrived at Frankfort upon the Maine, where I
assumed the character of a French chevalier, and struck some masterly
strokes, which you yourself would not have deemed unworthy of your
invention; and my success was the more agreeable, as my operations were
chiefly carried on against the enemies of our religion. But my
prosperity was not of long duration. Seeing they could not foil me at
my own weapons, they formed a damned conspiracy, by which I not only
lost all the fruits of my industry, but likewise ran the most imminent
hazard of my life. I had ordered some of those jewels which I had
borrowed of my good friend Fathom to be new set in a fashionable taste,
and soon after had an opportunity to sell one of these, at a great
advantage, to one of the fraternity, who offered an extraordinary price
for the stone, on purpose to effect my ruin. In less than
four-and-twenty hours after this bargain, I was arrested by the
officers of justice upon the oath of the purchaser, who undertook to
prove me guilty of a fraud, in selling a Saxon pebble for a real
diamond; and this accusation was actually true; for the change had been
artfully put upon me by the jeweller, who was himself engaged in the
conspiracy.

“Had my conscience been clear of any other impeachment, perhaps I
should have rested my cause upon the equity and protection of the law;
but I foresaw that the trial would introduce an inquiry, to which I was
not at all ambitious of submitting, and therefore was fain to
compromise the affair, at the price of almost my whole fortune. Yet
this accommodation was not made so secretly, but that my character was
blasted, and my credit overthrown; so that I was fain to relinquish my
occasional equipage, and hire myself as journeyman to a lapidary, an
employment which I had exercised in my youth. In this obscure station,
I laboured with great assiduity, until I made myself perfect in the
knowledge of stones, as well as in the different methods of setting
them off to the best advantage; and having, by dint of industry and
address, got possession of a small parcel, set out for this kingdom, in
which I happily arrived about four months ago; and surely England is
the paradise of artists of our profession.

“One would imagine that nature had created the inhabitants for the
support and enjoyment of adventurers like you and me. Not that these
islanders open the arms of hospitality to all foreigners without
distinction. On the contrary, they inherit from their fathers an
unreasonable prejudice against all nations under the sun; and when an
Englishman happens to quarrel with a stranger, the first term of
reproach he uses is the name of his antagonist’s country, characterised
by some opprobrious epithet, such as a chattering Frenchman, an Italian
ape, a German hog, and a beastly Dutchman; nay, their national
prepossession is maintained even against those people with whom they
are united under the same laws and government; for nothing is more
common than to hear them exclaim against their fellow-subjects, in the
expressions of a beggarly Scot, and an impudent Irish bog-trotter. Yet
this very prejudice will never fail to turn to the account of every
stranger possessed of ordinary talents; for he will always find
opportunities of conversing with them in coffee-houses and places of
public resort, in spite of their professed reserve, which, by the bye,
is so extraordinary, that I know some people who have lived twenty
years in the same house without exchanging one word with their
next-door neighbours; yet, provided he can talk sensibly, and preserve
the deportment of a sober gentleman, in those occasional conversations,
his behaviour will be the more remarkably pleasing, as it will
agreeably disappoint the expectation of the person who had entertained
notions to his prejudice. When a foreigner has once crossed this bar,
which perpetually occurs, he sails without further difficulty into the
harbour of an Englishman’s goodwill; for the pique is neither personal
nor rancorous, but rather contemptuous and national; so that, while he
despises a people in the lump, an individual of that very community may
be one of his chief favourites.

“The English are in general upright and honest, therefore unsuspecting
and credulous. They are too much engrossed with their own business to
pry into the conduct of their neighbours, and too indifferent, in point
of disposition, to interest themselves in what they conceive to be
foreign to their own concerns. They are wealthy and mercantile, of
consequence liberal and adventurous, and so well disposed to take a
man’s own word for his importance, that they suffer themselves to be
preyed upon by such a bungling set of impostors, as would starve for
lack of address in any other country under the sun. This being a true
sketch of the British character, so far as I have been able to observe
and learn, you will easily comprehend the profits that may be extracted
from it, by virtue of those arts by which you so eminently excel;—the
great, the unbounded prospect lies before me! Indeed, I look upon this
opulent kingdom as a wide and fertile common, on which we adventurers
may range for prey, without let or molestation. For so jealous are the
natives of their liberties, that they will not bear the restraint of
necessary police, and an able artist may enrich himself with their
spoils, without running any risk of attracting the magistrate, or
incurring the least penalty of the law.

“In a word, this metropolis is a vast masquerade, in which a man of
stratagem may wear a thousand different disguises, without danger of
detection. There is a variety of shapes in which we the knights of
industry make our appearance in London. One glides into a nobleman’s
house in the capacity of a valet-de-chambre, and in a few months leads
the whole family by the nose. Another exhibits himself to the public,
as an empiric or operator for the teeth; and by dint of assurance and
affidavits, bearing testimony to wonderful cures that never were
performed, whirls himself into his chariot, and lays the town under
contribution. A third professes the composition of music, as well as
the performance, and by means of a few capriciosos on the violin,
properly introduced, wriggles himself into the management of private
and public concerts. And a fourth breaks forth at once in all the
splendour of a gay equipage, under the title and denomination of a
foreign count. Not to mention those inferior projectors, who assume the
characters of dancers, fencing-masters, and French ushers, or, by
renouncing their religion, seek to obtain a provision for life.

“Either of these parts will turn to the account of an able actor; and,
as you are equally qualified for all, you may choose that which is most
suitable to your own inclination. Though, in my opinion, you was
designed by nature to shine in the great world, which, after all, is
the most ample field for men of genius; because the game is deeper, and
people of fashion being, for the most part, more ignorant, indolent,
vain, and capricious, than their inferiors, are of consequence more
easily deceived; besides, their morals sit generally so loose about
them, that, when a gentleman of our fraternity is discovered in the
exercise of his profession, their contempt of his skill is the only
disgrace he incurs.”

Our hero was so well pleased with this picture, that he longed to
peruse the original, and, before these two friends parted, they settled
all the operations of the campaign. Ratchcali, that same evening, hired
magnificent lodgings for Count Fathom, in the court end of the town,
and furnished his wardrobe and liveries from the spoils of Monmouth
Street; he likewise enlisted another footman and valet-de-chambre into
his service, and sent to the apartments divers large trunks, supposed
to be filled with the baggage of this foreign nobleman, though, in
reality, they contained little else than common lumber.

Next day, our adventurer took possession of his new habitation, after
having left to his friend and associate the task of dismissing the
unfortunate Elenor, who was so shocked at the unexpected message, that
she fainted away; and when she recovered the use of her senses so well
as to reflect upon her forlorn condition, she was seized with the most
violent transports of grief and dismay, by which her brain was
disordered to such a degree, that she grew furious and distracted, and
was, by the advice and assistance of the Tyrolese, conveyed into the
hospital of Bethlem; where we shall leave her for the present, happily
bereft of her reason.




CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

HE APPEARS IN THE GREAT WORLD WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE AND ADMIRATION.


Meanwhile, Fathom and his engine were busied in completing his
equipage, so that in a few days he had procured a very gay chariot,
adorned with painting, gilding, and a coat of arms, according to his
own fancy and direction. The first use he made of this vehicle was that
of visiting the young nobleman from whom he had received such important
civilities on the road, in consequence of an invitation at parting, by
which he learned his title and the place of his abode in London.

His lordship was not only pleased, but proud to see such a stranger at
his gate, and entertained him with excess of complaisance and
hospitality; insomuch that, by his means, our hero soon became
acquainted with the whole circle of polite company, by whom he was
caressed for his insinuating manners and agreeable conversation. He had
thought proper to tell the nobleman, at their first interview in town,
that his reasons for concealing his knowledge of the English tongue
were now removed, and that he would no longer deny himself the pleasure
of speaking a language which had been always music to his ear. He had
also thanked his lordship for his generous interposition at the inn,
which was an instance of that generosity and true politeness which are
engrossed by the English people, who leave nought to other nations but
the mere shadow of these virtues.

A testimony like this, from the mouth of such a noble stranger, won the
heart of the peer, who professed a friendship for him on the spot, and
undertook to see justice done to his lacquey, who in a short time was
gratified with a share of the seizure which had been made upon his
information, amounting to fifty or sixty pounds.

Ferdinand put not forth the whole strength of his accomplishments at
once, but contrived to spring a new mine of qualification every day, to
the surprise and admiration of all his acquaintance. He was gifted with
a sort of elocution, much more specious than solid, and spoke on every
subject that occurred in conversation with that familiarity and ease,
which, one would think, could only be acquired by long study and
application. This plausibility and confidence are faculties really
inherited from nature, and effectually serve the possessor, in lieu of
that learning which is not to be obtained without infinite toil and
perseverance. The most superficial tincture of the arts and sciences in
such a juggler, is sufficient to dazzle the understanding of half
mankind; and, if managed with circumspection, will enable him even to
spend his life among the literati, without once forfeiting the
character of a connoisseur.

Our hero was perfectly master of this legerdemain, which he carried to
such a pitch of assurance, as to declare, in the midst of a
mathematical assembly, that he intended to gratify the public with a
full confutation of Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy, to the nature of
which he was as much a stranger as the most savage Hottentot in Africa.
His pretensions to profound and universal knowledge were supported not
only by this kind of presumption, but also by the facility with which
he spoke so many different languages, and the shrewd remarks he had
made in the course of his travels and observation.

Among politicians, he settled the balance of power upon a certain
footing, by dint of ingenious schemes, which he had contrived for the
welfare of Europe. With officers, he reformed the art of war, with
improvements which had occurred to his reflection while he was engaged
in a military life. He sometimes held forth upon painting, like a
member of the Dilettanti club. The theory of music was a theme upon
which he seemed to expatiate with particular pleasure. In the provinces
of love and gallantry, he was a perfect Oroondates. He possessed a most
agreeable manner of telling entertaining stories, of which he had a
large collection; he sung with great melody and taste, and played upon
the violin with surprising execution. To these qualifications let us
add his affability and pliant disposition, and then the reader will not
wonder that he was looked upon as the pattern of human perfection, and
his acquaintance courted accordingly.

While he thus captivated the favour and affection of the English
nobility, he did not neglect to take other measures in behalf of the
partnership to which he had subscribed. The adventure with the two
squires at Paris had weakened his appetite for play, which was not at
all restored by the observations he had made in London, where the art
of gaming is reduced into a regular system, and its professors so
laudably devoted to the discharge of their functions, as to observe the
most temperate regimen, lest their invention should be impaired by the
fatigue of watching or exercise, and their ideas disturbed by the fumes
of indigestion. No Indian Brachman could live more abstemious than two
of the pack, who hunted in couple, and kennelled in the upper
apartments of the hotel in which our adventurer lived. They abstained
from animal food with the abhorrence of Pythagoreans, their drink was a
pure simple element, they were vomited once a week, took physic or a
glyster every third day, spent the forenoon in algebraical
calculations, and slept from four o’clock till midnight, that they
might then take the field with that cool serenity which is the effect
of refreshment and repose.

These were terms upon which our hero would not risk his fortune; he was
too much addicted to pleasure to forego every other enjoyment but that
of amassing; and did not so much depend upon his dexterity in play as
upon his talent of insinuation, which, by this time, had succeeded so
far beyond his expectation, that he began to indulge the hope of
enslaving the heart of some rich heiress, whose fortune would at once
raise him above all dependence. Indeed, no man ever set out with a
fairer prospect on such an expedition; for he had found means to render
himself so agreeable to the fair sex, that, like the boxes of the
playhouse, during the representation of a new performance, his company
was often bespoke for a series of weeks; and no lady, whether widow,
wife, or maiden, ever mentioned his name, without some epithet of
esteem or affection; such as the dear Count! the charming Man! the
Nonpareil, or the Angel!

While he thus shone in the zenith of admiration, it is not to be
doubted, that he could have melted some wealthy dowager or opulent
ward; but, being an enemy to all precipitate engagements, he resolved
to act with great care and deliberation in an affair of such
importance, especially as he did not find himself hurried by the
importunities of want; for, since his arrival in England, he had rather
increased than exhausted his finances, by methods equally certain and
secure. In a word, he, with the assistance of Ratchcali, carried on a
traffic, which yielded great profits, without subjecting the trader to
the least loss or inconvenience. Fathom, for example, wore upon his
finger a large brilliant, which he played to such advantage one night,
at a certain nobleman’s house, where he was prevailed upon to entertain
the company with a solo on the violin, that everybody present took
notice of its uncommon lustre, and it was handed about for the perusal
of every individual. The water and the workmanship were universally
admired; and one among the rest having expressed a desire of knowing
the value of such a jewel, the Count seized that opportunity of
entertaining them with a learned disquisition into the nature of
stones; this introduced the history of the diamond in question, which
he said had been purchased of an Indian trader of Fort St. George, at
an under price; so that the present proprietor could afford to sell it
at a very reasonable rate; and concluded with telling the company,
that, for his own part, he had been importuned to wear it by the
jeweller, who imagined it would have a better chance for attracting a
purchaser on his finger, than while it remained in his own custody.

This declaration was no sooner made, than a certain lady of quality
bespoke the refuse of the jewel, and desired Ferdinand to send the
owner next day to her house, where he accordingly waited upon her
ladyship with the ring, for which he received one hundred and fifty
guineas, two-thirds of the sum being clear gain, and equally divided
betwixt the associates. Nor was this bargain such as reflected
dishonour upon the lady’s taste, or could be productive of ill
consequences to the merchant; for the method of estimating diamonds is
altogether arbitrary; and Ratchcali, who was an exquisite lapidary, had
set it in such a manner as would have imposed upon any ordinary
jeweller. By these means of introduction, the Tyrolese soon monopolised
the custom of a great many noble families, upon which he levied large
contributions, without incurring the least suspicion of deceit. He
every day, out of pure esteem and gratitude for the honour of their
commands, entertained them with the sight of some new trinket, which he
was never permitted to carry home unsold; and from the profits of each
job, a tax was raised for the benefit of our adventurer.

Yet his indultos were not confined to the article of jewels, which
constituted only one part of his revenue. By the industry of his
understrapper, he procured a number of old crazy fiddles, which were
thrown aside as lumber; upon which he counterfeited the Cremona mark,
and otherwise cooked them up with great dexterity; so that, when he had
occasion to regale the lovers of music, he would send for one of these
vamped instruments, and extract from it such tones as quite ravished
the hearers; among whom there was always some conceited pretender, who
spoke in raptures of the violin, and gave our hero an opportunity of
launching out in its praise, and declaring it was the best Cremona he
had ever touched. This encomium never failed to inflame the desires of
the audience, to some one of whom he was generous enough to part with
it at prime cost—that is, for twenty or thirty guineas clear profit;
for he was often able to oblige his friends in this manner, because,
being an eminent connoisseur, his countenance was solicited by all the
musicians, who wanted to dispose of such moveables.

Nor did he neglect the other resources of a skilful virtuoso. Every
auction afforded some picture, in which, though it had been overlooked
by the ignorance of the times, he recognised the style of a great
master, and made a merit of recommending it to some noble friend. This
commerce he likewise extended to medals, bronzes, busts, intaglios, and
old china, and kept divers artificers continually employed in making
antiques for the English nobility. Thus he went on with such rapidity
of success in all his endeavours, that he himself was astonished at the
infatuation he had produced. Nothing was so wretched among the
productions of art, that he could not impose upon the world as a
capital performance; and so fascinated were the eyes of his admirers,
he could easily have persuaded them that a barber’s bason was an
Etrurian patera, and the cover of a copper pot no other than the shield
of Ancus Martius. In short, it was become so fashionable to consult the
Count in everything relating to taste and politeness, that not a plan
was drawn, not even a house furnished, without his advice and
approbation; nay, to such a degree did his reputation in these matters
excel, that a particular pattern of paper-hangings was known by the
name of Fathom; and his hall was every morning crowded with
upholsterers, and other tradesmen, who came, by order of their
employers, to learn his choice, and take his directions.

The character and influence he thus acquired, he took care to maintain
with the utmost assiduity and circumspection. He never failed to appear
the chief personage at all public diversions and private assemblies,
not only in conversation and dress, but also in the article of dancing,
in which he outstripped all his fellows, as far as in every other
genteel accomplishment.




CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

HE ATTRACTS THE ENVY AND ILL OFFICES OF THE MINOR KNIGHTS OF HIS OWN
ORDER, OVER WHOM HE OBTAINS A COMPLETE VICTORY.


Such a pre-eminence could not be enjoyed without exciting the
malevolence of envy and detraction, in the propagation of which none
were so industrious as the brethren of his own order, who had, like
him, made a descent upon this island, and could not, without repining,
see the whole harvest in the hands of one man, who, with equal art and
discretion, avoided all intercourse with their society. In vain they
strove to discover his pedigree, and detect the particular
circumstances of his life and conversation; all their inquiries were
baffled by the obscurity of his origin, and that solitary scheme which
he had adopted in the beginning of his career. The whole fruit of their
investigation amounted to no more than a certainty that there was no
family of any consideration in Europe known by the denomination of
Fathom; and this discovery they did not fail to divulge for the benefit
of our adventurer, who had by this time taken such firm root in the
favour of the great, as to set all those little arts at defiance; and
when the report reached his ear, actually made his friends merry with
the conjectures which had been circulated at his expense.

His adversaries, finding themselves disappointed in this effort, held a
consultation to devise other measures against him, and came to a
resolution of ending him by the sword, or rather of expelling him from
the kingdom by the fear of death, which they hoped he had not courage
enough to resist, because his deportment had always been remarkably
mild and pacific. It was upon this supposition that they left to the
determination of the dice the choice of the person who should execute
their plan; and the lot falling upon a Swiss, who, from the station of
a foot soldier in the Dutch service, out of which he had been drummed
for theft, had erected himself into the rank of a self-created
chevalier, this hero fortified himself with a double dose of brandy,
and betook himself to a certain noted coffee-house, with an intent to
affront Count Fathom in public.

He was lucky enough to find our adventurer sitting at a table in
conversation with some persons of the first rank; upon which he seated
himself in the next box, and after having intruded himself into their
discourse, which happened to turn upon the politics of some German
courts, “Count,” said he to Ferdinand, in a very abrupt and
disagreeable manner of address, “I was last night in company with some
gentlemen, among whom a dispute happened about the place of your
nativity; pray, what country are you of?” “Sir,” answered the other,
with great politeness, “I at present have the honour to be of England.”
“Oho!” replied the chevalier, “I ask your pardon, that is to say, you
are incog; some people may find it convenient to keep themselves in
that situation.” “True,” said the Count, “but some people are too well
known to enjoy that privilege.” The Swiss being a little disconcerted
at this repartee, which extracted a smile from the audience, after some
pause, observed, that persons of a certain class had good reason to
drop the remembrance of what they have been; but a good citizen will
not forget his country, or former condition. “And a bad citizen,” said
Fathom, “cannot, if he would, provided he has met with his deserts; a
sharper may as well forget the shape of a die, or a discarded soldier
the sound of a drum.”

As the chevalier’s character and story were not unknown, this
application raised an universal laugh at his expense, which provoked
him to such a degree, that, starting up, he swore Fathom could not have
mentioned any object in nature that he himself resembled so much as a
drum, which was exactly typified by his emptiness and sound, with this
difference, however, that a drum was never noisy till beaten, whereas
the Count would never be quiet, until he should have undergone the same
discipline. So saying, he laid his hand upon his sword with a menacing
look, and walked out as if in expectation of being followed by our
adventurer, who suffered himself to be detained by the company, and
very calmly took notice, that his antagonist would not be ill pleased
at their interposition. Perhaps he would not have comported himself
with such ease and deliberation, had not he made such remarks upon the
disposition of the chevalier, as convinced him of his own safety. He
had perceived a perplexity and perturbation in the countenance of the
Swiss, when he first entered the coffee-room; his blunt and precipitate
way of accosting him seemed to denote confusion and compulsion; and, in
the midst of his ferocity, this accurate observer discerned the
trepidation of fear. By the help of these signs, his sagacity soon
comprehended the nature of his schemes, and prepared accordingly for a
formal defiance.

His conjecture was verified next morning by a visit from the chevalier,
who, taking it for granted that Fathom would not face an adversary in
the field, because he had not followed him from the coffee-house, went
to his lodgings with great confidence, and demanded to see the Count
upon an affair that would admit of no delay. Maurice, according to his
instructions, told him that his master was gone out, but desired he
would have the goodness to repose himself in the parlour, till the
Count’s return, which he expected every moment. Ferdinand, who had
taken post in a proper place for observation, seeing his antagonist
fairly admitted, took the same road, and appearing before him, wrapped
up in a long Spanish cloak, desired to know what had procured him the
honour of such an early visit. The Swiss, raising his voice to conceal
his agitation, explained his errand, in demanding reparation for the
injury his honour had sustained the preceding day, in that odious
allusion to a scandalous report which had been raised by the malice of
his enemies; and insisted, in a very imperious style, upon his
attending him forthwith to the nursery in Hyde Park. “Have a little
patience,” said our adventurer with great composure, “and I will do
myself the pleasure to wait upon you in a few moments.”

With these words, he rang the bell, and, calling for a bason of water,
laid aside his cloak, and displayed himself in his shirt, with a sword
in his right hand, which was all over besmeared with recent blood, as
if he had just come from the slaughter of a foe. This phenomenon made
such an impression upon the astonished chevalier, already discomposed
by the resolute behaviour of the Count, that he became jaundiced with
terror and dismay, and, while his teeth chattered in his head, told our
hero he had hoped, from his known politeness, to have found him ready
to acknowledge an injury which might have been the effect of anger or
misapprehension, in which case the affair might have been compromised
to their mutual satisfaction, without proceeding to those extremities
which, among men of honour, are always accounted the last resource. To
this representation Ferdinand answered, that the affair had been of the
chevalier’s own seeking, inasmuch as he had intruded himself into his
company, and treated him with the most insolent and unprovoked abuse,
which plainly flowed from a premeditated design against his honour and
reputation; he, therefore, far from being disposed to own himself in
the wrong, would not even accept of a public acknowledgment from him,
the aggressor, whom he looked upon as an infamous sharper, and was
resolved to chastise accordingly.

Here the conversation was interrupted by the arrival of a person who
was brought to the door in a chair, and conducted into another
apartment, from which a message was brought to the Count, importing,
that the stranger desired to speak with him upon business of the last
importance. Fathom having chid the servant for admitting people without
his order, desired the Swiss to excuse him for a minute longer, and
went in to the next room, from whence the following dialogue was
overheard by this challenger:—“Count,” said the stranger, “you are not
ignorant of my pretensions to the heart of that young lady, at whose
house I met you yesterday; therefore you cannot be surprised when I
declare myself displeased with your visits and behaviour to my
mistress, and demand that you will instantly promise to drop the
correspondence.” “Else what follows?” answered Ferdinand, with a cool
and temperate voice. “My resentment and immediate defiance,” replied
the other; “for the only alternative I propose is, to forego your
design upon that lady, or to decide our pretension by the sword.”

Our hero, having expressed a regard for this visitant as the son of a
gentleman whom he honoured, was at the pains to represent the
unreasonableness of his demand, and the folly of his presumption; and
earnestly exhorted him to put the issue of his cause upon a more safe
and equitable footing. But this admonition, instead of appeasing the
wrath, seemed to inflame the resentment of the opponent, who swore he
would not leave him until he should have accomplished the purport of
his errand. In vain our adventurer requested half an hour for the
despatch of some urgent business, in which he was engaged with a
gentleman in the other parlour. This impetuous rival rejected all the
terms he could propose, and even challenged him to decide the
controversy upon the spot; an expedient to which the other having
assented with reluctance, the door was secured, the swords unsheathed,
and a hot engagement ensued, to the inexpressible pleasure of the
Swiss, who did not doubt that he himself would be screened from all
danger by the event of this rencontre. Nevertheless, his hope was
disappointed in the defeat of the stranger, who was quickly disarmed,
in consequence of a wound through the sword-arm; upon which occasion
Fathom was heard to say, that, in consideration of his youth and
family, he had spared his life; but he would not act with the same
tenderness towards any other antagonist. He then bound up the limb he
had disabled, conducted the vanquished party to his chair, rejoined the
chevalier with a serene countenance, and, asking pardon for having
detained him so long, proposed they should instantly set out in a
hackney-coach for the place of appointment.

The stratagem thus conducted, had all the success the inventor could
desire. The fear of the Swiss had risen almost to an ecstasy before the
Count quitted the room; but after this sham battle, which had been
preconcerted betwixt our adventurer and his friend Ratchcali, the
chevalier’s terrors were unspeakable. He considered Fathom as a devil
incarnate, and went into the coach as a malefactor bound for Tyburn. He
would have gladly compounded for the loss of a leg or arm, and
entertained some transient gleams of hope, that he should escape for
half a dozen flesh-wounds, which he would have willingly received as
the price of his presumption; but these hopes were banished by the
remembrance of that dreadful declaration which he had heard the Count
make, after having overcome his last adversary; and he continued under
the power of the most unsupportable panic, until the carriage halted at
Hyde Park Corner, where he crawled forth in a most piteous and
lamentable condition; so that, when they reached the spot, he was
scarce able to stand.

Here he made an effort to speak, and propose an accommodation upon a
new plan, by which he promised to leave his cause to the arbitrement of
those gentlemen who were present at the rupture, and to ask pardon of
the Count, provided he should be found guilty of a trespass upon good
manners; but this proposal would not satisfy the implacable Ferdinand,
who, perceiving the agony of the Swiss, resolved to make the most of
the adventure, and giving him to understand he was not a man to be
trifled with, desired him to draw without further preamble. Thus
compelled, the unfortunate gamester pulled off his coat, and, putting
himself in a posture, to use the words of Nym, “winked, and held out
his cold iron.”

Our adventurer, far from making a gentle use of the advantages he
possessed, fiercely attacked him, while he was incapable of making
resistance, and, aiming at a fleshy part, ran him through the arm and
outside of the shoulder at the very first pass. The chevalier, already
stupefied with the horror of expectation, no sooner felt his
adversary’s point in his body than he fell to the ground, and,
concluding he was no longer a man for this world, began to cross
himself with great devotion; while Fathom walked home deliberately, and
in his way sent a couple of chairmen to the assistance of the wounded
knight.

This achievement, which could not be concealed from the knowledge of
the public, not only furnished the character of Fathom with fresh
wreaths of admiration and applause, but likewise effectually secured
him from any future attempts of his enemies, to whom the Swiss, for his
own sake, had communicated such terrible ideas of his valour, as
overawed the whole community.




CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

HE PERFORMS ANOTHER EXPLOIT, THAT CONVEYS A TRUE IDEA OF HIS GRATITUDE
AND HONOUR.


It was not long after this celebrated victory, that he was invited to
spend part of the summer at the house of a country gentleman, who lived
about one hundred miles from London, possessed of a very opulent
fortune, the greatest part of which was expended in acts of old English
hospitality. He had met with our hero by accident at the table of a
certain great man, and was so struck with his manner and conversation,
as to desire his acquaintance, and cultivate his friendship; and he
thought himself extremely happy in having prevailed upon him to pass a
few weeks in his family.

Fathom, among his other observations, perceived that there was a
domestic uneasiness, occasioned by a very beautiful young creature
about the age of fifteen, who resided in the house under the title of
the gentleman’s niece, though she was in reality his natural daughter,
born before his marriage. This circumstance was not unknown to his
lady, by whose express approbation he had bestowed particular attention
upon the education of the child, whom we shall distinguish by the name
of Celinda. Their liberality in this particular had not been
misapplied; for she not only gave marks of uncommon capacity, but, as
she grew up, became more and more amiable in her person, and was now
returned from the boarding school, possessed of every accomplishment
that could be acquired by one of her age and opportunities. These
qualifications, which endeared her to every other person, excited the
jealousy and displeasure of her supposed aunt, who could not bear to
see her own children eclipsed by this illegitimate daughter, whom she
therefore discountenanced upon all occasions, and exposed to such
mortifications as would in all appearance drive her from her father’s
house. This persecuting spirit was very disagreeable to the husband,
who loved Celinda with a truly paternal affection, and produced
abundance of family disquiet; but being a man of a peaceable and
yielding disposition, he could not long maintain the resolution he had
taken in her favour, and therefore he ceased opposing the malevolence
of his wife.

In this unfortunate predicament stood the fair bastard, at the arrival
of our adventurer, who, being allured by her charms, apprised of her
situation at the same time, took the generous resolution to undermine
her innocence, that he might banquet his vicious appetite with the
spoils of her beauty. Perhaps such a brutal design might not have
entered his imagination, if he had not observed, in the disposition of
this hapless maiden, certain peculiarities from which he derived the
most confident presages of success. Besides a total want of experience,
that left her open and unguarded against the attacks of the other sex,
she discovered a remarkable spirit of credulity and superstitious fear,
which had been cherished by the conversation of her school-fellows. She
was particularly fond of music, in which she had made some progress;
but so delicate was the texture of her nerves, that one day, while
Fathom entertained the company with a favourite air, she actually
swooned with pleasure.

Such sensibility, our projector well knew, must be diffused through all
the passions of her heart; he congratulated himself upon the sure
ascendency he had gained over her in this particular; and forthwith
began to execute the plan he had erected for her destruction. That he
might the more effectually deceive the vigilance of her father’s wife,
he threw such a dash of affectation in his complaisance towards
Celinda, as could not escape the notice of that prying matron, though
it was not palpable enough to disoblige the young lady herself, who
could not so well distinguish between overstrained courtesy and real
good breeding. This behaviour screened him from the suspicion of the
family, who considered it as an effort of politeness, to cover his
indifference and disgust for the daughter of his friend, who had by
this time given some reason to believe she looked upon him with the
eyes of affection; so that the opportunities he enjoyed of conversing
with her in private, were less liable to intrusion or inquiry. Indeed,
from what I have already observed, touching the sentiments of her
stepdame, that lady, far from taking measures for thwarting our hero’s
design, would have rejoiced at the execution of it, and, had she been
informed of his intent, might have fallen upon some method to
facilitate the enterprise; but, as he solely depended upon his own
talents, he never dreamed of soliciting such an auxiliary.

Under cover of instructing and accomplishing her in the exercise of
music, he could not want occasions for promoting his aim; when, after
having soothed her sense of hearing, even to a degree of ravishment, so
as to extort from her an exclamation, importing, that he was surely
something supernatural! he never failed to whisper some insidious
compliment or tale of love, exquisitely suited to the emotions of her
soul. Thus was her heart insensibly subdued; though more than half his
work was still undone; for, at all times, she disclosed such purity of
sentiment, such inviolable attachment to religion and virtue, and
seemed so averse to all sorts of inflammatory discourse, that he durst
not presume upon the footing he had gained in her affection, to explain
the baseness of his desire; he therefore applied to another of her
passions, that proved the bane of her virtue. This was her timidity,
which at first being constitutional, was afterwards increased by the
circumstances of her education, and now aggravated by the artful
conversation of Fathom, which he chequered with dismal stories of
omens, portents, prophecies, and apparitions, delivered upon such
unquestionable testimony, and with such marks of conviction, as
captivated the belief of the devoted Celinda, and filled her
imagination with unceasing terrors.

In vain she strove to dispel those frightful ideas, and avoid such
topics of discourse for the future. The more she endeavoured to banish
them, the more troublesome they became; and such was her infatuation,
that as her terrors increased, her thirst after that sort of knowledge
was augmented. Many sleepless nights did she pass amidst those horrors
of fancy, starting at every noise, and sweating with dreary
apprehension, yet ashamed to own her fears, or solicit the comfort of a
bedfellow, lest she should incur the ridicule and censure of her
father’s wife; and what rendered this disposition the more irksome, was
the solitary situation of her chamber, that stood at the end of a long
gallery scarce within hearing of any other inhabited part of the house.

All these circumstances had been duly weighed by our projector, who,
having prepared Celinda for his purpose, stole at midnight from his
apartment, which was in another storey, and approaching her door, there
uttered a piteous groan; then softly retired to his bed, in full
confidence of seeing next day the effect of this operation. Nor did his
arrow miss the mark. Poor Celinda’s countenance gave such indications
of melancholy and dismay, that he could not omit asking the cause of
her disquiet, and she, at his earnest request, was prevailed upon to
communicate the dreadful salutation of the preceding night, which she
considered as an omen of death to some person of the family, in all
probability to herself, as the groan seemed to issue from one corner of
her own apartment. Our adventurer argued against this supposition, as
contradictory to the common observation of those supernatural warnings
which are not usually imparted to the person who is doomed to die, but
to some faithful friend, or trusty servant, particularly interested in
the event. He therefore supposed, that the groans foreboded the death
of my lady, who seemed to be in a drooping state of health, and were,
by her genius, conveyed to the organs of Celinda, who was the chief
sufferer by her jealous and barbarous disposition; he likewise
expressed an earnest desire to be an ear-witness of such solemn
communication, and, alleging that it was highly improper for a young
lady of her delicate feelings to expose herself alone to such another
dismal visitation, begged he might be allowed to watch all night in her
chamber, in order to defend her from the shocking impressions of fear.

Though no person ever stood more in need of a companion or guard, and
her heart throbbed with transports of dismay at the prospect of night,
she rejected his proposal with due acknowledgment, and resolved to
trust solely to the protection of Heaven. Not that she thought her
innocence or reputation could suffer by her compliance with his
request; for, hitherto, her heart was a stranger to those young desires
which haunt the fancy, and warm the breast of youth; so that, being
ignorant of her danger, she saw not the necessity of avoiding
temptation; but she refused to admit a man into her bedchamber, merely
because it was a step altogether opposite to the forms and decorum of
life. Nevertheless, far from being discouraged by this repulse, he knew
her fears would multiply and reduce that reluctance, which, in order to
weaken, he had recourse to another piece of machinery, that operated
powerfully in behalf of his design.

Some years ago, a twelve-stringed instrument was contrived by a very
ingenious musician, by whom it was aptly entitled the “Harp of Aeolus,”
because, being properly applied to a stream of air, it produces a wild
irregular variety of harmonious sounds, that seem to be the effect of
enchantment, and wonderfully dispose the mind for the most romantic
situations. Fathom, who was really a virtuoso in music, had brought one
of those new-fashioned guitars into the country, and as the effect of
it was still unknown in the family, he that night converted it to the
purposes of his amour, by fixing it in the casement of a window
belonging to the gallery, exposed to the west wind, which then blew in
a gentle breeze. The strings no sooner felt the impression of the balmy
zephyr, than they began to pour forth a stream of melody more
ravishingly delightful than the song of Philomel, the warbling brook,
and all the concert of the wood. The soft and tender notes of peace and
love were swelled up with the most delicate and insensible transition
into a loud hymn of triumph and exultation, joined by the deep-toned
organ, and a full choir of voices, which gradually decayed upon the
ear, until it died away in distant sound, as if a flight of angels had
raised the song in their ascent to heaven. Yet the chords hardly ceased
to vibrate after the expiration of this overture, which ushered in a
composition in the same pathetic style; and this again was succeeded by
a third, almost without pause or intermission, as if the artist’s hand
had been indefatigable, and the theme never to be exhausted.

His heart must be quite callous, and his ear lost to all distinction,
who could hear such harmony without emotion; how deeply, then, must it
have affected the delicate Celinda, whose sensations, naturally acute,
were whetted to a most painful keenness by her apprehension; who could
have no previous idea of such entertainment, and was credulous enough
to believe the most improbable tale of superstition! She was
overwhelmed with awful terror, and, never doubting that the sounds were
more than mortal, recommended herself to the care of Providence in a
succession of pious ejaculations.

Our adventurer, having allowed some time for the effect of this
contrivance, repaired to her chamber door, and, in a whisper, conveyed
through the keyhole, asked if she was awake, begged pardon for such an
unseasonable visit, and desired to know her opinion of the strange
music which he then heard. In spite of her notions of decency, she was
glad of his intrusion, and, being in no condition to observe
punctilios, slipped on a wrapper, opened the door, and, with a
faltering voice, owned herself frightened almost to distraction. He
pretended to console her with reflections, importing, that she was in
the hands of a benevolent Being, who would not impose upon his
creatures any task which they could not bear; he insisted upon her
returning to bed, and assured her he would not stir from her chamber
till day. Thus comforted, she betook herself again to rest, while he
sat down in an elbow-chair at some distance from the bedside, and, in a
soft voice, began the conversation with her on the subject of those
visitations from above, which, though undertaken on pretence of
dissipating her fear and anxiety, was, in reality, calculated for the
purpose of augmenting both.

“That sweet air,” said he, “seems designed for soothing the bodily
anguish of some saint in his last moments. Hark! how it rises into a
more sprightly and elevated strain, as if it were an inspiriting
invitation to the realms of bliss! Sure, he is now absolved from all
the misery of this life! That full and glorious concert of voices and
celestial harps betoken his reception among the heavenly choir, who now
waft his soul to paradisian joys! This is altogether great, solemn, and
amazing! The clock strikes one, the symphony hath ceased!”

This was actually the case; for he had ordered Maurice to remove the
instrument at that hour, lest the sound of it should become too
familiar, and excite the curiosity of some undaunted domestic, who
might frustrate his scheme by discovering the apparatus. As for poor
Celinda, her fancy was, by his music and discourse, worked up to the
highest pitch of enthusiastic terrors; the whole bed shook with her
trepidation, the awful silence that succeeded the supernatural music
threw an additional damp upon her spirits, and the artful Fathom
affecting to snore at the same time, she could no longer contain her
horror, but called upon his name with a fearful accent, and, having
owned her present situation insupportable, entreated him to draw near
her bedside, that he might be within touch on any emergency.

This was a welcome request to our adventurer, who, asking pardon for
his drowsiness, and taking his station on the side of her bed, exhorted
her to compose herself; then locking her hand fast in his own, was
again seized with such an inclination to sleep, that he gradually sunk
down by her side, and seemed to enjoy his repose in that attitude.
Meanwhile, his tender-hearted mistress, that he might not suffer in his
health by his humanity and complaisance, covered him with the
counterpane as he slept, and suffered him to take his rest without
interruption, till he thought proper to start up suddenly with an
exclamation of, “Heaven watch over us!” and then asked, with symptoms
of astonishment, if she had heard nothing. Such an abrupt address upon
such an occasion, did not fail to amaze and affright the gentle
Celinda, who, unable to speak, sprung towards her treacherous
protector; and he, catching her in his arms, bade her fear nothing, for
he would, at the expense of his life, defend her from all danger.

Having thus, by tampering with her weakness, conquered the first and
chief obstacles to his design, he, with great art and perseverance,
improved the intercourse to such a degree of intimacy, as could not but
be productive of all the consequences which he had foreseen. The groans
and music were occasionally repeated, so as to alarm the whole family,
and inspire a thousand various conjectures. He failed not to continue
his nocturnal visits and ghastly discourse, until his attendance became
so necessary to this unhappy maiden, that she durst not stay in her own
chamber without his company, nor even sleep, except in contact with her
betrayer.

Such a commerce between two such persons of a different sex could not
possibly be long carried on, without degenerating from the Platonic
system of sentimental love. In her paroxysms of dismay, he did not
forget to breathe the soft inspirations of his passion, to which she
listened with more pleasure, as they diverted the gloomy ideas of her
fear; and by this time his extraordinary accomplishments had made a
conquest of her heart. What therefore could be a more interesting
transition than that from the most uneasy to the most agreeable
sensation of the human breast?

This being the case, the reader will not wonder that a consummate
traitor, like Fathom, should triumph over the virtue of an artless,
innocent young creature, whose passions he had entirely under his
command. The gradations towards vice are almost imperceptible, and an
experienced seducer can strew them with such enticing and agreeable
flowers, as will lead the young sinner on insensibly, even to the most
profligate stages of guilt. All therefore that can be done by virtue,
unassisted with experience, is to avoid every trial with such a
formidable foe, by declining and discouraging the first advances
towards a particular correspondence with perfidious man, howsoever
agreeable it may seem to be. For here is no security but in conscious
weakness.

Fathom, though possessed of the spoils of poor Celinda’s honour, did
not enjoy his success with tranquillity. Reflection and remorse often
invaded her in the midst of their guilty pleasures, and embittered all
those moments they had dedicated to mutual bliss. For the seeds of
virtue are seldom destroyed at once. Even amidst the rank productions
of vice, they regerminate to a sort of imperfect vegetation, like some
scattered hyacinths shooting up among the weeds of a ruined garden,
that testify the former culture and amenity of the soil. She sighed at
the sad remembrance of that virgin dignity which she had lost; she wept
at the prospect of that disgrace, mortification, and misery she should
undergo, when abandoned by this transient lover, and severely
reproached him for the arts he had used to shipwreck her innocence and
peace.

Such expostulations are extremely unseasonable, when addressed to a man
well-nigh sated with the effects of his conquest. They act like strong
blasts of wind applied to embers almost extinguished, which, instead of
reviving the flame, scatter and destroy every remaining particle of
fire. Our adventurer, in the midst of his peculiarities, had
inconstancy in common with the rest of his sex. More than half cloyed
with the possession of Celinda, he could not fail to be disgusted with
her upbraidings; and had she not been the daughter of a gentleman whose
friendship he did not think it his interest to forfeit, he would have
dropped this correspondence, without reluctance or hesitation. But, as
he had measures to keep with a family of such consequence, he
constrained his inclinations, so far as to counterfeit those raptures
he no longer felt, and found means to appease those intervening tumults
of her grief.

Foreseeing, however, that it would not be always in his power to
console her on these terms, he resolved, if possible, to divide her
affection, which now glowed upon him too intensely; and, with that
view, whenever she complained of the vapours or dejection, he
prescribed, and even insisted upon her swallowing certain cordials of
the most palatable composition, without which he never travelled; and
these produced such agreeable reveries and flow of spirits, that she
gradually became enamoured of intoxication; while he encouraged the
pernicious passion, by expressing the most extravagant applause and
admiration at the wild irregular sallies it produced. Without having
first made this diversion, he would have found it impracticable to
leave the house with tranquillity; but, when this bewitching philtre
grew into an habit, her attachment to Ferdinand was insensibly
dissolved; she began to bear his neglect with indifference, and,
sequestering herself from the rest of the family, used to solicit this
new ally for consolation.

Having thus put the finishing stroke to the daughter’s ruin, he took
leave of the father, with many acknowledgments and expressions of
gratitude for his hospitality and friendship, and, riding across the
country to Bristol, took up his habitation near the hot well, where he
stayed during the remaining part of the season. As for the miserable
Celinda, she became more and more addicted to the vices in which she
had been initiated by his superlative perfidy and craft, until she was
quite abandoned by decency and caution. Her father’s heart was torn
with anguish, while his wife rejoiced in her fall; at length her ideas
were quite debased by her infirmity; she grew every day more and more
sensual and degenerate, and contracted an intimacy with one of the
footmen, who was kind enough to take her to wife, in hope of obtaining
a good settlement from his master; but, being disappointed in his aim,
he conducted her to London, where he made shift to insinuate himself
into another service, leaving her to the use, and partly the advantage,
of her own person, which was still uncommonly attractive.




CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

HE REPAIRS TO BRISTOL SPRING, WHERE HE REIGNS PARAMOUNT DURING THE
WHOLE SEASON.


We shall therefore leave her in this comfortable situation, and return
to our adventurer, whose appearance at Bristol was considered as a
happy omen by the proprietor of the hot well, and all the people who
live by the resort of company to that celebrated spring. Nor were they
deceived in their prognostic. Fathom, as usual, formed the nucleus or
kernel of the beau monde; and the season soon became so crowded, that
many people of fashion were obliged to quit the place for want of
lodging. Ferdinand was the soul that animated the whole society. He not
only invented parties of pleasure, but also, by his personal talents,
rendered them more agreeable. In a word, he regulated their diversions,
and the master of the ceremonies never would allow the ball to be begun
till the Count was seated.

Having thus made himself the object of admiration and esteem, his
advice was an oracle, to which they had recourse in all doubtful cases
of punctilio or dispute, or even of medicine; for among his other
accomplishments, his discourse on that subject was so plausible, and
well adapted to the understanding of his hearers, that any person who
had not actually studied the medical art would have believed he was
inspired by the spirit of Aesculapius. What contributed to the
aggrandisement of his character in this branch of knowledge, was a
victory he obtained over an old physician, who plied at the well, and
had one day unfortunately begun to harangue in the pump-room upon the
nature of the Bristol water. In the course of this lecture he undertook
to account for the warmth of the fluid; and his ideas being perplexed
with a great deal of reading, which he had not been able to digest, his
disquisition was so indistinct, and his expression so obscure and
unentertaining, that our hero seized the opportunity of displaying his
own erudition, by venturing to contradict some circumstances of the
doctor’s hypothesis, and substituting a theory of his own, which, as he
had invented it for the purpose, was equally amusing and chimerical.

He alleged, that fire was the sole vivifying principle that pervaded
all nature; that, as the heat of the sun concocted the juice of
vegetables, and ripened those fruits that grow upon the surface of this
globe, there was likewise an immense store of central fire reserved
within the bowels of the earth, not only for the generation of gems,
fossils, and all the purposes of the mineral world, but likewise for
cherishing and keeping alive those plants which would otherwise perish
by the winter’s cold. The existence of such a fire he proved from the
nature of all those volcanoes, which in almost every corner of the
earth are continually vomiting up either flames or smoke. “These,” said
he, “are the great vents appointed by nature for the discharge of that
rarefied air and combustible matter, which, if confined, would burst
the globe asunder; but, besides the larger outlets, there are some
small chimneys through which part of the heat transpires; a vapour of
that sort, I conceive, must pass through the bed or channel of this
spring, the waters of which, accordingly retain a moderate warmth.”

This account, which totally overthrew the other’s doctrine, was so
extremely agreeable to the audience, that the testy doctor lost his
temper, and gave them to understand, without preamble, that he must be
a person wholly ignorant of natural philosophy, who could invent such a
ridiculous system, and they involved in worse than an Egyptian fog,
that could not at once discern its weakness and absurdity. This
declaration introduced a dispute, which was unanimously determined in
favour of our adventurer. On all such occasions the stream of prejudice
runs against the physician, even though his antagonist has nothing to
recommend himself to the favour of the spectators; and this decision
depends upon divers considerations. In the first place, there is a
continual war carried on against the learned professions, by all those
who, conscious of their own ignorance, seek to level the reputation of
their superiors with their own. Secondly, in all disputes upon physic
that happen betwixt a person who really understands the art, and an
illiterate pretender, the arguments of the first will seem obscure and
unintelligible to those who are unacquainted with the previous systems
on which they are built; while the other’s theory, derived from common
notions, and superficial observation, will be more agreeable, because
better adapted to the comprehension of the hearers. Thirdly, the
judgment of the multitude is apt to be biassed by that surprise which
is the effect of seeing an artist foiled at his own weapons, by one who
engages him only for amusement.

Fathom, besides these advantages, was blessed with a flow of language,
an elegant address, a polite and self-denying style of argumentation,
together with a temper not to be ruffled; so that the victory could not
long waver between him and the physician, to whom he was infinitely
superior in every acquisition but that of solid learning, of which the
judges had no idea. This contest was not only glorious but profitable
to our adventurer, who grew into such request in his medical capacity,
that the poor doctor was utterly deserted by his patients, and Fathom’s
advice solicited by every valetudinarian in the place; nor did he
forfeit the character he thus acquired by any miscarriages in his
practice. Being but little conversant with the materia medica, the
circle of his prescriptions was very small; his chief study was to
avoid all drugs of rough operation and uncertain effect, and to
administer such only as should be agreeable to the palate, without
doing violence to the constitution. Such a physician could not but be
agreeable to people of all dispositions; and, as most of the patients
were in some shape hypochondriac, the power of imagination,
co-operating with his remedies, often effected a cure.

On the whole, it became the fashion to consult the Count in all
distempers, and his reputation would have had its run, though the death
of every patient had given the lie to his pretensions. But empty fame
was not the sole fruit of his success. Though no person would presume
to affront this noble graduate with a fee, they did not fail to
manifest their gratitude by some more valuable present. Every day some
superb piece of china, curious snuffbox, or jewel, was pressed upon
him; so that, at the end of the season, he could almost have furnished
a toyshop with the acknowledgments he had received. Not only his
avarice, but his pleasure, was gratified in the course of his medical
administration. He enjoyed free access, egress, and regress with all
the females at the well, and no matron scrupled to put her daughter
under his care and direction. These opportunities could not be lost
upon a man of his intriguing genius; though he conducted his amours
with such discretion, that, during the whole season, no lady’s
character suffered on his account, yet he was highly fortunate in his
addresses, and we may venture to affirm, that the reproach of
barrenness was more than once removed by the vigour of his endeavours.




CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

HE IS SMITTEN WITH THE CHARMS OF A FEMALE ADVENTURER, WHOSE ALLUREMENTS
SUBJECT HIM TO A NEW VICISSITUDE OF FORTUNE.


Among those who were distinguished by his gallantry was the young wife
of an old citizen of London, who had granted her permission to reside
at the hot well for the benefit of her health, under the eye and
inspection of his own sister, who was a maiden of fifty years. The
pupil, whose name was Mrs. Trapwell, though low in stature, was finely
shaped, her countenance engaging, though her complexion was brown, her
hair in colour rivalled the raven’s back, and her eyes emulated the
lustre of the diamond. Fathom had been struck with her first
appearance; but found it impracticable to elude the vigilance of her
duenna, so as to make a declaration of his flame; until she herself,
guessing the situation of his thoughts, and not displeased with the
discovery, thought proper to furnish him with the opportunity he
wanted, by counterfeiting an indisposition, for the cure of which she
knew his advice would be implored. This was the beginning of an
acquaintance, which was soon improved to his wish; and so well did she
manage her attractions, as in some measure to fix the inconstancy of
his disposition; for, at the end of the season, his passion was not
sated; and they concerted the means of continuing their commerce, even
after their return to London.

This intercourse effectually answered the purpose of the husband, who
had been decoyed into matrimony by the cunning of his spouse, whom he
had privately kept as a concubine before marriage. Conscious of her own
precarious situation, she had resolved to impose upon the infirmities
of Trapwell, and, feigning herself pregnant, gave him to understand she
could no longer conceal her condition from the knowledge of her
brother, who was an officer in the army, and of such violent passions,
that, should he once discover her backsliding, he would undoubtedly
wipe away the stains of his family dishonour with her own blood, as
well as that of her keeper. The citizen, to prevent such a catastrophe,
took her to wife; but soon after perceiving the trick which had been
played upon him, set his invention at work, and at length contrived a
scheme which he thought would enable him, not only to retrieve his
liberty, but also indemnify himself for the mortification he had
undergone.

Far from creating any domestic disturbance, by upbraiding her with her
finesse, he seemed perfectly well pleased with his acquisition; and, as
he knew her void of any principle, and extremely addicted to pleasure,
he chose proper occasions to insinuate, that she might gratify her own
inclination, and at the same time turn her beauty to good account. She
joyfully listened to these remonstrances, and, in consequence of their
mutual agreement, she repaired to Bristol Spring, on pretence of an ill
state of health, accompanied by her sister-in-law, whom they did not
think proper to intrust with the real motive of her journey. Fathom’s
person was agreeable, and his finances supposed to be in flourishing
order; therefore, she selected him from the herd of gallants, as a
proper sacrifice to the powers which she adored; and, on her arrival in
London, made her husband acquainted with the importance of her
conquest.

Trapwell overwhelmed her with caresses and praise for her discreet and
dutiful conduct, and faithfully promised that she should pocket in her
own privy purse one-half of the spoils that should be gathered from her
gallant, whom she therefore undertook to betray, after he had swore, in
the most solemn manner, that his intention was not to bring the affair
to a public trial, which would redound to his own disgrace, but to
extort a round sum of money from the Count, by way of composition.
Confiding in this protestation, she in a few days gave him intelligence
of an assignation she had made with our adventurer, at a certain bagnio
near Covent Garden; upon which he secured the assistance of a
particular friend and his own journeyman, with whom, and a constable,
he repaired to the place of rendezvous, where he waited in an adjoining
room, according to the directions of his virtuous spouse, until she
made the preconcerted signal of hemming three times aloud, when he and
his associates rushed into the chamber and surprised our hero in bed
with his inamorata.

The lady on this occasion acted her part to a miracle; she screamed at
their approach; and, after an exclamation of “Ruined and undone!”
fainted away in the arms of her spouse, who had by this time seized her
by the shoulders, and begun to upbraid her with her infidelity and
guilt. As for Fathom, his affliction was unutterable, when he found
himself discovered in that situation, and made prisoner by the two
assistants, who had pinioned him in such a manner, that he could not
stir, much less accomplish an escape. All his ingenuity and presence of
mind seemed to forsake him in this emergency. The horrors of an English
jury overspread his imagination; for he at once perceived that the toil
into which he had fallen was laid for the purpose; consequently he took
it for granted that there would be no deficiency in point of evidence.
Soon as he recollected himself, he begged that no violence might be
offered to his person, and entreated the husband to favour him with a
conference, in which the affair might be compromised, without prejudice
to the reputation of either.

At first Trapwell breathed nothing but implacable revenge, but, by the
persuasion of his friends, after he had sent home his wife in a chair,
he was prevailed upon to hear the proposals of the delinquent, who
having assured him, by way of apology, that he had always believed the
lady was a widow, made him an offer of five hundred pounds, as an
atonement for the injury he had sustained. This being a sum no ways
adequate to the expectation of the citizen, who looked upon the Count
as possessor of an immense estate, he rejected the terms with disdain,
and made instant application to a judge, from whom he obtained a
warrant for securing his person till the day of trial. Indeed, in this
case, money was but a secondary consideration with Trapwell, whose
chief aim was to be legally divorced from a woman he detested.
Therefore there was no remedy for the unhappy Count, who in vain
offered to double the sum. He found himself reduced to the bitter
alternative of procuring immediate bail, or going directly to Newgate.

In this dilemma he sent a messenger to his friend Ratchcali, whose
countenance fell when he understood the Count’s condition; nor would he
open his mouth in the style of consolation, until he had consulted a
certain solicitor of his acquaintance, who assured him the law abounded
with such resources as would infallibly screen the defendant, had the
fact been still more palpable than it was. He said there was great
presumption to believe the Count had fallen a sacrifice to a
conspiracy, which by some means or other would be detected; and, in
that case, the plaintiff might obtain one shilling in lieu of damages.
If that dependence should fail, he hinted that, in all probability, the
witnesses were not incorruptible; or, should they prove to be so, one
man’s oath was as good as another’s; and, thank Heaven, there was no
dearth of evidence, provided money could be found to answer the
necessary occasions.

Ratchcali, comforted by these insinuations, and dreading the resentment
of our adventurer, who, in his despair, might punish him severely for
his want of friendship, by some precipitate explanation of the commerce
they had carried on; moved, I say, by these considerations, and
moreover tempted with the prospect of continuing to reap the advantages
resulting from their conjunction, he and another person of credit with
whom he largely dealt in jewels, condescended to become sureties for
the appearance of Fathom, who was accordingly admitted to bail. Not but
that the Tyrolese knew Ferdinand too well to confide in his parole. He
depended chiefly upon his ideas of self-interest, which, he thought,
would persuade him to risk the uncertain issue of a trial, rather than
quit the field before the harvest was half over; and he was resolved to
make his own retreat without ceremony, should our hero be unwise enough
to abandon his bail.

Such an adventure could not long lie concealed from the notice of the
public, even if both parties had been at pains to suppress the
circumstances. But the plaintiff, far from seeking to cover, affected
to complain loudly of his misfortune, that he might interest his
neighbours in his behalf, and raise a spirit of rancour and animosity,
to influence the jury against this insolent foreigner, who had come
over into England to debauch our wives and deflower our daughters;
while he employed a formidable band of lawyers to support the
indictment, which he laid at ten thousand pounds damages.

Meanwhile, Fathom and his associate did not fail to take all proper
measures for his defence; they retained a powerful bar of counsel, and
the solicitor was supplied with one hundred pounds after another, to
answer the expense of secret service; still assuring his clients that
everything was in an excellent train, and that his adversary would gain
nothing but shame and confusion of face. Nevertheless, there was a
necessity for postponing the trial, on account of a material evidence,
who, though he wavered, was not yet quite brought over; and the
attorney found means to put off the decision from term to term, until
there was no quibble left for further delay. While this suit was
depending, our hero continued to move in his usual sphere; nor did the
report of his situation at all operate to his disadvantage in the
polite world; on the contrary, it added a fresh plume to his character,
in the eyes of all those who were not before acquainted with the
triumphs of his gallantry. Notwithstanding this countenance of his
friends, he himself considered the affair in a very serious light; and
perceiving that, at any rate, he must be a considerable loser, he
resolved to double his assiduity in trade, that he might be the more
able to afford the extraordinary expense to which he was subjected.




CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

FRESH CAUSE FOR EXERTING HIS EQUANIMITY AND FORTITUDE.


The reader may have observed, that Fathom, with all his circumspection,
had a weak side, which exposed him to sundry mischances; this was his
covetousness, which on some occasions became too hard for his
discretion. At this period of time it was, by the circumstances of his
situation, inflamed to a degree of rapacity. He was now prevailed upon
to take a hand at whist or piquet, and even to wield the hazard-box;
though he had hitherto declared himself an irreconcilable enemy to all
sorts of play; and so uncommon was his success and dexterity at these
exercises, as to surprise his acquaintance, and arouse the suspicion of
some people, who repined at his prosperity.

But in nothing was his conduct more inexcusable than in giving way to
the dangerous temerity of Ratchcali, which he had been always at pains
to restrain, and permitting him to practise the same fraud upon an
English nobleman, which had been executed upon himself at Frankfort. In
other words, the Tyrolese, by the canal of Ferdinand’s finger and
recommendation, sold a pebble for a real brilliant, and in a few days
the cheat was discovered, to the infinite confusion of our adventurer,
who nevertheless assumed the guise of innocence with so much art, and
expressed such indignation against the villain who had imposed upon his
judgment and unsuspecting generosity, that his lordship acquitted him
of any share in the deceit, and contented himself with the restitution,
which he insisted upon making out of his own pocket, until he should be
able to apprehend the rogue, who had thought proper to abscond for his
own safety. In spite of all this exculpation, his character did not
fail to retain a sort of stigma, which indeed the plainest proofs of
innocence are hardly able to efface; and his connexion with such a
palpable knave as the Tyrolese appeared to be, had an effect to his
prejudice in the minds of all those who were privy to the occurrence.

When a man’s reputation is once brought in question, every trifle is,
by the malevolence of mankind, magnified into a strong presumption
against the culprit. A few whispers communicated by the envious mouth
of slander, which he can have no opportunity to answer and refute,
shall, in the opinion of the world, convict him of the most horrid
crimes; and for one hypocrite who is decked with the honours of virtue,
there are twenty good men who suffer the ignominy of vice; so well
disposed are individuals to trample upon the fame of their
fellow-creatures. If the most unblemished merit is not protected from
this injustice, it will not be wondered at that no quarter was given to
the character of an adventurer like Fathom, who, among other unlucky
occurrences, had the misfortune to be recognised about this time by his
two Parisian friends, Sir Stentor Stile and Sir Giles Squirrel.

These worthy knights-errant had returned to their own country, after
having made a very prosperous campaign in France, at the end of which,
however, they very narrowly escaped the galleys; and seeing the Polish
Count seated at the head of taste and politeness, they immediately
circulated the story of his defeat at Paris, with many ludicrous
circumstances of their own invention, and did not scruple to affirm
that he was a rank impostor. When the laugh is raised upon a great man,
he never fails to dwindle into contempt. Ferdinand began to perceive a
change in the countenance of his friends. His company was no longer
solicited with that eagerness which they had formerly expressed in his
behalf. Even his entertainments were neglected; when he appeared at any
private or public assembly, the ladies, instead of glowing with
pleasure, as formerly, now tittered or regarded him with looks of
disdain; and a certain pert, little, forward coquette, with a view to
put him out of countenance, by raising the laugh at his expense, asked
him one night, at a drum, when he had heard from his relations in
Poland? She succeeded in her design upon the mirth of the audience, but
was disappointed in the other part of her aim; for our hero replied,
without the least mark of discomposure, “They are all in good health at
your service, madam; I wish I knew in what part of the world your
relations reside, that I might return the compliment.” By this answer,
which was the more severe, as the young lady was of very doubtful
extraction, he retorted the laugh upon the aggressor, though he
likewise failed in his attempt upon her temper; for she was perhaps the
only person present who equalled himself in stability of countenance.

Notwithstanding this appearance of unconcern, he was deeply touched
with these marks of alienation in the behaviour of his friends, and,
foreseeing in his own disgrace the total shipwreck of his fortune, he
entered into a melancholy deliberation with himself about the means of
retrieving his importance in the beau monde, or of turning his address
into some other channel, where he could stand upon a less slippery
foundation. In this exercise of his thoughts, no scheme occurred more
feasible than that of securing the booty he had made, and retiring with
his associate, who was also blown, into some other country, where their
names and characters being unknown, they might pursue their old plan of
commerce without molestation. He imparted this suggestion to the
Tyrolese, who approved the proposal of decamping, though he combated
with all his might our hero’s inclination to withdraw himself before
the trial, by repeating the assurances of the solicitor, who told him
he might depend upon being reimbursed by the sentence of the court for
great part of the sums he had expended in the course of the
prosecution.

Fathom suffered himself to be persuaded by these arguments, supported
with the desire of making an honourable retreat, and, waiting patiently
for the day of trouble, discharged his sureties, by a personal
appearance in court. Yet this was not the only score he discharged that
morning; the solicitor presented his own bill before they set out for
Westminster Hall, and gave the Count to understand that it was the
custom, from time immemorial, for the client to clear with his attorney
before trial. Ferdinand had nothing to object against this established
rule, though he looked upon it as a bad omen, in spite of all the
solicitor’s confidence and protestations; and he was not a little
confounded, when, looking into the contents, he found himself charged
with 350 attendances. He knew it was not his interest to disoblige his
lawyer at such a juncture; nevertheless, he could not help
expostulating with him on this article, which seemed to be so falsely
stated with regard to the number; when his questions drew on an
explanation, by which he found he had incurred the penalty of three
shillings and fourpence for every time he chanced to meet the
conscientious attorney, either in the park, the coffee-house, or the
street, provided they had exchanged the common salutation; and he had
good reason to believe the solicitor had often thrown himself in his
way, with a view to swell this item of his account.

With this extortion our adventurer was fain to comply, because he lay
at the mercy of the caitiff; accordingly, he with a good grace paid the
demand, which, including his former disbursements, amounted to three
hundred and sixty-five pounds eleven shillings and threepence three
farthings, and then presenting himself before the judge, quietly
submitted to the laws of the realm. His counsel behaved like men of
consummate abilities in their profession; they exerted themselves with
equal industry, eloquence, and erudition, in their endeavours to
perplex the truth, browbeat the evidence, puzzle the judge, and mislead
the jury; but the defendant found himself wofully disappointed in the
deposition of Trapwell’s journeyman, whom the solicitor pretended to
have converted to his interest. This witness, as the attorney
afterwards declared, played booty, and the facts came out so clear,
that Ferdinand Count Fathom was convicted of criminal conversation with
the plaintiff’s wife, and cast in fifteen hundred pounds, under the
denomination of damages.

He was not so much surprised as afflicted at this decision, because he
saw it gradually approaching from the examination of the first
evidence. His thoughts were now employed in casting about for some
method of deliverance from the snare in which he found himself
entangled. To escape, he foresaw it would be impracticable, as Trapwell
would undoubtedly be prepared for arresting him before he could quit
Westminster Hall; he was too well acquainted with Ratchcali’s
principles, to expect any assistance from that quarter in money
matters; and he was utterly averse to the payment of the sum awarded
against him, which would have exhausted his whole fortune. He therefore
resolved to try the friendship of some persons of fashion, with whom he
had maintained an intimacy of correspondence. Should they fail him in
the day of his necessity, he proposed to have recourse to his former
sureties, one of whom he meant to bilk, while the other might accompany
him in his retreat; or, should both these expedients miscarry, he
determined, rather than part with his effects, to undergo the most
disagreeable confinement, in hope of obtaining the jailor’s connivance
at his escape.

These resolutions being taken, he met his fate with great fortitude and
equanimity, and calmly suffered himself to be conveyed to the house of
a sheriff’s officer, who, as he made his exit from the hall, according
to his own expectation, executed a writ against him, at the suit of
Trapwell, for a debt of two thousand pounds. To this place he was
followed by his solicitor, who was allured by the prospect of another
job, and who, with great demonstrations of satisfaction, congratulated
him upon the happy issue of the trial; arrogating to himself the merit
of having saved him eight thousand pounds in the article of damages, by
the previous steps he had taken, and the noble defence that he and his
friends the counsel had made for their client; he even hinted an
expectation of receiving a gratuity for his extraordinary care and
discretion.

Fathom, galled as he was with his misfortune, and enraged at the
effrontery of this pettifogger, maintained a serenity of countenance,
and sent the attorney with a message to the plaintiff, importing, that,
as he was a foreigner, and could not be supposed to have so much cash
about him, as to spare fifteen hundred pounds from the funds of his
ordinary expense, he would grant him a bond payable in two months,
during which period he should be able to procure a proper remittance
from his own estate. While the solicitor was employed in this
negotiation, he despatched his valet-de-chambre to one nobleman, and
Maurice to another, with billets, signifying the nature of the verdict
which his adversary had obtained, and desiring that each would lend him
a thousand pounds upon his parole, until he could negotiate bills upon
the Continent.

His three messengers returned almost at the same instant of time, and
these were the answers they brought back.

Trapwell absolutely rejected his personal security; and threatened him
with all the horrors of a jail, unless he would immediately discharge
the debt, or procure sufficient bondsmen; and one of his quality
friends favoured him with this reply to his request:—

“MY DEAR COUNT!
I am mortally chagrined at the triumph you have furnished to that
rascally citizen. By the lard! the judge must have been in the terrors
of cuckoldom, to influence the decision; and the jury a mere herd of
horned beasts, to bring in such a barbarous verdict. Egad! at this
rate, no gentleman will be able to lie with another man’s wife, but at
the risk of a cursed prosecution. But to waive this disagreeable
circumstance, which you must strive to forget; I declare my
mortification is still the greater, because I cannot at present supply
you with the trifle your present exigency requires; for, to tell you a
secret, my own finances are in damnable confusion. But a man of Count
Fathom’s figure and address can never be puzzled for the want of such a
paltry sum. Adieu, my dear Count! we shall, I suppose, have the
pleasure of seeing you to-morrow at White’s: meanwhile, I have the
honour to be, with the most perfect attachment,


yours, GRIZZLEGRIN.”


The other noble peer, to whom he addressed himself on this occasion,
cherished the same sentiments of virtue, friendship, and generosity;
but his expression was so different, that we shall, for the edification
of the reader, transcribe his letter in his own words:—

“SIR,
I was never more astonished than at the receipt of your very
extraordinary billet, wherein you solicit the loan of a thousand
pounds, which you desire may be sent with the bearer on the faith of
your parole. Sir, I have no money to send you or lend you; and cannot
help repeating my expressions of surprise at your confidence in making
such a strange and unwarranted demand. ’Tis true, I may have made
professions of friendship, while I looked upon you as a person of
honour and good morals; but now that you are convicted of such a
flagrant violation of the laws of that kingdom where you have been
treated with such hospitality and respect, I think myself fully
absolved from any such conditional promise, which indeed is never
interpreted into any other than a bare compliment. I am sorry you have
involved your character and fortune in such a disagreeable affair, and
am,


Sir, yours, etc.
TROMPINGTON.”


Ferdinand was not such a novice in the world as to be disappointed at
these repulses; especially as he had laid very little stress upon the
application, which was made by way of an experiment upon the gratitude
or caprice of those two noblemen, whom he had actually more than once
obliged with the same sort of assistance which he now solicited, though
not to such a considerable amount.

Having nothing further to expect from the fashionable world, he sent
the Tyrolese to the person who had been bail for his appearance, with
full instructions to explain his present occasion in the most
favourable light, and desire he would reinforce the credit of the Count
with his security; but that gentleman, though he placed the most
perfect confidence on the honour of our hero, and would have willingly
entered into bonds again for his personal appearance, was not quite so
well satisfied of his circumstances, as to become liable for the
payment of two thousand pounds, an expense which, in his opinion, the
finances of no foreign Count were able to defray. He therefore lent a
deaf ear to the most pressing remonstrances of the ambassador, who had
recourse to several other merchants, with the same bad success; so that
the prisoner, despairing of bail, endeavoured to persuade Ratchcali,
that it would be his interest to contribute a thousand pounds towards
his discharge, that he might be enabled to quit England with a good
grace, and execute his part of the plan they had projected.

So powerful was his eloquence on the occasion, and such strength of
argument did he use, that even the Tyrolese seemed convinced, though
reluctantly, and agreed to advance the necessary sum upon the bond and
judgment of our adventurer, who, being disabled from transacting his
own affairs in person, was obliged to intrust Ratchcali with his keys,
papers, and power of attorney, under the check and inspection of his
faithful Maurice and the solicitor, whose fidelity he bespoke with the
promise of an ample recompense.




CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

THE BITER IS BIT.


Yet, he had no sooner committed his effects to the care of this
triumvirate, than his fancy was visited with direful warnings, which
produced cold sweats and palpitations, and threw him into such agonies
of apprehension as he had never known before. He remembered the former
desertion of the Tyrolese, the recent villany of the solicitor, and
recollected the remarks he had made upon the disposition and character
of his valet, which evinced him a fit companion for the other two.

Alarmed at these reflections, he entreated the bailiff to indulge him
with a visit to his own lodgings, and even offered one hundred guineas
as a gratification for his compliance. But the officer, who had
formerly lost a considerable sum by the escape of a prisoner, would not
run any risk in an affair of such consequence, and our hero was obliged
to submit to the tortures of his own presaging fears. After he had
waited five hours in the most racking impatience, he saw the attorney
enter with all the marks of hurry, fatigue, and consternation, and
heard him exclaim, “Good God, have you seen the gentleman?”

Fathom found his fears realised in this interrogation, to which he
answered in a tone of horror and dismay, “What gentleman? I suppose I
am robbed. Speak, and keep me no longer in suspense.” “Robbed!” cried
the attorney, “the Lord forbid! I hope you can depend upon the person
you empowered to receive your jewels and cash? I must own his
proceedings are a little extraordinary; for after he had rummaged your
scrutoire, from which, in presence of me and your servant, he took one
hundred and fifty guineas, a parcel of diamond rings and buckles,
according to this here inventory, which I wrote with my own hand, and
East India bonds to the tune of five hundred more, we adjourned to
Garraway’s, where he left me alone, under pretence of going to a broker
of his acquaintance who lived in the neighbourhood, while the valet, as
I imagined, waited for us in the alley. Well, sir, he stayed so long,
that I began to be uneasy, and at length resolved to send the servant
in quest of him, but when I went out for that purpose, deuce a servant
was to be found; though I in person inquired for him at every alehouse
within half a mile of the place. I then despatched no less than five
ticket porters upon the scent after them, and I myself, by a direction
from the bar-keeper, went to Signior Ratchcali’s lodgings, where, as
they told me, he had not been seen since nine o’clock in the morning.
Upon this intimation, I came directly hither, to give you timely
notice, that you may without delay take measures for your own security.
The best thing you can do, is to take out writs for apprehending him,
in the counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and I shall put
them in the hands of trusty and diligent officers, who will soon ferret
him out of his lurking-place, provided he skulks within ten miles of
the bills of mortality. To be sure, the job will be expensive; and all
these runners must be paid beforehand. But what then? the defendant is
worth powder, and if we can once secure him, I’ll warrant the
prosecution will quit cost.”

Fathom was almost choked with concern and resentment at the news of
this mischance, so that he could not utter one word until this
narrative was finished. Nor was his suspicion confined to the Tyrolese
and his own lacquey; he considered the solicitor as their accomplice
and director, and was so much provoked at the latter part of his
harangue, that his discretion seemed to vanish, and, collaring the
attorney, “Villain!” said he, “you yourself have been a principal actor
in this robbery.” Then turning to the bystanders, “and I desire in the
King’s name that he may be secured, until I can make oath before a
magistrate in support of the charge. If you refuse your assistance in
detaining him, I will make immediate application to one of the
secretaries of state, who is my particular friend, and he will see
justice done to all parties.”

At mention of this formidable name, the bailiff and his whole family
were in commotion, to obstruct the retreat of the lawyer, who stood
aghast and trembled under the grasp of our adventurer. But, soon as he
found himself delivered from this embrace, by the interposition of the
spectators, and collected his spirits, which had been suddenly
dissipated by Fathom’s unexpected assault, he began to display one art
of his occupation, which he always reserved for extraordinary
occasions. This was the talent of abuse, which he poured forth with
such fluency of opprobrious language, that our hero, smarting as he
was, and almost desperate with his loss, deviated from that temperance
of behaviour which he had hitherto preserved, and snatching up the
poker, with one stroke opened a deep trench upon the attorney’s skull,
that extended from the hind head almost to the upper part of the nose,
upon each side of which it discharged a sanguine stream.
Notwithstanding the pain of this application, the solicitor was
transported with joy at the sense of the smart, and inwardly
congratulated himself upon the appearance of his own blood, which he no
sooner perceived, than he exclaimed, “I’m a dead man,” and fell upon
the floor at full length.

Immediate recourse was had to a surgeon in the neighbourhood, who,
having examined the wound, declared there was a dangerous depression of
the first table of the skull, and that, if he could save the patient’s
life without the application of the trepan, it would be one of the
greatest cures that ever were performed. By this time, Fathom’s first
transport being overblown, he summoned up his whole resolution, and
reflected upon his own ruin with that fortitude which had never failed
him in the emergencies of his fate. Little disturbed at the prognostic
of the surgeon, which he considered in the right point of view; “Sir,”
said he, “I am not so unacquainted with the resistance of an attorney’s
skull, as to believe the chastisement I have bestowed on him will at
all endanger his life, which is in much greater jeopardy from the hands
of the common executioner. For, notwithstanding this accident, I am
determined to prosecute the rascal for robbery with the utmost severity
of the law; and, that I may have a sufficient fund left for that
prosecution, I shall not at present throw away one farthing in
unnecessary expense, but insist upon being conveyed to prison without
farther delay.”

This declaration was equally unwelcome to the bailiff, surgeon, and
solicitor, who, upon the supposition that the Count was a person of
fortune, and would rather part with an immense sum than incur the
ignominy of a jail, or involve himself in another disgraceful lawsuit,
had resolved to fleece him to the utmost of their power. But, now the
attorney finding him determined to set his fate at defiance, and to
retort upon him a prosecution, which he had no design to undergo, began
to repent heartily of the provocation he had given, and to think
seriously on some method to overcome the obstinacy of the incensed
foreigner. With this view, while the bailiff conducted him to bed in
another apartment, he desired the catchpole to act the part of mediator
between him and the Count, and furnished him with proper instructions
for that purpose. Accordingly the landlord, on his return, told Fathom
that he was sure the solicitor was not a man for this world; for that
he had left him deprived of his senses, and praying to God with great
devotion for mercy to his murderer. He then exhorted him, with many
protestations of friendship, to compromise the unhappy affair by
exchanging releases with the attorney before his delirium should be
known, otherwise he would bring himself into a most dangerous
premunire, whether the plaintiff should die of his wound, or live to
prosecute him for assault. “And with regard to your charge of robbery
against him,” said he, “as it is no more than a base suspicion,
unsupported by the least shadow of evidence, the bill would be thrown
out, and then he might sue you for damages. I therefore, out of pure
friendship and good-nature, advise you to compromise the affair, and,
if you think proper, will endeavour to bring about a mutual release.”

Our hero, whose passion was by this time pretty well cooled, saw reason
for assenting to the proposal; upon which the deed was immediately
executed, the mediator’s bill was discharged, and Ferdinand conveyed in
an hackney-coach to prison, after he had empowered his own landlord to
discharge his servants, and convert his effects into ready money. Thus,
he saw himself, in the course of a few hours, deprived of his
reputation, rank, liberty, and friends; and his fortune reduced from
two thousand pounds to something less than two hundred, fifty of which
he had carried to jail in his pocket.

END OF VOL. I.




 THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM

by Tobias Smollett


Titlepage

COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS




 PART II.


With the Author’s Preface, and an Introduction by G. H. Maynadier,
Ph.D. Department of English, Harvard University.




THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM




CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

OUR ADVENTURER IS MADE ACQUAINTED WITH A NEW SCENE OF LIFE.


Just as he entered these mansions of misery, his ears were invaded with
a hoarse and dreadful voice, exclaiming, “You, Bess Beetle, score a
couple of fresh eggs, a pennyworth of butter, and half a pint of
mountain to the king; and stop credit till the bill is paid:—He is now
debtor for fifteen shillings and sixpence, and d—n me if I trust him
one farthing more, if he was the best king in Christendom. And, d’ye
hear, send Ragged-head with five pounds of potatoes for Major
Macleaver’s supper, and let him have what drink he wants; the fat widow
gentlewoman from Pimlico has promised to quit his score. Sir Mungo
Barebones may have some hasty pudding and small beer, though I don’t
expect to see his coin, no more than to receive the eighteen pence I
laid out for a pair of breeches to his backside—what then? he’s a quiet
sort of a body, and a great scholar, and it was a scandal to the place
to see him going about in that naked condition. As for the mad
Frenchman with the beard, if you give him so much as a cheese-paring,
you b—ch, I’ll send you back to the hole, among your old companions; an
impudent dog! I’ll teach him to draw his sword upon the governor of an
English county jail. What! I suppose he thought he had to do with a
French hang-tang-dang, rabbit him! he shall eat his white feather,
before I give him credit for a morsel of bread.”

Although our adventurer was very little disposed, at this juncture, to
make observations foreign to his own affairs, he could not help taking
notice of these extraordinary injunctions; especially those concerning
the person who was entitled king, whom, however, he supposed to be some
prisoner elected as the magistrate by the joint suffrage of his
fellows. Having taken possession of his chamber, which he rented at
five shillings a week, and being ill at ease in his own thoughts, he
forthwith secured his door, undressed, and went to bed, in which,
though it was none of the most elegant or inviting couches, he enjoyed
profound repose after the accumulated fatigues and mortifications of
the day. Next morning, after breakfast, the keeper entered his
apartment, and gave him to understand, that the gentlemen under his
care, having heard of the Count’s arrival, had deputed one of their
number to wait upon him with the compliments of condolence suitable to
the occasion, and invite him to become a member of their society. Our
hero could not politely dispense with this instance of civility, and
their ambassador being instantly introduced by the name of Captain
Minikin, saluted him with great solemnity.

This was a person equally remarkable for his extraordinary figure and
address; his age seemed to border upon forty, his stature amounted to
five feet, his visage was long, meagre, and weather-beaten, and his
aspect, though not quite rueful, exhibited a certain formality, which
was the result of care and conscious importance. He was very little
encumbered with flesh and blood; yet what body he had was well
proportioned, his limbs were elegantly turned, and by his carriage he
was well entitled to that compliment which we pay to any person when we
say he has very much the air of a gentleman. There was also an evident
singularity in his dress, which, though intended as an improvement,
appeared to be an extravagant exaggeration of the mode, and at once
evinced him an original to the discerning eyes of our adventurer, who
received him with his usual complaisance, and made a very eloquent
acknowledgment of the honour and satisfaction he received from the
visit of the representative, and the hospitality of his constituents.
The captain’s peculiarities were not confined to his external
appearance; for his voice resembled the sound of a bassoon, or the
aggregate hum of a whole bee-hive, and his discourse was almost nothing
else than a series of quotations from the English poets, interlarded
with French phrases, which he retained for their significance, on the
recommendation of his friends, being himself unacquainted with that or
any other outlandish tongue.

Fathom, finding this gentleman of a very communicative disposition,
thought he could not have a fairer opportunity of learning the history
of his fellow-prisoners; and, turning the conversation on that subject,
was not disappointed in his expectation. “I don’t doubt, sir,” said he,
with the utmost solemnity of declamation, “but you look with horror
upon every object that surrounds you in this uncomfortable place; but,
nevertheless, here are some, who, as my friend Shakespeare has it, have
seen better days, and have with holy bell been knolled to church; and
sat at good men’s feasts, and wiped their eyes of drops that sacred
pity hath engendered. You must know, sir, that, exclusive of the
canaille, or the profanum vulgus, as they are styled by Horace, there
are several small communities in the jail, consisting of people who are
attracted by the manners and dispositions of each other; for this
place, sir, is quite a microcosm, and as the great world, so is this, a
stage, and all the men and women merely players. For my own part, sir,
I have always made it a maxim to associate with the best of company I
can find. Not that I pretend to boast of my family or extraction;
because, you know, as the poet says, Vix ea nostra voco. My father,
’tis true, was a man that piqued himself upon his pedigree, as well as
upon his politesse and personal merit; for he had been a very old
officer in the army, and I myself may say I was born with a spontoon in
my hand. Sir, I have had the honour to serve his Majesty these twenty
years, and have been bandied about in the course of duty through all
the British plantations, and you see the recompense of all my service.
But this is a disagreeable subject, and therefore I shall waive it;
however, as Butler observes:

My only comfort is, that now
My dubbolt fortune is so low,
That either it must quickly end,
Or turn about again and mend.


“And now, to return from this digression, you will perhaps be surprised
to hear that the head or chairman of our club is really a sovereign
prince; no less, I’ll assure you, than the celebrated Theodore king of
Corsica, who lies in prison for a debt of a few hundred pounds. Heu!
quantum mutatus ab illo. It is not my business to censure the conduct
of my superiors; but I always speak my mind in a cavalier manner, and
as, according to the Spectator, talking to a friend is no more than
thinking aloud, entre nous, his Corsican majesty has been scurvily
treated by a certain administration. Be that as it will, he is a
personage of a very portly appearance, and is quite master of the
bienseance. Besides, they will find it their interest to have recourse
again to his alliance; and in that case some of us may expect to profit
by his restoration. But few words are best.

“He that maintains the second rank in our assembly is one Major
Macleaver, an Irish gentleman, who has served abroad; a soldier of
fortune, sir, a man of unquestionable honour and courage, but a little
overbearing, in consequence of his knowledge and experience. He is a
person of good address,—to be sure, and quite free of the mauvaise
honte, and he may have seen a good deal of service. But what then?
other people may be as good as he, though they have not had such
opportunities; if he speaks five or six languages, he does not pretend
to any taste in the liberal arts, which are the criterion of an
accomplished gentleman.

“The next is Sir Mungo Barebones, the representative of a very ancient
family in the north; his affairs are very much deranged, but he is a
gentleman of great probity and learning, and at present engaged in a
very grand scheme, which, if he can bring it to bear, will render him
famous to all posterity; no less than the conversion of the Jews and
the Gentiles. The project, I own, looks chimerical to one who has not
conversed with the author; but, in my opinion, he has clearly
demonstrated, from an anagrammatical analysis of a certain Hebrew word,
that his present Majesty, whom God preserve, is the person pointed at
in Scripture as the temporal Messiah of the Jews; and, if he could once
raise by subscription such a trifling sum as twelve hundred thousand
pounds, I make no doubt but he would accomplish his aim, vast and
romantic as it seems to be.

“Besides these, we have another messmate, who is a French chevalier, an
odd sort of a man, a kind of Lazarillo de Tormes, a caricatura; he
wears a long beard, pretends to be a great poet, and makes a d—-ed
fracas with his verses. The king has been obliged to exert his
authority over him more than once, by ordering him into close
confinement, for which he was so rash as to send his majesty a
challenge; but he afterwards made his submission, and was again taken
into favour. The truth is, I believe his brain is a little disordered,
and, he being a stranger, we overlook his extravagancies.

“Sir, we shall think ourselves happy in your accession to our society.
You will be under no sort of restraint; for, though we dine at one
table, every individual calls and pays for his own mess. Our
conversation, such as it is, will not, I hope, be disagreeable; and
though we have not opportunities of breathing the pure Arcadian air,
and cannot, ‘under the shade of melancholy boughs, lose and neglect the
creeping hours of time,’ we may enjoy ourselves over a glass of punch
or a dish of tea. Nor are we destitute of friends, who visit us in
these shades of distress. The major has a numerous acquaintance of both
sexes; among others, a first cousin of good fortune, who, with her
daughters, often cheer our solitude; she is a very sensible ladylike
gentlewoman, and the young ladies have a certain degagee air, that
plainly shows they have seen the best company. Besides, I will venture
to recommend Mrs. Minikin as a woman of tolerable breeding and
capacity, who, I hope, will not be found altogether deficient in the
accomplishments of the sex. So that we find means to make little
parties, in which the time glides away insensibly. Then I have a small
collection of books which are at your service. You may amuse yourself
with Shakespeare, or Milton, or Don Quixote, or any of our modern
authors that are worth reading, such as the Adventures of Loveill, Lady
Frail, George Edwards, Joe Thompson, Bampfylde Moore Carew, Young
Scarron, and Miss Betsy Thoughtless; and if you have a taste for
drawing, I can entertain you with a parcel of prints by the best
masters.”

A man of our hero’s politeness could not help expressing himself in the
warmest terms of gratitude for this courteous declaration. He thanked
the captain in particular for his obliging offers, and begged he would
be so good as to present his respects to the society, of which he
longed to be a member. It was determined, therefore, that Minikin
should return in an hour, when the Count would be dressed, in order to
conduct him into the presence of his majesty; and he had already taken
his leave for the present, when all of a sudden he came back, and
taking hold of a waistcoat that lay upon a chair, “Sir,” said he, “give
me leave to look at that fringe; I think it is the most elegant
knitting I ever saw. But pray, sir, are not these quite out of fashion?
I thought plain silk, such as this that I wear, had been the mode, with
the pockets very low.” Before Fathom had time to make any sort of
reply, he took notice of his hat and pumps; the first of which, he
said, was too narrow in the brims, and the last an inch too low in the
heels. Indeed, they formed a remarkable contrast with his own; for,
exclusive of the fashion of the cock, which resembled the form of a
Roman galley, the brim of his hat, if properly spread, would have
projected a shade sufficient to shelter a whole file of musketeers from
the heat of a summer’s sun; and the heels of his shoes were so high as
to raise his feet three inches at least from the surface of the earth.

Having made these observations, for the credit of his taste, he
retired, and returning at the time appointed, accompanied Ferdinand to
the apartment of the king, at the doors of which their ears were
invaded with a strange sound, being that of a human voice imitating the
noise of a drum. The captain, hearing this alarm, made a full stop,
and, giving the Count to understand that his majesty was busy, begged
he would not take it amiss, if the introduction should be delayed for a
few moments. Fathom, curious to know the meaning of what he had heard,
applied to his guide for information, and learned that the king and the
major, whom he had nominated to the post of his general-in-chief, were
employed in landing troops upon the Genoese territory; that is, that
they were settling beforehand the manner of their disembarkation.

He then, by the direction of his conductor, reconnoitred them through
the keyhole, and perceived the sovereign and his minister sitting on
opposite sides of a deal board table, covered with a large chart or
map, upon which he saw a great number of mussel and oyster shells
ranged in a certain order, and, at a little distance, several regular
squares and columns made of cards cut in small pieces. The prince
himself, whose eyes were reinforced by spectacles, surveyed this
armament with great attention, while the general put the whole in
action, and conducted their motions by beat of drum. The mussel-shells,
according to Minikin’s explanation, represented the transports, the
oyster-shells were considered as the men-of-war that covered the troops
in landing, and the pieces of card exhibited the different bodies into
which the army was formed upon its disembarkation.

As an affair of such consequence could not be transacted without
opposition, they had provided divers ambuscades, consisting of the
enemy, whom they represented by grey peas; and accordingly General
Macleaver, perceiving the said grey peas marching along shore to attack
his forces before they could be drawn up in battalia, thus addressed
himself to the oyster-shells, in an audible voice:—“You men-of-war,
don’t you see the front of the enemy advancing, and the rest of the
detachment following out of sight? Arrah! the devil burn you, why don’t
you come ashore and open your batteries?” So saying, he pushed the
shells towards the breach, performed the cannonading with his voice,
the grey peas were soon put in confusion, the general was beat, the
cards marched forwards in order of battle, and the enemy having
retreated with great precipitation, they took possession of their
ground without farther difficulty.




CHAPTER FORTY

HE CONTEMPLATES MAJESTY AND ITS SATELLITES IN ECLIPSE.


This expedition being happily finished, General Macleaver put the whole
army, navy, transports, and scene of action into a canvas bag, the
prince unsaddled his nose, and Captain Minikin being admitted, our hero
was introduced in form. Very gracious was the reception he met with
from his majesty, who, with a most princely demeanour, welcomed him to
court, and even seated him on his right hand, in token of particular
regard. True it is, this presence-chamber was not so superb, nor the
appearance of the king so magnificent, as to render such an honour
intoxicating to any person of our hero’s coolness and discretion. In
lieu of tapestry, the apartment was hung with halfpenny ballads, a
truckle-bed without curtains supplied the place of a canopy, and
instead of a crown his majesty wore a woollen night-cap. Yet, in spite
of these disadvantages, there was an air of dignity in his deportment,
and a nice physiognomist would have perceived something majestic in the
features of his countenance.

He was certainly a personage of very prepossessing mien; his manners
were engaging, his conversation agreeable, and any man whose heart was
subject to the meltings of humanity would have deplored his distress,
and looked upon him as a most pathetic instance of that miserable
reverse to which all human grandeur is exposed. His fall was even
greater than that of Belisarius, who, after having obtained many
glorious victories over the enemies of his country, is said to have
been reduced to such extremity of indigence, that, in his old age, when
he was deprived of his eyesight, he sat upon the highway like a common
mendicant, imploring the charity of passengers in the piteous
exclamation of Date obolum Belisario; that is, “Spare a farthing to
your poor old soldier Belisarius.” I say, this general’s disgrace was
not so remarkable as that of Theodore, because he was the servant of
Justinian, consequently his fortune depended upon the nod of that
emperor; whereas the other actually possessed the throne of sovereignty
by the best of all titles, namely, the unanimous election of the people
over whom he reigned; and attracted the eyes of all Europe, by the
efforts he made in breaking the bands of oppression, and vindicating
that liberty which is the birthright of man.

The English of former days, alike renowned for generosity and valour,
treated those hostile princes, whose fate it was to wear their chains,
with such delicacy of benevolence, as even dispelled the horrors of
captivity; but their posterity of this refined age feel no compunction
at seeing an unfortunate monarch, their former friend, ally, and
partisan, languish amidst the miseries of a loathsome jail, for a
paltry debt contracted in their own service. But, moralising apart, our
hero had not long conversed with this extraordinary debtor, who in his
present condition assumed no other title than that of Baron, than he
perceived in him a spirit of Quixotism, which all his experience,
together with the vicissitudes of his fortune, had not been able to
overcome. Not that his ideas soared to such a pitch of extravagant hope
as that which took possession of his messmates, who frequently
quarrelled one with another about the degrees of favour to which they
should be entitled after the king’s restoration; but he firmly believed
that affairs would speedily take such a turn in Italy, as would point
out to the English court the expediency of employing him again; and his
persuasion seemed to support him against every species of poverty and
mortification.

While they were busy in trimming the balance of power on the other side
of the Alps, their deliberations were interrupted by the arrival of a
scullion, who came to receive their orders touching the bill of fare
for dinner, and his majesty found much more difficulty in settling this
important concern, than in compromising all the differences between the
Emperor and the Queen of Spain. At length, however, General Macleaver
undertook the office of purveyor for his prince; Captain Minikin
insisted upon treating the Count; and in a little time the table was
covered with a cloth, which, for the sake of my delicate readers, I
will not attempt to describe.

At this period they were joined by Sir Mungo Barebones, who, having
found means to purchase a couple of mutton chops, had cooked a mess of
broth, which he now brought in a saucepan to the general rendezvous.
This was the most remarkable object which had hitherto presented itself
to the eyes of Fathom. Being naturally of a meagre habit, he was, by
indigence and hard study, wore almost to the bone, and so bended
towards the earth, that in walking his body described at least 150
degrees of a circle. The want of stockings and shoes he supplied with a
jockey straight boot and an half jack. His thighs and middle were cased
in a monstrous pair of brown trunk breeches, which the keeper bought
for his use from the executor of a Dutch seaman who had lately died in
the jail. His shirt retained no signs of its original colour, his body
was shrouded in an old greasy tattered plaid nightgown; a blue and
white handkerchief surrounded his head, and his looks betokened that
immense load of care which he had voluntarily incurred for the eternal
salvation of sinners. Yet this figure, uncouth as it was, made his
compliments to our adventurer in terms of the most elegant address,
and, in the course of conversation, disclosed a great fund of valuable
knowledge. He had appeared in the great world, and borne divers offices
of dignity and trust with universal applause. His courage was
undoubted, his morals were unimpeached, and his person held in great
veneration and esteem; when his evil genius engaged him in the study of
Hebrew, and the mysteries of the Jewish religion, which fairly
disordered his brain, and rendered him incapable of managing his
temporal affairs. When he ought to have been employed in the functions
of his post, he was always wrapt in visionary conferences with Moses on
the Mount; rather than regulate the economy of his household, he chose
to exert his endeavours in settling the precise meaning of the word
Elohim; and having discovered that now the period was come, when the
Jews and Gentiles would be converted, he postponed every other
consideration, in order to facilitate that great and glorious event.

By this time Ferdinand had seen every member of the club, except the
French chevalier, who seemed to be quite neglected by the society; for
his name was not once mentioned during this communication, and they sat
down to dinner, without asking whether he was dead or alive. The king
regaled himself with a plate of ox-cheek; the major, who complained
that his appetite had forsaken him, amused himself with some forty hard
eggs, malaxed with salt butter; the knight indulged upon his soup and
bouilli, and the captain entertained our adventurer with a neck of veal
roasted with potatoes; but before Fathom could make use of his knife
and fork, he was summoned to the door, where he found the chevalier in
great agitation, his eyes sparkling like coals of fire.

Our hero was not a little surprised at this apparition, who, having
asked pardon for the freedom he had used, observed, that, understanding
the Count was a foreigner, he could not dispense with appealing to him
concerning an outrage he had suffered from the keeper, who, without any
regard to his rank or misfortunes, had been base enough to refuse him
credit for a few necessaries, until he could have a remittance from his
steward in France; he therefore conjured Count Fathom, as a stranger
and nobleman like himself, to be the messenger of defiance, which he
resolved to send to that brutal jailor, that, for the future, he might
learn to make proper distinctions in the exercise of his function.

Fathom, who had no inclination to offend this choleric Frenchman,
assured him that he might depend upon his friendship; and, in the
meantime, prevailed upon him to accept of a small supply, in
consequence of which he procured a pound of sausages, and joined the
rest of the company without delay; making a very suitable addition to
such an assemblage of rarities. Though his age did not exceed thirty
years, his beard, which was of a brindled hue, flowed down, like
Aaron’s, to his middle. Upon his legs he wore red stockings rolled up
over the joint of the knee, his breeches were of blue drab, with vellum
button-holes, and garters of gold lace, his waistcoat of scarlet, his
coat of rusty black cloth, his hair, twisted into a ramilie, hung down
to his rump, of the colour of jet, and his hat was adorned with a white
feather.

This original had formed many ingenious schemes to increase the glory
and grandeur of France, but was discouraged by Cardinal Fleury, who, in
all appearance, jealous of his great talents, not only rejected his
projects, but even sent him to prison, on pretence of being offended at
his impertinence. Perceiving that, like the prophet, he had no honour
in his own country, he no sooner obtained his release, than he retired
to England, where he was prompted by his philanthropy to propose an
expedient to our ministry, which would have saved a vast effusion of
blood and treasure; this was an agreement between the Queen of Hungary
and the late Emperor, to decide their pretensions by a single combat;
in which case he offered himself as the Bavarian champion; but in this
endeavour he also proved unsuccessful. Then turning his attention to
the delights of poetry, he became so enamoured of the muse, that he
neglected every other consideration, and she as usual gradually
conducted him to the author’s never-failing goal—a place of rest
appointed for all those sinners whom the profane love of poesy hath led
astray.




CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

ONE QUARREL IS COMPROMISED, AND ANOTHER DECIDED BY UNUSUAL ARMS.


Among other topics of conversation that were discussed at this genial
meeting, Sir Mungo’s scheme was brought upon the carpet by his majesty,
who was graciously pleased to ask how his subscription filled? To this
interrogation the knight answered, that he met with great opposition
from a spirit of levity and self-conceit, which seemed to prevail in
this generation, but that no difficulties should discourage him from
persevering in his duty; and he trusted in God, that, in a very little
time, he should be able to confute and overthrow the false philosophy
of the moderns, and to restore the writings of Moses to that
pre-eminence and veneration which is due to an inspired author. He
spoke of the immortal Newton with infinite contempt, and undertook to
extract from the Pentateuch a system of chronology which would
ascertain the progress of time since the fourth day of the creation to
the present hour, with such exactness, that not one vibration of a
pendulum should be lost; nay, he affirmed that the perfection of all
arts and sciences might be attained by studying these secret memoirs,
and that he himself did not despair of learning from them the art of
transmuting baser metals into gold.

The chevalier, though he did not pretend to contradict these
assertions, was too much attached to his own religion to acquiesce in
the knight’s project of converting the Jews and the Gentiles to the
Protestant heresy, which, he said, God Almighty would never suffer to
triumph over the interests of his own Holy Catholic Church. This
objection produced abundance of altercation between two very unequal
disputants; and the Frenchman, finding himself puzzled by the learning
of his antagonist, had recourse to the argumentum ad hominem, by laying
his hand upon his sword, and declaring that he was ready to lose the
last drop of his blood in opposition to such a damnable scheme.

Sir Mungo, though in all appearance reduced to the last stage of animal
existence, no sooner heard this epithet applied to his plan, than his
eyes gleamed like lightning, he sprung from his seat with the agility
of a grasshopper, and, darting himself out at the door like an arrow
from a bow, reappeared in a moment with a long rusty weapon, which
might have been shown among a collection of rarities as the sword of
Guy Earl of Warwick. This implement he brandished over the chevalier’s
head with the dexterity of an old prize-fighter, exclaiming, in the
French language, “Thou art a profane wretch marked out for the
vengeance of Heaven, whose unworthy minister I am, and here thou shalt
fall by the sword of the Lord and of Gideon.”

The chevalier, unterrified by this dreadful salutation, desired he
would accompany him to a more convenient place; and the world might
have been deprived of one or both these knights-errant, had not General
Macleaver, at the desire of his majesty, interposed, and found means to
bring matters to an accommodation.

In the afternoon the society was visited by the major’s cousin and her
daughters, who no sooner appeared than they were recognised by our
adventurer, and his acquaintance with them renewed in such a manner as
alarmed the delicacy of Captain Minikin, who in the evening repaired to
the Count’s apartment, and with a formal physiognomy, accosted him in
these words: “Sir, I beg pardon for this intrusion, but I come to
consult you about an affair in which my honour is concerned; and a
soldier without honour, you know, is no better than a body without a
soul. I have always admired that speech of Hotspur in the first part of
Henry the Fourth:

By Heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac’d moon;
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks—


“There is a boldness and ease in the expression, and the images are
very picturesque. But, without any further preamble, pray, sir, give me
leave to ask how long you have been acquainted with those ladies who
drank tea with us this afternoon. You’ll forgive the question, sir,
when I tell you that Major Macleaver introduced Mrs. Minikin to them as
to ladies of character, and, I don’t know how, sir, I have a sort of
presentiment that my wife has been imposed upon. Perhaps I may be
mistaken, and God grant I may. But there was a je ne sais quoi in their
behaviour to-day, which begins to alarm my suspicion. Sir, I have
nothing but my reputation to depend upon, and I hope you will excuse
me, when I earnestly beg to know what rank they maintain in life.”

Fathom, without minding the consequence, told him, with a simper, that
he knew them to be very good-natured ladies, who devoted themselves to
the happiness of mankind. This explanation had no sooner escaped from
his lips, than the captain’s face began to glow with indignation, his
eyes seemed bursting from their spheres, he swelled to twice his
natural dimensions, and, raising himself on his tiptoes, pronounced, in
a strain that emulated thunder, “Blood! sir, you seem to make very
light of the matter, but it is no joke to me, I’ll assure you, and
Macleaver shall see that I am not to be affronted with impunity. Sir, I
shall take it as a singular favour if you will be the bearer of a
billet to him, which I shall write in three words; nay, sir, you must
give me leave to insist upon it, as you are the only gentleman of our
mess whom I can intrust with an affair of this nature.”

Fathom, rather than run the risk of disobliging such a punctilious
warrior, after having in vain attempted to dissuade him from his
purpose, undertook to carry the challenge, which was immediately penned
in these words:

“SIR,
You have violated my honour in imposing upon Mrs. Minikin your
pretended cousins as ladies of virtue and reputation. I therefore
demand such satisfaction as a soldier ought to receive, and expect you
will adjust with my friend Count Fathom the terms upon which you shall
be met by the much injured


GOLIAH MINIKIN.”


This morceau being sealed and directed, was forthwith carried by our
adventurer to the lodgings of the major, who had by this time retired
to rest, but hearing the Count’s voice, he got up and opened the door
in cuerpo, to the astonishment of Ferdinand, who had never before seen
such an Herculean figure. He made an apology for receiving the Count in
his birthday suit, to which he said he was reduced by the heat of his
constitution, though he might have assigned a more adequate cause, by
owning that his shirt was in the hands of his washerwoman; then
shrouding himself in a blanket, desired to know what had procured him
the honour of such an extraordinary visit. He read the letter with
great composure, like a man accustomed to such intercourse; then
addressing himself to the bearer, “I will be after diverting the
gentleman,” said he, “in any manner he shall think proper; but, by
Jesus, this is no place for such amusements, because, as you well know,
my dear Count, if both should be killed by the chance of war, neither
of us will be able to escape, and after the breath is out of his body,
he will make but a sorry excuse to his family and friends. But that is
no concern of mine, and therefore I am ready to please him in his own
way.”

Fathom approved of his remarks, which he reinforced with sundry
considerations, to the same purpose, and begged the assistance of the
major’s advice, in finding some expedient to terminate the affair
without bloodshed, that no troublesome consequences might ensue either
to him or to his antagonist, who, in spite of this overstraining
formality, seemed to be a person of worth and good-nature. “With all my
heart,” said the generous Hibernian, “I have a great regard for the
little man, and my own character is not to seek at this time of day. I
have served a long apprenticeship to fighting, as this same carcase can
testify, and if he compels me to run him through the body, by my shoul,
I shall do it in a friendly manner.”

So saying, he threw aside the blanket, and displayed scars and seams
innumerable upon his body, which appeared like an old patched leathern
doublet. “I remember,” proceeded this champion, “when I was a slave at
Algiers, Murphy Macmorris and I happened to have some difference in the
bagnio, upon which he bade me turn out. ‘Arra, for what?’ said I; ‘here
are no weapons that a gentleman can use, and you would not be such a
negro as to box like an English carman.’ After he had puzzled himself
for some time, he proposed that we should retire into a corner, and
funk one another with brimstone, till one of us should give out.
Accordingly we crammed half a dozen tobacco pipes with sulphur, and,
setting foot to foot, began to smoke, and kept a constant fire, until
Macmorris dropped down; then I threw away my pipe, and taking poor
Murphy in my arms, ‘What, are you dead?’ said I; ‘if you are dead,
speak.’ ‘No, by Jesus!’ cried he, ‘I an’t dead, but I’m speechless.’ So
he owned I had obtained the victory, and we were as good friends as
ever. Now, if Mr. Minikin thinks proper to put the affair upon the same
issue, I will smoke a pipe of brimstone with him to-morrow morning, and
if I cry out first, I will be after asking pardon for this supposed
affront.”

Fathom could not help laughing at the proposal, to which, however, he
objected on account of Minikin’s delicate constitution, which might
suffer more detriment from breathing in an atmosphere of sulphur than
from the discharge of a pistol, or the thrust of a small sword. He
therefore suggested another expedient in lieu of the sulphur, namely,
the gum called assafatida, which, though abundantly nauseous, could
have no effect upon the infirm texture of the lieutenant’s lungs. This
hint being relished by the major, our adventurer returned to his
principal, and having repeated the other’s arguments against the use of
mortal instruments, described the succedaneum which he had concerted
with Macleaver. The captain at first believed the scheme was calculated
for subjecting him to the ridicule of his fellow-prisoners, and began
to storm with great violence; but, by the assurances and address of
Fathom, he was at length reconciled to the plan, and preparations were
made on each side for this duel, which was actually smoked next day,
about noon, in a small closet, detached from the challenger’s
apartment, and within hearing of his majesty, and all his court,
assembled as witnesses and umpires of the contest.

The combatants, being locked up together, began to ply their engines
with great fury, and it was not long before Captain Minikin perceived
he had a manifest advantage over his antagonist. For his organs were
familiarised to the effluvia of this drug, which he had frequently used
in the course of an hypochondriac disorder; whereas Macleaver, who was
a stranger to all sorts of medicine, by his wry faces and attempts to
puke, expressed the utmost abhorrence of the smell that invaded his
nostrils. Nevertheless, resolved to hold out to the last extremity, he
continued in action until the closet was filled with such an
intolerable vapour as discomposed the whole economy of his entrails,
and compelled him to disgorge his breakfast in the face of his
opponent, whose nerves were so disconcerted by this disagreeable and
unforeseen discharge, that he fell back into his chair in a swoon, and
the major bellowed aloud for assistance. The door being opened, he ran
directly to the window, to inhale the fresh air, while the captain,
recovering from his fit, complained of Macleaver’s unfair proceeding,
and demanded justice of the arbitrators, who decided in his favour; and
the major being prevailed upon to ask pardon for having introduced Mrs.
Minikin to women of rotten reputation, the parties were reconciled to
each other, and peace and concord re-established in the mess.

Fathom acquired universal applause for his discreet and humane conduct
upon this occasion; and that same afternoon had an opportunity of
seeing the lady in whose cause he had exerted himself. He was presented
to her as the husband’s particular friend, and when she understood how
much she was indebted to his care and concern for the captain’s safety,
she treated him with uncommon marks of distinction; and he found her a
genteel, well-bred woman, not without a good deal of personal charms,
and a well-cultivated understanding.




CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

AN UNEXPECTED RENCONTRE, AND A HAPPY REVOLUTION IN THE AFFAIRS OF OUR
ADVENTURER.


As she did not lodge within the precincts of this garrison, she was one
day, after tea, conducted to the gate by the captain and the Count, and
just as they approached the turnkey’s lodge, our hero’s eyes were
struck with the apparition of his old companion Renaldo, son of his
benefactor and patron, the Count de Melvil. What were the emotions of
his soul, when he saw that young gentleman enter the prison, and
advance towards him, after having spoke to the jailor! He never doubted
that, being informed of his confinement, he was come to upbraid him
with his villany and ingratitude, and he in vain endeavoured to
recollect himself from that terror and guilty confusion which his
appearance had inspired; when the stranger, lifting up his eyes,
started back with signs of extreme amazement, and, after a considerable
pause, exclaimed, “Heaven and earth! Sure my eyes do not deceive me! is
not your name Fathom? It is, it must be my old friend and companion,
the loss of whom I have so long regretted!” With these words he ran
towards our adventurer, and, while he clasped him in his arms with all
the eagerness of affection, protested that this was one of the happiest
days he had ever seen.

Ferdinand, who, from this salutation, concluded himself still in
possession of Renaldo’s good opinion, was not deficient in expressions
of tenderness and joy; he returned his embraces with equal ardour, the
tears trickled down his cheeks, and that perturbation which proceeded
from conscious perfidy and fear, was mistaken by the unsuspecting
Hungarian for the sheer effects of love, gratitude, and surprise. These
first transports having subsided, they adjourned to the lodgings of
Fathom, who soon recollected his spirits and invention so well as to
amuse the other with a feigned tale of his having been taken by the
French, sent prisoner into Champagne, from whence he had written many
letters to Count Melvil and his son, of whom he could hear no tidings;
of his having contracted an intimacy with a young nobleman of France,
who died in the flower of his age, after having, in token of his
friendship, bequeathed to him a considerable legacy; by this he had
been enabled to visit the land of his forefathers in the character of a
gentleman, which he had supported with some figure, until he was
betrayed into a misfortune that exhausted his funds, and drove him to
the spot where he was now found. And he solemnly declared, that, far
from forgetting the obligation he owed to Count Melvil, or renouncing
the friendship of Renaldo, he had actually resolved to set out for
Germany on his return to the house of his patron in the beginning of
the week posterior to that in which he had been arrested.

Young Melvil, whose own heart had never known the instigations of
fraud, implicitly believed the story and protestations of Fathom; and
though he would not justify that part of his conduct by which the term
of his good fortune was abridged, he could not help excusing an
indiscretion into which he had been hurried by the precipitancy of
youth, and the allurements of an artful woman. Nay, with the utmost
warmth of friendship, he undertook to wait upon Trapwell, and endeavour
to soften him into some reasonable terms of composition.

Fathom seemed to be quite overwhelmed with a deep sense of all this
goodness, and affected the most eager impatience to know the
particulars of Renaldo’s fate, since their unhappy separation, more
especially his errand to this uncomfortable place, which he should
henceforth revere as the providential scene of their reunion. Nor did
he forget to inquire, in the most affectionate and dutiful manner,
about the situation of his noble parents and amiable sister.

At mention of these names, Renaldo, fetching a deep sigh, “Alas! my
friend,” said he, “the Count is no more; and, what aggravates my
affliction for the loss of such a father, it was my misfortune to be
under his displeasure at the time of his death. Had I been present on
that melancholy occasion, so well I knew his generosity and paternal
tenderness, that, sure I am, he would in his last moments have forgiven
an only son, whose life had been a continual effort to render himself
worthy of such a parent, and whose crime was no other than an
honourable passion for the most meritorious of her sex. But I was
removed at a fatal distance from him, and doubtless my conduct must
have been invidiously misrepresented. Be that as it will, my mother has
again given her hand in wedlock to Count Trebasi; by whom I have the
mortification to be informed that I am totally excluded from my
father’s succession; and I learn from other quarters, that my sister is
barbarously treated by this inhuman father-in-law. Grant, Heaven, I may
soon have an opportunity of expostulating with the tyrant upon that
subject.”

So saying, his cheeks glowed, and his eyes lightened with resentment.
Then he thus proceeded: “My coming hither to-day was with a view to
visit a poor female relation, from whom I yesterday received a letter,
describing her most deplorable situation, and soliciting my assistance;
but the turnkey affirms that there is no such person in the jail, and I
was on my way to consult the keeper, when I was agreeably surprised
with the sight of my dear Fathom.”

Our adventurer having wiped from his eyes the tears which were produced
by the news of his worthy patron’s death, desired to know the name of
that afflicted prisoner, in whose behalf he interested himself so much,
and Renaldo produced the letter, subscribed, “Your unfortunate cousin,
Helen Melvil.” This pretended relation, after having explained the
degree of consanguinity which she and the Count stood in to each other,
and occasionally mentioned some anecdotes of the family in Scotland,
gave him to understand that she had married a merchant of London, who,
by repeated losses in trade, had been reduced to indigence, and
afterwards confined to prison, where he then lay a breathless corpse,
having left her in the utmost extremity of wretchedness and want, with
two young children in the smallpox, and an incurable cancer in one of
her own breasts. Indeed, the picture she drew was so moving, and her
expressions so sensibly pathetic, that no person, whose heart was not
altogether callous, could peruse it without emotion. Renaldo had sent
two guineas by the messenger, whom she had represented as a trusty
servant, whose fidelity had been proof against all the distress of her
mistress; and he was now arrived in order to reinforce his bounty.

Fathom, in the consciousness of his own practices, immediately
comprehended the scheme of this letter, and confidently assured him
that no such person resided in the prison or in any other place. And
when his friend applied for information to the keeper, these assurances
were confirmed; and that stern janitor told him he had been imposed
upon by a stale trick, which was often practised upon strangers by a
set of sharpers, who make it their business to pick up hints of
intelligence relating to private families, upon which they build such
superstructures of fraud and imposition.

However piqued the young Hungarian might be to find himself duped in
this manner, he rejoiced at the occasion which had thrown Fathom in his
way; and, after having made him a tender of his purse, took his leave,
on purpose to wait upon Trapwell, who was not quite so untractable as
an enraged cuckold commonly is; for, by this time, he had accomplished
the best part of his aim, which was to be divorced from his wife, and
was fully convinced that the defendant was no more than a needy
adventurer, who, in all probability, would be released by an act of
parliament for the benefit of insolvent debtors; in which case, he, the
plaintiff, would reap no solid advantage from his imprisonment.

He, therefore, listened to the remonstrances of the mediator, and,
after much canvassing, agreed to discharge the defendant, in
consideration of two hundred pounds, which were immediately paid by
Count Melvil, who, by this deduction, was reduced to somewhat less than
thirty.

Nevertheless, he cheerfully beggared himself in behalf of his friend,
for whose release he forthwith obtained an order; and, next day, our
adventurer, having bid a formal adieu to his fellows in distress, and,
in particular, to his majesty, for whose restoration his prayers were
preferred, he quitted the jail, and accompanied his deliverer, with all
the outward marks of unutterable gratitude and esteem.

Surely, if his heart had been made of penetrable stuff, it would have
been touched by the circumstances of this redemption; but had not his
soul been invincible to all such attacks, these memoirs would possibly
never have seen the light.

When they arrived at Renaldo’s lodgings, that young gentleman honoured
him with other proofs of confidence and friendship, by giving him a
circumstantial detail of all the adventures in which he had been
engaged after Fathom’s desertion from the imperial camp. He told him,
that, immediately after the war was finished, his father had pressed
him to a very advantageous match, with which he would have complied,
though his heart was not at all concerned, had not he been inflamed
with the desire of seeing the world before he could take any step
towards a settlement for life. That he had signified his sentiments on
this head to the Count, who opposed them with unusual obstinacy, as
productive of a delay which might be fatal to his proposal; for which
reason he had retired incognito from his family, and travelled through
sundry states and countries, in a disguise by which he eluded the
inquiries of his parents.

That, in the course of these peregrinations, he was captivated by the
irresistible charms of a young lady, on whose heart he had the good
fortune to make a tender impression. That their mutual love had
subjected both to many dangers and difficulties, during which they
suffered a cruel separation; after the torments of which, he had
happily found her in England, where she now lived entirely cut off from
her native country and connexions, and destitute of every other
resource but his honour, love, and protection. And, finally, that he
was determined to combat his own desires, how violent soever they might
be, until he should have made some suitable provision for the
consequences of a stricter union with the mistress of his soul, that he
might not, by a precipitate marriage, ruin the person whom he adored.

This end he proposed to attain, by an application to the court of
Vienna, which he did not doubt would have some regard to his own
service, and that of his father; and thither he resolved to repair,
with the first opportunity, now that he had found a friend with whom he
could intrust the inestimable jewel of his heart.

He likewise gave our hero to understand, that he had been eight months
in England, during which he had lived in a frugal manner, that he might
not unnecessarily exhaust the money he had been able to raise upon his
own credit; that, hitherto, he had been obliged to defer his departure
for Germany on account of his attendance upon the mother of his
mistress, who was lately dead of sorrow and chagrin; and that, since he
resided in London, he had often heard of the celebrated Count Fathom,
though he never imagined that his friend Ferdinand could be
distinguished by that appellation.




CHAPTER FORTY-THREE

FATHOM JUSTIFIES THE PROVERB, “WHAT’S BRED IN THE BONE WILL NEVER COME
OUT OF THE FLESH.”


Some circumstances of this conversation made a deep impression upon the
mind of our adventurer, who nevertheless concealed his emotions from
the knowledge of his friend, and was next day introduced to that hidden
treasure of which Renaldo had spoken with such rapture and adoration.
It was not without reason he had expatiated upon the personal
attractions of this young lady, whom, for the present, we shall call
Monimia, a name that implies her orphan situation. When she entered the
room, even Fathom, whose eyes had been sated with beauty, was struck
dumb with admiration, and could scarce recollect himself so far as to
perform the ceremony of his introduction.

She seemed to be about the age of eighteen. Her stature was tall; her
motion graceful. A knot of artificial flowers restrained the luxuriancy
of her fine black hair, that flowed in shining ringlets adown her snowy
neck. The contour of her face was oval; her forehead remarkably high;
her complexion clean and delicate, though not florid; and her eyes were
so piercing, as to strike the soul of every beholder. Yet, upon this
occasion, one half of their vivacity was eclipsed by a languishing air
of melancholy concern; which, while it in a manner sheathed the edge of
her beauty, added a most engaging sweetness to her looks. In short,
every feature was elegantly perfect; and the harmony of the whole
ravishing and delightful.

It was easy to perceive the mutual sentiments of the two lovers at
meeting, by the pleasure that sensibly diffused itself in the
countenances of both. Fathom was received by her as the intimate friend
of her admirer, whom she had often heard of in terms of the most
sincere affection; and the conversation was carried on in the Italian
language, because she was a foreigner who had not as yet made great
proficiency in the knowledge of the English tongue. Her understanding
was such as, instead of diminishing, reinforced the prepossession which
was inspired by her appearance; and if the sum-total of her charms
could not melt the heart, it at least excited the appetite of Fathom to
such a degree, that he gazed upon her with such violence of desire, as
had never transported him before; and he instantly began to harbour
thoughts, not only destructive to the peace of his generous patron, but
also to the prudential maxims he had adopted on his first entrance into
life.

We have already recorded divers instances of his conduct to prove that
there was an intemperance in his blood, which often interfered with his
caution; and although he had found means to render this heat sometimes
subservient to his interest, yet, in all probability, Heaven mingled
the ingredient in his constitution, on purpose to counteract his
consummate craft, defeat the villany of his intention, and at least
expose him to the justice of the law, and the contempt of his
fellow-creatures.

Stimulated as he was by the beauty of the incomparable Monimia, he
foresaw that the conquest of her heart would cost him a thousand times
more labour and address than all the victories he had ever achieved;
for, besides her superior understanding, her sentiments of honour,
virtue, gratitude, religion, and pride of birth, her heart was already
engaged by the tenderest ties of love and obligation, to a man whose
person and acquired accomplishments at least equalled his own; and
whose connexion with him was of such a nature as raised an almost
insurmountable bar to his design; because, with what face could he
commence rival to the person whose family had raised him from want and
servility, and whose own generosity had rescued him from the miseries
of a dreary gaol?

Notwithstanding these reflections, he would not lay aside an idea which
so agreeably flattered his imagination. He, like every other projector
in the same circumstances, was so partial to his own qualifications, as
to think the lady would soon perceive a difference between him and
Renaldo that could not fail to turn to his advantage in her opinion. He
depended a good deal on the levity and inconstancy of the sex; and did
not doubt that, in the course of their acquaintance, he should profit
by that languor which often creeps upon and flattens the intercourse of
lovers cloyed with the sight and conversation of each other.

This way of arguing was very natural to a man who had never known other
motives than those of sensuality and convenience; and perhaps, upon
these maxims, he might have succeeded with nine-tenths of the fair sex.
But, for once, he erred in his calculation; Monimia’s soul was perfect,
her virtue impregnable. His first approaches were, as usual, performed
by the method of insinuation, which succeeded so well, that in a few
days he actually acquired a very distinguished share of her favour and
esteem. To this he had been recommended, in the warmest strain of
exaggerating friendship, by her dear Renaldo; so that, placing the most
unreserved confidence in his honour and integrity, and being almost
quite destitute of acquaintance, she made no scruple of owning herself
pleased with his company and conversation; and therefore he was never
abridged in point of opportunity. She had too much discernment to
overlook his uncommon talents and agreeable address, and too much
susceptibility to observe them with indifference. She not only regarded
him as the confidant of her lover, but admired him as a person whose
attachment did honour to Count Melvil’s choice. She found his discourse
remarkably entertaining, his politeness dignified with an air of
uncommon sincerity, and she was ravished with his skill in music, an
art of which she was deeply enamoured.

While he thus ingratiated himself with the fair Monimia, Renaldo
rejoiced at their intimacy, being extremely happy in the thought of
having found a friend who could amuse and protect the dear creature in
his absence. That she might be the better prepared for the temporary
separation which he meditated, he began to be less frequent in his
visits, or rather to interrupt, by gradual intermissions, the constant
attendance he had bestowed upon her since her mother’s death. This
alteration she was enabled to bear by the assiduities of Fathom, when
she understood that her lover was indispensably employed in negotiating
a sum of money for the purposes of his intended voyage. This was really
the case; for, as the reader hath been already informed, the provision
he had made for that emergency was expended in behalf of our
adventurer; and the persons of whom he had borrowed it, far from
approving of the use to which it was put, and accommodating him with a
fresh supply, reproached him with his benevolence as an act of
dishonesty to them; and, instead of favouring this second application,
threatened to distress him for what he had already received. While he
endeavoured to surmount these difficulties, his small reversion was
quite exhausted, and he saw himself on the brink of wanting the common
necessaries of life.

There was no difficulty which he could not have encountered with
fortitude, had he alone been concerned. But his affection and regard
for Monimia were of such a delicate nature, that, far from being able
to bear the prospect of her wanting the least convenience, he could not
endure that she should suspect her situation cost him a moment’s
perplexity; because he foresaw it would wring her gentle heart with
unspeakable anguish and vexation. This, therefore, he endeavoured to
anticipate by expressions of confidence in the Emperor’s equity, and
frequent declarations touching the goodness and security of that credit
from which he derived his present subsistence.




CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR

ANECDOTES OF POVERTY, AND EXPERIMENTS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THOSE WHOM IT
MAY CONCERN.


His affairs being thus circumstanced, it is not to be supposed that he
passed his time in tranquillity. Every day ushered in new demands and
fresh anxiety; for though his economy was frugal, it could not be
supported without money; and now not only his funds were drained, but
also his private friends tired of relieving his domestic necessities;
nay, they began to relinquish his company, which formerly they had
coveted; and those who still favoured him with their company embittered
that favour with disagreeable advice, mingled with impertinent reproof.
They loudly exclaimed against the last instance of his friendship for
Fathom, as a piece of wrong-headed extravagance, which neither his
fortune could afford nor his conscience excuse; and alleged that such
specimens of generosity are vicious in any man, let his finances be
never so opulent, if he has any relations of his own who need his
assistance; but altogether scandalous, not to say unjust, in a person
who depends for his own support on the favour of his friends.

These expostulations did not even respect the beauteous, the
accomplished, the gentle-hearted, the orphan Monimia. Although they
owned her perfections, and did not deny that it would be highly
meritorious in any man of fortune to make her happy, they disapproved
of Renaldo’s attachment to the fair beggar, made light of that intimate
union of hearts which subsisted between the two lovers, and which no
human consideration could dissolve; and some among them, in the
consummation of their prudence, ventured to hint a proposal of
providing for her in the service of some lady of fashion.

Any reader of sensibility will easily conceive how these admonitions
were relished by a young gentleman whose pride was indomitable, whose
notions of honour were scrupulously rigid and romantic, whose temper
was warm, and whose love was intense. Every such suggestion was as a
dagger to his soul; and what rendered the torture more exquisite, he
lay under obligations to those very persons whose selfish and sordid
sentiments he disdained; so that he was restricted by gratitude from
giving vent to his indignation, and his forlorn circumstances would not
permit him to renounce their acquaintance. While he struggled with
these mortifications, his wants grew more and more importunate, and his
creditors became clamorous.

Fathom, to whom all his grievances were disclosed, lamented his hard
hap with all the demonstrations of sympathy which he could expect to
find in such a zealous adherent. He upbraided himself incessantly as
the cause of his patron’s distress; took God to witness that he would
rather have perished in gaol than have enjoyed his liberty, had he
known it would have cost his dearest friend and benefactor one-tenth
part of the anguish he now saw him suffer; and, in conclusion, the
fervency of his affection glowed to such a degree, that he offered to
beg, steal, or plunder on the highway, for Renaldo’s assistance.

Certain it is, he might have recollected a less disagreeable expedient
than any of these to alleviate the pangs of this unhappy lover; for, at
that very period he was possessed of money and moveables to the amount
of a much greater sum than that which was necessary to remove the
severest pangs of the Count’s misfortune. But, whether he did not
reflect upon this resource, or was willing to let Melvil be better
acquainted with adversity, which is the great school of life, I shall
leave the reader to determine. Yet, so far was he from supplying the
wants of the young Hungarian, that he did not scruple to receive a
share of the miserable pittance which that gentleman made shift to
extort from the complaisance of a few companions, whose countenance he
still enjoyed.

Renaldo’s life was now become a sacrifice to the most poignant
distress. Almost his whole time was engrossed by a double scheme,
comprehending his efforts to render his departure practicable, and his
expedients for raising the means of daily bread. With regard to the
first, he exerted himself among a set of merchants, some of whom knew
his family and expectations; and, for the last, he was fain to depend
upon the assistance of a few intimates, who were not in a condition to
furnish him with sums of consequence. These, however, gradually dropped
off, on pretence of friendly resentment for his indiscreet conduct; so
that he found himself naked and deserted by all his former companions,
except one gentleman, with whom he had lived in the most unreserved
correspondence, as with a person of the warmest friendship, and the
most unbounded benevolence; nay, he had actually experienced repeated
proofs of his generosity; and such were the Count’s sentiments of the
gratitude, love, and esteem, which were due to the author of these
obligations, that he would have willingly laid down his own life for
his interest or advantage. He had already been at different times
accommodated by this benefactor with occasional supplies, amounting in
the whole to about forty or fifty pounds; and so fearful was he of
taking any step by which he might forfeit the goodwill of this
gentleman, that he struggled with unparelleled difficulty and vexation,
before he could prevail upon himself to put his liberality to another
proof.

What maxims of delicacy will not the dire calls of necessity infringe!
Reduced to the alternative of applying once more to that beneficence
which had never failed him, or of seeing Monimia starve, he chose the
first, as of two evils the least, and intrusted Fathom with a letter
explaining the bitterness of his case. It was not without trepidation
that he received in the evening from his messenger an answer to this
billet; but what were his pangs when he learned the contents! The
gentleman, after having professed himself Melvil’s sincere well-wisher,
gave him to understand, that he was resolved for the future to detach
himself from every correspondence which would be inconvenient for him
to maintain; that he considered his intimacy with the Count in that
light; yet, nevertheless, if his distress was really as great as he had
described it, he would still contribute something towards his relief;
and accordingly had sent by the bearer five guineas for that purpose;
but desired him to take notice, that, in so doing, he laid himself
under some difficulty.

Renaldo’s grief and mortification at this disappointment were
unspeakable. He now saw demolished the last screen betwixt him and the
extremity of indigence and woe; he beheld the mistress of his soul
abandoned to the bleakest scenes of poverty and want; and he deeply
resented the lofty strain of the letter, by which he conceived himself
treated as a worthless spendthrift and importunate beggar. Though his
purse was exhausted to the last shilling; though he was surrounded with
necessities and demands, and knew not how to provide another meal for
his fair dependent, he, in opposition to all the suggestions and
eloquence of Fathom, despatched him with the money and another billet,
intimating, in the most respectful terms, that he approved of his
friend’s new-adopted maxim, which, for the future, he should always
take care to remember; and that he had sent back the last instance of
his bounty, as a proof how little he was disposed to incommode his
benefactor.

This letter, though sincerely meant, and written in a very serious
mood, the gentleman considered as an ungrateful piece of irony, and in
that opinion complained to several persons of the Count’s acquaintance,
who unanimously exclaimed against him as a sordid, unthankful, and
profligate knave, that abused and reviled those very people who had
generously befriended him, whenever they found it inconvenient to
nourish his extravagance with further supplies. Notwithstanding these
accumulated oppressions, he still persevered with fortitude in his
endeavours to disentangle himself from this maze of misery. To these he
was encouraged by a letter which about this time he received from his
sister, importing, that she had good reason to believe the real will of
her father had been suppressed for certain sinister views; and desiring
him to hasten his departure for Hungary, where he would still find some
friends who were both able and willing to support his cause. He had
some trinkets left; the pawnbroker’s shop was still open; and hitherto
he made shift to conceal from Monimia the extent of his affliction.

The money-broker whom he employed, after having amused him with a
variety of schemes, which served no other purpose than that of
protracting his own job, at length undertook to make him acquainted
with a set of monied men who had been very venturous in lending sums
upon personal security; he was therefore introduced to their club in
the most favourable manner, after the broker had endeavoured to
prepossess them separately, with magnificent ideas of his family and
fortune.—By means of this anticipation he was received with a manifest
relaxation of that severity which people of this class mingle in their
aspects to the world in general; and they even vied with each other in
their demonstrations of hospitality and respect; for every one in
particular looked upon him as a young heir, who would bleed freely, and
mortgage at cent. per cent.

Renaldo, buoyed up with these exterior civilities, began to flatter
himself with hopes of success, which, however, were soon checked by the
nature of the conversation; during which the chairman upbraided one of
the members in open club for having once lent forty pounds upon slight
security. The person accused alleged, in his own defence, that the
borrower was his own kinsman, whose funds he knew to be sufficient;
that he had granted his bond, and been at the expense of insuring his
life for the money; and, in conclusion, had discharged it to the day
with great punctuality. These allegations were not deemed exculpatory
by the rest of the assembly, who with one voice pronounced him guilty
of unwarrantable rashness and indiscretion, which, in time coming, must
undoubtedly operate to the prejudice of his character and credit.

This was a bitter declaration to the young Count, who nevertheless
endeavoured to improve the footing he had gained among them, by
courting their company, conforming to their manners, and attentively
listening to their discourse. When he had cultivated them with great
assiduity for the space of some weeks, dined at their houses upon
pressing invitations, and received repeated offers of service and
friendship, believing that things were now ripe for the purpose, he,
one day, at a tavern to which he had invited him to dinner, ventured to
disclose his situation to him whose countenance was the least
unpromising; and as he introduced the business with a proposal of
borrowing money, he perceived his eyes sparkle with a visible alacrity,
from which he drew a happy presage. But, alas! this was no more than a
transient gleam of sunshine, which was suddenly obumbrated by the
sequel of his explanation; insomuch, that, when the merchant understood
the nature of the security, his visage was involved in a most
disagreeable gloom, and his eyes distorted into a most hideous
obliquity of vision; indeed, he squinted so horribly, that Renaldo was
amazed and almost affrighted at his looks, until he perceived that this
distortion proceeded from concern for a silver tobacco box which he had
laid down by him on the table, after having filled his pipe. As the
youth proceeded to unfold his necessities, the other became gradually
alarmed for this utensil, to which he darted his eyes askance in this
preternatural direction, until he had slyly secured it in his pocket.

Having made this successful conveyance, he shifted his eyes alternately
from the young gentleman to the broker for a considerable pause, during
which he in silence reproached the last for introducing such a beggarly
varlet to his acquaintance; then taking the pipe from his mouth, “Sir,”
said he, addressing himself to the Count, “if I had all the inclination
in the world to comply with your proposal, it is really not in my
power. My correspondents abroad have remitted such a number of bad
bills of late, that all my running cash hath been exhausted in
supporting their credit. Mr. Ferret, sure I am, you was not ignorant of
my situation; and I’m not a little surprised that you should bring the
gentleman to me on business of this kind; but, as the wise man
observes, Bray a fool in a mortar, and he’ll never be wise.” So saying,
with a most emphatic glance directed to the broker, he rung the bell,
and called for the reckoning; when, finding that he was to be the guest
of Renaldo, he thanked him drily for his good cheer, and in an abrupt
manner took himself away.

Though baffled in this quarter, the young gentleman would not despair;
but forthwith employed Mr. Ferret in an application to another of the
society; who, after having heard the terms of his commission, desired
him to tell his principal, that he could do nothing without the
concurrence of his partner, who happened to be at that time in one of
our American plantations. A third being solicited, excused himself on
account of an oath which he had lately taken on the back of a
considerable loss. A fourth being tried, made answer, that it was not
in his way. And a fifth candidly owned, that he never lent money
without proper security.

Thus the forlorn Renaldo tried every experiment without success, and
now saw the last ray of hope extinguished. Well-nigh destitute of
present support, and encompassed with unrelenting duns, he was obliged
to keep within doors, and seek some comfort in the conversation of his
charming mistress, and his faithful friend; yet, even there, he
experienced the extremest rigour of adverse fate. Every rap at the door
alarmed him with the expectation of some noisy tradesman demanding
payment. When he endeavoured to amuse himself with drawing, some
unlucky feature of the occasional portrait recalled the image of an
obdurate creditor, and made him tremble at the work of his own hands.
When he fled for shelter to the flattering creation of fancy, some
abhorred idea always started up amidst the gay vision, and dissolved
the pleasing enchantment.—Even the seraphic voice of Monimia had no
longer power to compose the anxious tumults of his mind. Every song she
warbled, every tune she played, recalled to his remembrance some scene
of love and happiness elapsed; and overwhelmed his soul with the woful
comparison of past and present fate. He saw all that was amiable and
perfect in woman, all that he held most dear and sacred upon earth,
tottering on the brink of misery, without knowing the danger of her
situation, and found himself unable to prevent her fall, or even to
forewarn her of the peril; for as we have already observed, his soul
could not brook the thought of communicating the tidings of distress to
the tender-hearted Monimia.




CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

RENALDO’S DISTRESS DEEPENS, AND FATHOM’S PLOT THICKENS.


Such aggravated misfortune could not fail to affect his temper and
deportment. The continual efforts he made to conceal his vexation
produced a manifest distraction in his behaviour and discourse. He
began to be seized with horror at the sight of poor Monimia, whom he
therefore shunned as much as the circumstances of their correspondence
would allow; and every evening he went forth alone to some solitary
place, where he could, unperceived, give a loose to the transports of
his sorrow, and in silence meditate some means to lighten the burden of
his woe. His heart was sometimes so savaged with despair, which
represented mankind as his inveterate enemies, that he entertained
thoughts of denouncing war against the whole community, and supplying
his own wants with the spoils he should win. At other times he was
tempted with the desire of putting an end to his miseries and life
together. Yet these were but the transitory suggestions of temporary
madness, that soon yielded to the dictates of reason. From the
execution of the first he was restrained by his own notions of honour
and morality; and, from using the other expedient, he was deterred by
his love for Monimia, together with the motives of philosophy and
religion.

While in this manner he secretly nursed the worm of grief that preyed
upon his vitals, the alteration in his countenance and conduct did not
escape the eyes of that discerning young lady. She was alarmed at the
change, yet afraid to inquire into the source of it; for, being
ignorant of his distress, she could impute it to no cause in which her
happiness was not deeply interested. She had observed his strained
complaisance and extraordinary emotion. She had detected him in
repeated attempts to avoid her company, and taken notice of his regular
excursions in the dark. These were alarming symptoms to a lover of her
delicacy and pride. She strove in vain to put the most favourable
construction on what she saw; and, finally, imputed the effects of his
despondence to the alienation of his heart. Made miserable beyond
expression by these suspicions, she imparted them to Fathom, who, by
this time, was in full possession of her confidence and esteem, and
implored his advice touching her conduct in such a nice conjuncture.

This artful politician, who rejoiced at the effect of her penetration,
no sooner heard himself questioned on the subject, than he gave tokens
of surprise and confusion, signifying his concern to find she had
discovered what, for the honour of his friend, he wished had never come
to light. His behaviour on this occasion confirmed her fatal
conjecture; and she conjured him, in the most pathetic manner, to tell
her if he thought Renaldo’s heart had contracted any new engagement. At
this question, he started with signs of extreme agitation, and stifling
an artificial sigh, “Sure, madam,” said he, “you cannot doubt the
Count’s constancy—I am confident—he is certainly—I protest, madam, I am
so shocked.”

Here he made a full pause, as if the conflict between his integrity and
his friendship would not allow him to proceed, and summoned the
moisture into either eye—“Then are my doubts removed,” cried the
afflicted Monimia; “I see your candour in the midst of your attachment
to Renaldo; and will no longer torment you with impertinent
interrogations and vain complaints.” With these words, a flood of tears
gushed from her enchanting eyes, and she instantly withdrew into her
own apartment, where she indulged her sorrow to excess. Nor was her
grief unanimated with resentment. She was by birth, nature, and
education inspired with that dignity of pride which ennobles the human
heart; and this, by the circumstance of her present dependence, was
rendered extremely jealous and susceptible; insomuch that she could not
brook the least shadow of indifference, much less an injury of such a
nature, from the man whom she had honoured with her affections, and for
whom she had disobliged and deserted her family and friends.

Though her love was so unalterably fixed on this unhappy youth, that,
without the continuation of reciprocal regard, her life would have
become an unsupportable burden, even amidst all the splendour of
affluence and pomp; and although she foresaw, that, when his protection
should cease, she must be left a wretched orphan in a foreign land,
exposed to all the miseries of want; yet, such was the loftiness of her
displeasure, that she disdained to complain, or even demand an
explanation from the supposed author of her wrongs.

While she continued undetermined in her purpose, and fluctuating on
this sea of torture, Fathom, believing that now was the season for
working upon her passions, while they were all in commotion, became, if
possible, more assiduous than ever about the fair mourner, modelled his
features into a melancholy cast, pretended to share her distress with
the most emphatic sympathy, and endeavoured to keep her resentment
glowing by cunning insinuations, which, though apparently designed to
apologise for his friend, served only to aggravate the guilt of his
perfidy and dishonour. This pretext of friendly concern is the most
effectual vehicle for the conveyance of malice and slander; and a man’s
reputation is never so mortally stabbed, as when the assassin begins
with the preamble of, “For my own part, I can safely say that no man
upon earth has a greater regard for him than I have; and it is with the
utmost anguish and concern that I see him misbehave in such a manner.”
Then he proceeds to mangle his character, and the good-natured hearers,
concluding he is even blacker than he is represented, on the
supposition that the most atrocious circumstances are softened or
suppressed by the tenderness or friendship of the accuser, exclaim,
“Good lack! what a wretch he must be, when his best friends will no
longer attempt to defend him!” Nay, sometimes these well-wishers
undertake his defence, and treacherously betray the cause they have
espoused, by omitting the reasons that may be urged in his vindication.

Both these methods were practised by the wily Ferdinand, according to
the predominant passion of Monimia. When her indignation prevailed, he
expatiated upon his love and sincere regard for Renaldo, which, he
said, had grown up from the cradle, to such a degree of fervour, that
he would willingly part with life for his advantage. He shed tears for
his apostasy; but every drop made an indelible stain upon his
character; and, in the bitterness of his grief, swore, notwithstanding
his fondness for Renaldo, which had become a part of his constitution,
that the young Hungarian deserved the most infamous destiny for having
injured such perfection. At other times, when he found her melted into
silent sorrow, he affected to excuse the conduct of his friend. He
informed her, that the young gentleman’s temper had been uneven from
his infancy; that frailty was natural to man; that he might in time be
reclaimed by self-conviction; he even hinted, that she might have
probably ascribed to inconstancy, what was really the effect of some
chagrin which he industriously concealed from his participation. But,
when he found her disposed to listen to this last suggestion, he
destroyed the force of it, by recollecting the circumstances of his
nocturnal rambles, which, he owned, would admit of no favourable
construction.

By these means he blew the coals of her jealousy, and enhanced the
value of his own character at the same time; for she looked upon him as
a mirror of faith and integrity, and the mind being overcharged with
woe, naturally seeks some confidant, upon whose sympathy it can repose
itself. Indeed, his great aim was to make himself necessary to her
affliction, and settle a gossiping correspondence, in the familiarity
of which he hoped his purpose would certainly be answered.

Yet the exertion of these talents was not limited to her alone. While
he laid these trains for the hapless young lady, he was preparing
snares of another kind for her unsuspecting lover, who, for the
completion of his misery, about this time began to perceive marks of
disquiet and displeasure in the countenance and deportment of his
adored Monimia. For that young lady, in the midst of her grief,
remembered her origin, and over her vexation affected to throw a veil
of tranquillity, which served only to give an air of disgust to her
internal disturbance.

Renaldo, whose patience and philosophy were barely sufficient to bear
the load of his other evils, would have been quite overwhelmed with the
additional burden of Monimia’s woe, if it had not assumed this
appearance of disesteem, which, as he knew he had not deserved it,
brought his resentment to his assistance. Yet this was but a wretched
cordial to support him against the baleful reflections that assaulted
him from every quarter; it operated like those desperate remedies,
which, while they stimulate exhausted nature, help to destroy the very
fundamentals of the constitution. He reviewed his own conduct with the
utmost severity, and could not recollect one circumstance which could
justly offend the idol of his soul. The more blameless he appeared to
himself in this examination, the less excusable did her behaviour
appear. He tasked his penetration to discover the cause of this
alteration; he burned with impatience to know it; his discernment
failed him, and he was afraid, though he knew not why, to demand an
explanation. His thoughts were so circumstanced, that he durst not even
unbosom himself to Fathom, though his own virtue and friendship
resisted those sentiments that began to intrude upon his mind, with
suggestions to the prejudice of our adventurer’s fidelity.

Nevertheless, unable to endure the torments of such interesting
suspense, he at length made an effort to expostulate with the fair
orphan; and in an abrupt address, the effect of his fear and confusion,
begged to know if he had inadvertently done anything to incur her
displeasure. Monimia, hearing herself bluntly accosted in this unusual
strain, after repeated instances of his reserve and supposed
inconstancy, considered the question as a fresh insult, and, summoning
her whole pride to her assistance, replied, with affected tranquillity,
or rather with an air of scorn, that she had no title to judge, neither
did she pretend to condemn his conduct. This answer, so wide of that
tenderness and concern which had hitherto manifested itself in the
disposition of his amiable mistress, deprived him of all power to carry
on the conversation, and he retired with a low bow, fully convinced of
his having irretrievably lost the place he had possessed in her
affection; for, to his imagination, warped and blinded by his
misfortunes, her demeanour seemed fraught, not with a transient gleam
of anger, which a respectful lover would soon have appeased, but with
that contempt and indifference which denote a total absence of
affection and esteem. She, on the other hand, misconstrued his sudden
retreat; and now they beheld the actions of each other through the
false medium of prejudice and resentment. To such fatal
misunderstandings the peace and happiness of whole families often fall
a sacrifice.




CHAPTER FORTY-SIX

OUR ADVENTURER BECOMES ABSOLUTE IN HIS POWER OVER THE PASSIONS OF HIS
FRIEND, AND EFFECTS ONE HALF OF HIS AIM.


Influenced by this dire mistake, the breast of those unhappy lovers
began to be invaded with the horrors of jealousy. The tender-hearted
Monimia endeavoured to devour her griefs in silence; she in secret
bemoaned her forlorn fate without ceasing; her tears flowed without
intermission from night to morn, and from morn to night. She sought not
to know the object for which she was forsaken; she meant not to upbraid
her undoer; her aim was to find a sequestered corner, in which she
could indulge her sorrow; where she could brood over the melancholy
remembrance of her former felicity; where she could recollect those
happy scenes she had enjoyed under the wings of her indulgent parents,
when her whole life was a revolution of pleasures, and she was
surrounded with affluence, pomp, and admiration; where she could,
unmolested, dwell upon the wretched comparison between her past and
present condition, and paint every circumstance of her misery in the
most aggravating colours, that they might make the deeper impression
upon her mind, and the more speedily contribute to that dissolution for
which she ardently wished, as a total release from woe.

Amidst these pinings, she began to loathe all sustenance; her cheeks
grew wan, her bright eyes lost their splendour, the roses vanished from
her lips, and her delicate limbs could hardly support their burden; in
a word, her sole consolation was limited to the prospect of depositing
her sorrows in the grave; and her only wish was to procure a retreat in
which she might wait with resignation for that happy period. Yet this
melancholy comfort she could not obtain without the advice and
mediation of Fathom, whom she therefore still continued to see and
consult. While these consultations were held, Renaldo’s bosom was
ravaged with tempests of rage and distraction. He believed himself
superseded in the affection of his mistress, by some favoured rival,
whose success rankled at his soul; and though he scarce durst
communicate the suspicion to his own heart, his observation continually
whispered to him that he was supplanted by his friend Fathom; for
Monimia was totally detached from the conversation of every other man,
and he had of late noted their intercourse with distempered eyes.

These considerations sometimes transported him to such a degree of
frenzy, that he was tempted to sacrifice them both as traitors to
gratitude, friendship, and love; but such deliriums soon vanished
before his honour and humanity. He would not allow himself to think
amiss of Ferdinand, until some undoubted mark of his guilt should
appear; and this was so far from being the case, that hitherto there
was scarce a presumption. “On the contrary,” said he to himself, “I am
hourly receiving proofs of his sympathy and attachment. Not but that he
may be the innocent cause of my mishap. His superior qualifications may
have attracted the eye, and engaged the heart of that inconstant fair,
without his being sensible of the victory he has won; or, perhaps,
shocked at the conquest he hath unwillingly made, he discourages her
advances, tries to reason down her unjustifiable passion, and in the
meantime conceals from me the particulars, out of regard to my
happiness and quiet.”

Under cover of these favourable conjectures, our adventurer securely
prosecuted his scheme upon the unfortunate Monimia. He dedicated
himself wholly to her service and conversation, except at those times
when his company was requested by Renaldo, who now very seldom exacted
his attendance. In his ministry about the person of the beauteous
orphan, this cunning incendiary mingled such awful regard, such melting
compassion, as effectually screened him from the suspicion of
treachery, while he widened the fatal breach between her and her lover
by the most diabolical insinuations. He represented his friend as a
voluptuary, who gratified his own appetite without the least regard to
honour or conscience; and, with a show of infinite reluctance, imparted
some anecdotes of his sensuality, which he had feigned for the purpose;
then he would exclaim in an affected transport, “Gracious Heaven! is it
possible for any man who has the least title to perception or humanity
to injure such innocence and perfection! for my own part, had I been so
undeservedly happy—Heaven and earth! forgive my transports, madam, I
cannot help seeing and admiring such divine attractions. I cannot help
resenting your wrongs; it is the cause of virtue I espouse; it ought to
be the cause of every honest man.”

He had often repeated such apostrophes as these, which she ascribed to
nothing else than sheer benevolence and virtuous indignation, and
actually began to think he had made some impression upon her heart, not
that he now entertained the hope of an immediate triumph over her
chastity. The more he contemplated her character, the more difficult
the conquest seemed to be: he therefore altered his plan, and resolved
to carry on his operations under the shelter of honourable proposals,
foreseeing that a wife of her qualifications, if properly managed,
would turn greatly to the account of the husband, or, if her virtue
should prove refractory, that he could at any time rid himself of the
encumbrance, by decamping without beat of drum, after he should be
cloyed with possession.

Elevated by these expectations, he one day, in the midst of a
preconcerted rhapsody, importing that he could no longer conceal the
fire that preyed upon his heart, threw himself on his knees before the
lovely mourner, and imprinted a kiss on her fair hand. Though he did
not presume to take this liberty till after such preparation as he
thought had altogether extinguished her regard for Melvil, and paved
the way for his own reception in room of that discarded lover, he had
so far overshot his mark, that Monimia, instead of favouring his
declaration, started up, and retired in silence, her cheeks glowing
with shame, and her eyes gleaming with indignation.

Ferdinand no sooner recovered from the confusion produced by this
unexpected repulse, than he saw the necessity of coming to a speedy
determination, lest the offended fair one should appeal to Renaldo, in
which case they might be mutually undeceived, to his utter shame and
confusion; he therefore resolved to deprecate her anger by humble
supplications, and by protesting, that, whatever tortures he might
suffer by suppressing his sentiments, she should never again be
offended with a declaration of his passion.

Having thus appeased the gentle Monimia, and discovered that, in spite
of her resentment, his friend still kept possession of her heart, he
determined to work an effectual separation, so as that the young lady,
being utterly deserted by Melvil, should be left altogether in his
power. With this Christian intention, he began to sadden his visage
with a double shade of pensive melancholy, in the presence of Renaldo,
to stifle a succession of involuntary sighs, to answer from the
purpose, to be incoherent in his discourse, and, in a word, to act the
part of a person wrapt up in sorrowful cogitation.

Count Melvil, soon as he perceived these symptoms, very kindly inquired
into the cause of them, and was not a little alarmed to hear the artful
and evasive answers of Ferdinand, who, without disclosing the source of
his disquiet, earnestly begged leave to retire into some other corner
of the world. Roused by this entreaty, the Hungarian’s jealousy awoke,
and with violent agitation, he exclaimed, “Then are my fears too true,
my dear Fathom: I comprehend the meaning of your request. I have for
some time perceived an host of horrors approaching from that quarter. I
know your worth and honour. I depend upon your friendship, and conjure
you, by all the ties of it, to free me at once from the most miserable
suspense, by owning you have involuntarily captivated the heart of that
unhappy maiden.”

To this solemn interrogation he made no reply, but shedding a flood of
tears, of which he had always a magazine at command, he repeated his
desire of withdrawing, and took God to witness, that what he proposed
was solely for the quiet of his honoured patron and beloved friend.
“Enough,” cried the unfortunate Renaldo, “the measure of my woes is now
filled up.” So saying, he fell backwards in a swoon, from which he was
with difficulty recovered to the sensation of the most exquisite
torments. During this paroxysm, our adventurer nursed him with infinite
care and tenderness, he exhorted him to summon all his fortitude to his
assistance, to remember his forefathers, and exert himself in the
imitation of their virtues, to fly from those bewitching charms which
had enslaved his better part, to retrieve his peace of mind by
reflecting on the inconstancy and ingratitude of woman, and amuse his
imagination in the pursuit of honour and glory.

After these admonitions he abused his ears with a forged detail of the
gradual advances made to him by Monimia, and the steps he had taken to
discourage her addresses, and re-establish her virtue, poisoning the
mind of that credulous youth to such a degree, that, in all
probability, he would have put a fatal period to his own existence, had
not Fathom found means to allay the rage of his ecstasy, by the cunning
arrangement of opposite considerations. He set his pride against his
love, he opposed his resentment to his sorrow, and his ambition to his
despair. Notwithstanding the balance of power so settled among these
antagonists, so violent were the shocks of their successive conflicts,
that his bosom fared like a wretched province, harassed, depopulated,
and laid waste, by two fierce contending armies. From this moment his
life was nothing but an alternation of starts and reveries; he wept and
raved by turns, according to the prevailing gust of passion; food
became a stranger to his lips, and sleep to his eyelids; he could not
support the presence of Monimia, her absence increased the torture of
his pangs; and, when he met her by accident, he started back with
horror, like a traveller who chances to tread upon a snake.

The poor afflicted orphan, worn to a shadow with self-consuming
anguish, eager to find some lowly retreat, where she could breath out
her soul in peace, and terrified at the frantic behaviour of Renaldo,
communicated to Fathom her desire of removing, and begged that he would
take a small picture of her father, decorated with diamonds, and
convert them into money, for the expense of her subsistence. This was
the last pledge of her family, which she had received from her mother,
who had preserved it in the midst of numberless distresses, and no
other species of misery but that which she groaned under could have
prevailed upon the daughter to part with it; but, exclusive of other
motives, the very image itself, by recalling to her mind the honours of
her name, upbraided her with living in dependence upon a man who had
treated her with such indignity and ingratitude; besides, she flattered
herself with the hope that she should not long survive the loss of this
testimonial.

Our adventurer, with many professions of sorrow and mortification at
his own want of capacity to prevent such an alienation, undertook to
dispose of it to the best advantage, and to provide her with a cheap
and retired apartment, to which he would conduct her in safety, though
at the hazard of his life. In the meantime, however, he repaired to his
friend Renaldo, and, after having admonished him to arm his soul with
patience and philosophy, declared that Monimia’s guilty passion for
himself could no longer be kept within bounds, that she had conjured
him, in the most pressing manner, to assist her in escaping from an
house which she considered as the worst of dungeons, because she was in
it daily exposed to the sight and company of a man whom she detested,
and that she had bribed him to compliance with her request, not only
with repeated promises of eternal love and submission, but also with
the picture of her father set with diamonds, which she had hitherto
reserved as the last and greatest testimony of her affection and
esteem.

With these words he presented the fatal pledge to the eyes of the
astonished youth, upon whom it operated like the poisonous sight of the
basilisk, for in an instant, the whole passions of his soul were in the
most violent agitation. “What!” cried he, in an ecstasy of rage, “is
she so abandoned to perfidy, so lost to shame, so damned to constancy,
to gratitude, and virtuous love, as to meditate the means of leaving me
without decency, without remorse! to forsake me in my adversity, when
my hapless fortune can no longer flatter the pride and vanity of her
expectation! O woman! woman! woman! what simile shall I find to
illustrate the character of the sex? But I will not have recourse to
vain complaints and feeble exclamations. By Heaven! she shall not
’scape, she shall not triumph in her levity, she shall not exult in my
distress; no! I will rather sacrifice her to my just resentment, to the
injured powers of love and friendship. I will act the avenging minister
of Heaven! I will mangle that fair bosom, which contains so false a
heart! I will tear her to pieces, and scatter those beauteous limbs as
a prey to the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air!”

Fathom, who expected this storm, far from attempting to oppose its
progress, waited with patience until its first violence was overblown;
then, assuming an air of condolence, animated with that resolution
which a friend ought to maintain on such occasions, “My dear Count,”
said he, “I am not at all surprised at your emotion, because I know
what an heart, susceptible as yours, must feel from the apostasy of one
who has reigned so long the object of your love, admiration, and
esteem. Your endeavours to drive her from your thoughts must create an
agony much more severe than that which divorces the soul from the body.
Nevertheless, I am so confident of your virtue and your manhood, as to
foresee, that you will allow the fair Monimia to execute that
resolution which she hath so unwisely taken, to withdraw herself from
your love and protection. Believe me, my best friend and benefactor,
this is a step, in consequence of which you will infallibly retrieve
your peace of mind. It may cost you many bitter pangs, it may probe
your wounds to the quick; but those pangs will be soothed by the gentle
and salutary wing of time, and that probing will rouse you to a due
sense of your own dignity and importance, which will enable you to
convert your attention to objects far more worthy of your
contemplation. All the hopes of happiness you had cherished in the
possession of Monimia are now irrecoverably blasted; her heart is now
debased beneath your consideration; her love is, without all doubt,
extinguished, and her honour irretrievably lost; insomuch, that, were
she to profess sorrow for her indiscretion, and implore your
forgiveness, with the most solemn promises of regarding you for the
future with unalterable fidelity and affection, you ought not to
restore her to that place in your heart which she hath so meanly
forfeited, because you could not at the same time reinstate her in the
possession of that delicate esteem without which there is no harmony,
no rapture, no true enjoyment in love.

“No, my dear Renaldo, expel the unworthy tenant from your bosom; allow
her to fill up the measure of her ingratitude, by deserting her lover,
friend, and benefactor. Your glory demands her dismission; the world
will applaud your generosity, and your own heart approve of your
conduct. So disencumbered, let us exert ourselves once more in
promoting your departure from this island, that you may revisit your
father’s house, do justice to yourself and amiable sister, and take
vengeance on the author of your wrongs; then dedicate yourself to
glory, in imitation of your renowned ancestors, and flourish in the
favour of your imperial patron.”

These remonstrances had such an effect upon the Hungarian, that his
face was lighted up with a transient gleam of satisfaction. He embraced
Ferdinand with great ardour, calling him his pride, his Mentor, his
good genius, and entreated him to gratify the inclination of that
fickle creature so far as to convey her to another lodging, without
loss of time, while he would, by absenting himself, favour their
retreat.

Our hero having obtained this permission, went immediately to the
skirts of the town, where he had previously bespoke a small, though
neat apartment, at the house of an old woman, widow of a French
refugee. He had already reconnoitred the ground, by sounding his
landlady, from whose poverty and complaisance he found reason to expect
all sorts of freedom and opportunity for the accomplishment of his aim
upon Monimia’s person. The room being prepared for her reception, he
returned to that disconsolate beauty, to whom he presented ten guineas,
which he pretended to have raised by pledging the picture, though he
himself acted as the pawnbroker on this occasion, for a very plain and
obvious reason.

The fair orphan was overjoyed to find her wish so speedily
accomplished. She forthwith packed up her necessaries in a trunk; and a
hackney-coach was called in the dusk of the evening, in which she
embarked with her baggage and conductor.

Yet she did not leave the habitation of Renaldo without regret. In the
instant of parting, the idea of that unfortunate youth was associated
with every well-known object that presented itself to her eyes; not as
an inconstant, ungenerous, and perjured swain, but as the accomplished,
the virtuous, the melting lover, who had captivated her virgin heart.
As Fathom led her to the door, she was met by Renaldo’s dog, which had
long been her favourite; and the poor animal fawning upon her as she
passed, her heart was overwhelmed with such a gush of tenderness, that
a flood of tears streamed down her cheeks, and she had well-nigh sunk
upon the floor.

Ferdinand, considering this emotion as the last tribute she would pay
to Renaldo, hurried her into the coach, where she soon recovered her
composure; and in a little time he ushered her into the house of Madam
la Mer, by whom she was received with great cordiality, and conducted
to her apartment, with which she found no other fault than that of its
being too good for one in her forlorn situation. Here, while the tear
of gratitude started in either eye, she thanked our adventurer for his
benevolence and kind concern, assuring him, that she would not fail
duly to beseech the Most High to shower down blessings upon him, as the
orphan’s friend and protector.

Fathom was not deficient in those expressions that were best adapted to
her present turn of mind. He observed, that what he had done was in
obedience to the dictates of common humanity, which would have prompted
him to assist any fellow-creature in distress; but that her peculiar
virtue and qualifications were such as challenged the utmost exertion
of his faculties in her service. He said, that surely Heaven had not
created such perfection in vain; that she was destined to receive as
well as to communicate happiness; and that the Providence, which she so
piously adored, would not fail, in due season, to raise her from
distress and affliction, to that honour and felicity for which she was
certainly ordained. In the meantime, he entreated her to depend upon
his service and fidelity, and the article of her board being settled,
he left her to the company and consolation of her discreet hostess, who
soon insinuated herself into the good opinion of her beauteous lodger.

While our hero was employed in this transaction, Renaldo sallied forth
in a sort of intoxication, which Fathom’s admonitions had inspired;
and, repairing to a certain noted coffee-house, engaged at chess with
an old French refugee, that his attention, by being otherwise employed,
might not stray towards that fatal object which he ardently wished to
forget. But, unluckily for him, he had scarce performed three moves of
the game, when his ears were exposed to a dialogue between two young
gentlemen, one of whom asked the other if he would go and see the
“Orphan” acted at one of the theatres; observing, as a farther
inducement, that the part of Monimia would be performed by a young
gentlewoman who had never appeared on the stage. At mention of that
name, Renaldo started; for though it did not properly belong to his
orphan, it was the appellation by which she had been distinguished ever
since her separation from her father’s house, and therefore it recalled
her to his imagination in the most interesting point of view. Though he
endeavoured to expel the image, by a closer application to his play,
every now and then it intruded upon his fancy, and at each return made
a stronger impression; so that he found himself in the situation of an
unfortunate bark stranded upon some hidden rock, which, when the wind
begins to blow, feels every succeeding wave more boisterous than the
former, until, with irresistible fury, they surmount her deck, sweep
everything before them, and dash her all to pieces.

The refugee had observed his first emotion, which he attributed to an
unforeseen advantage he himself had gained over the Hungarian; but
seeing him, in the sequel, bite his lip, roll his eyes, groan, writhe
his body, ejaculate incoherent curses, and neglect his game, the
Huguenot concluded that he was mad, and being seized with terror and
dismay, got up and scampered off, without ceremony or hesitation.

Melvil, thus left to the horrors of his own thought, which tortured him
with the apprehension of losing Monimia for ever, could no longer
combat that suggestion, but ran homewards with all the speed he could
exert, in order to prevent her retreat. When he crossed the threshold,
he was struck with such a damp of presaging fear, that he durst not in
person approach her apartment, nor even, by questioning the servant,
inform himself of the particulars he wanted to know. Yet his suspense
becoming more insupportable than his fear, he rushed from room to room
in quest of that which was not to be found; and, seeing Monimia’s
chamber door open, entered the deserted temple in a state of
distraction, calling aloud upon her name. All was silent, solitary, and
woful. “She is gone,” he cried, shedding a flood of tears, “she is for
ever lost; and all my hopes of happiness are fled!”

So saying, he sunk upon that couch on which Monimia had oft reposed,
and abandoned himself to all the excess of grief and despondence. In
this deplorable condition he was found by our adventurer, who gently
chid him for his want of resolution, and again repelled his sorrow, by
arousing his resentment against the innocent cause of his disquiet,
having beforehand forged the particulars of provocation.

“Is it possible,” said he, “that Renaldo can still retain the least
sentiment of regard for a fickle woman, by whom he has been so
ungratefully forsaken and so unjustly scorned? Is it possible he can be
so disturbed by the loss of a creature who is herself lost to all
virtue and decorum?—Time and reflection, my worthy friend, will cure
you of that inglorious malady. And the future misconduct of that
imprudent damsel will, doubtless, contribute to the recovery of your
peace. Her behaviour, at leaving the house where she had received so
many marks of the most delicate affection, was in all respects so
opposite to honour and decency, that I could scarce refrain from
telling her I was shocked at her deportment, even while she loaded me
with protestations of love. When a woman’s heart is once depraved, she
bids adieu to all restraint;—she preserves no measures. It was not
simply contempt which she expressed for Renaldo; she seems to resent
his being able to live under her disdain; and that resentment stoops to
objects unworthy of indignation. Even your dog was not exempted from
the effects of her displeasure. For, in her passage to the door, she
kicked the poor animal as one of your dependents; and, in our way to
the apartment I had provided for her, she entertained me with a
ludicrous comment upon the manner in which you first made her
acquainted with your passion. All that modesty of carriage, all that
chastity of conversation, all that dignity of grief, which she knew so
well how to affect, is now entirely laid aside, and, when I quitted
her, she seemed the most gay, giddy, and impertinent of her sex.”

“Gracious powers!” exclaimed Renaldo, starting from the couch, “am I
under the delusion of a dream; or are these things really so, as my
friend has represented them? Such a total and sudden degeneracy is
amazing! is monstrous and unnatural!”

“Such, my dear Count,” replied our hero, “is the caprice of a female
heart, fickle as the wind, uncertain as a calm at sea, fixed to no
principle, but swayed by every fantastic gust of passion, or of whim.
Congratulate yourself, therefore, my friend, upon your happy
deliverance from such a domestic plague—upon the voluntary exile of a
traitor from your bosom.—Recollect the dictates of your duty, your
discretion, and your glory, and think upon the honours and elevated
enjoyment for which you are certainly ordained. To-night let us over a
cheerful bottle anticipate your success; and to-morrow I will accompany
you to the house of an usurer, who, I am informed, fears no risk,
provided twenty per cent be given, and the borrower’s life insured.”




CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

THE ART OF BORROWING FURTHER EXPLAINED, AND AN ACCOUNT OF A STRANGE
PHENOMENON.


In this manner did the artful incendiary work upon the passions of the
credulous unsuspecting Hungarian, who pressed him to his breast with
the most cordial expressions of friendship, calling him his guardian,
his saviour, his second father, and gave himself up wholly to his
advice.

Next morning, according to the plan they had laid overnight, they
repaired to a tavern in the neighbourhood of the person to whom our
adventurer had been directed, and were fortunate enough to find him in
the house, transacting a money affair with a young gentleman who
treated him with his morning’s whet.

That affair being negotiated, he adjourned into another room with
Renaldo and his companion, who were not a little surprised to see this
minister of Plutus in the shape of a young sprightly beau, trimmed up
in all the foppery of the fashion; for they had hitherto always
associated with the idea of an usurer old age and rusty apparel. After
divers modish congees, he begged to know to what he should attribute
the honour of their message; when Ferdinand, who acted the orator, told
him, that his friend Count Melvil, having occasion for a sum of money,
had been directed to a gentleman of his name, “and, I suppose,” added
he, “you are the son of the person with whom the affair is to be
negotiated.”

“Sir,” said this petit-maitre, with a smile, “I perceive you are
surprised to see one of my profession in the appearance of a gentleman;
and perhaps your wonder will not cease, when I tell you, that my
education was liberal, and that I once had the honour to bear a
commission in the British army. I was indeed a first lieutenant of
marines, and will venture to say, that no officer in the service was
more delicate than myself in observing all the punctilios of honour. I
entertained the utmost contempt for all the trading part of the nation,
and suffered myself to be run through the body in a duel, rather than
roll with a brother-lieutenant, who was a broker’s son. But, thank
Heaven! I have long ago conquered all those ridiculous prejudices. I
soon observed, that without money there was no respect, honour, or
convenience to be acquired in life; that wealth amply supplied the want
of wit, merit, and pedigree, having influence and pleasure ever at
command; and that the world never failed to worship the flood of
affluence, without examining the dirty channels through which it
commonly flowed.

“At the end of the war, finding my appointments reduced to two
shillings and fourpence per day, and being addicted to pleasures which
I could not possibly purchase from such a fund, I sold my half-pay for
two hundred pounds, which I lent upon bond to a young officer of the
same regiment, on condition that he should insure his life, and restore
one-fourth part of the sum by way of premium. I happened to be lucky in
this first essay; for the borrower, having in six weeks expended the
money, made an excursion on the highway, was apprehended, tried,
convicted of felony, and cut his own throat, to prevent the shame of a
public execution; so that his bond was discharged by the insurers.

“In short, gentlemen, when I engaged in this business, I determined to
carry it on with such spirit, as would either make my fortune, or
entirely ruin me in a little time; and hitherto my endeavours have been
tolerably successful. Nor do I think my proceedings a whit more
criminal or unjust than those of other merchants, who strive to turn
their money to the best account. The commodity I deal in is cash; and
it is my business to sell it to the best advantage. A London factor
sends a cargo of goods to market, and if he gets two hundred per cent
upon the sale, he is commended for industry and address. If I sell
money for one-fourth part of that profit, certain persons will be so
unjust as to cry, Shame upon me, for taking such advantage of my
neighbour’s distress; not considering, that the trader took four times
the same advantage of those people who bought his cargo, though his
risk was not half so great as mine, and although the money I sold
perhaps retrieved the borrower from the very jaws of destruction. For
example, it was but yesterday I saved a worthy man from being arrested
for a sum of money, for which he had bailed a friend who treacherously
left him in the lurch. As he did not foresee what would happen, he had
made no provision for the demand, and his sphere of life secluding him
from all sorts of monied intercourse, he could not raise the cash by
his credit in the usual way of borrowing; so that, without my
assistance, he must have gone to jail; a disgrace which would have
proved fatal to the peace of his family, and utterly ruined his
reputation.—Nay, that very young gentleman, from whom I am just now
parted, will, in all probability, be indebted to me for a very genteel
livelihood. He had obtained the absolute promise of being provided for
by a great man, who sits at the helm of affairs in a neighbouring
kingdom; but, being destitute of all other resources, he could not have
equipped himself for the voyage, in order to profit by his lordship’s
intention, unless I had enabled him to pursue his good fortune.”

Renaldo was not a little pleased to hear this harangue, to which Fathom
replied with many florid encomiums upon the usurer’s good sense and
humane disposition; then he explained the errand of his friend, which
was to borrow three hundred pounds, in order to retrieve his
inheritance, of which he had been defrauded in his absence.

“Sir,” said the lender, addressing himself to Count Melvil, “I pretend
to have acquired by experience some skill in physiognomy; and though
there are some faces so deeply disguised as to baffle all the
penetration of our art, there are others, in which the heart appears
with such nakedness of integrity, as at once to recommend it to our
goodwill. I own your countenance prepossesses me in your favour; and
you shall be accommodated, upon those terms from which I never deviate,
provided you can find proper security, that you shall not quit the
British dominions; for that, with me, is a condition sine qua non.”

This was a very disagreeable declaration to Renaldo, who candidly
owned, that, as his concerns lay upon the Continent, his purpose was to
leave England without delay. The usurer professed himself sorry that it
was not in his power to oblige him; and, in order to prevent any
further importunity, assured them, he had laid it down as a maxim, from
which he would never swerve, to avoid all dealings with people whom, if
need should be, he could not sue by the laws of this realm.

Thus the intervention of one unlucky and unforeseen circumstance
blasted in an instant the budding hopes of Melvil, who, while his
visage exhibited the most sorrowful disappointment, begged to know, if
there was any person of his acquaintance who might be less scrupulous
in that particular.

The young gentleman directed them to another member of his profession,
and wishing them success, took his leave with great form and
complaisance. This instance of politeness was, however, no more than a
shift to disengage himself the more easily from their entreaties; for,
when the case was opened to the second usurer, he blessed himself from
such customers, and dismissed them with the most mortifying and boorish
refusal. Notwithstanding these repulses, Renaldo resolved to make one
desperate push; and, without allowing himself the least respite,
solicited, one by one, not fewer than fifteen persons who dealt in this
kind of traffic, and his proposals were rejected by each. At last,
fatigued by the toil, and exasperated at the ill success of his
expedition, and half mad with the recollection of his finances, which
were now drained to half-a-crown, “Since we have nothing to expect,”
cried he, “from the favour of Christians, let us have recourse to the
descendants of Judah. Though they lie under the general reproach of
nations, as a people dead to virtue and benevolence, and wholly devoted
to avarice, fraud, and extortion, the most savage of their tribe cannot
treat me with more barbarity of indifference, than I have experienced
among those who are the authors of their reproach.”

Although Fathom looked upon this proposal as an extravagant symptom of
despair, he affected to approve of the scheme, and encouraged Renaldo
with the hope of succeeding in another quarter, even if this expedition
should fail; for, by this time, our adventurer was half resolved to
export him at his own charge, rather than he should be much longer
restricted in his designs upon Monimia.

Meanwhile, being resolved to try the experiment upon the children of
Israel, they betook themselves to the house of a rich Jew, whose wealth
they considered as a proof of his rapaciousness; and, being admitted
into his counting-house, they found him in the midst of half a dozen
clerks, when Renaldo, in his imagination, likened him unto a minister
of darkness surrounded by his familiars, and planning schemes of misery
to be executed upon the hapless sons of men. In spite of these
suggestions, which were not at all mitigated by the forbidding aspect
of the Hebrew, he demanded a private audience; and, being ushered into
another apartment, he explained his business with manifest marks of
disorder and affliction. Indeed, his confusion was in some measure
owing to the looks of the Jew, who, in the midst of this exordium,
pulled down his eyebrows, which were surprisingly black and bushy, so
as, in appearance, totally to extinguish his visage, though he was all
the time observing our youth from behind those almost impenetrable
thickets.

Melvil, having signified his request, “Young gentleman,” said the
Israelite, with a most discordant voice, “what in the name of goodness
could induce you to come to me upon such an errand? Did you ever hear
that I lent money to strangers without security?” “No,” replied
Renaldo, “nor did I believe I should profit by my application; but my
affairs are desperate; and my proposals having been rejected by every
Christian to whom they were offered, I was resolved to try my fate
among the Jews, who are reckoned another species of men.”

Fathom, alarmed at this abrupt reply, which he supposed could not fail
to disgust the merchant, interposed in the conversation, by making an
apology for the plain dealing of his friend, who, he said, was soured
and ruffled by his misfortunes; then exerting that power of eloquence
which he had at command, he expostulated upon Renaldo’s claim and
expectations, described the wrongs he had suffered, extolled his
virtue, and drew a most pathetic picture of his distress.

The Jew listened attentively for some time; then his eyebrows began to
rise and fall alternately; he coughed, sneezed, and winking hard, “I’m
plagued,” said he, “with a salt rheum that trickles from my eyes
without intermission.” So saying, he wiped the moisture from his face,
and proceeded in these words: “Sir, your story is plausible; and your
friend is a good advocate; but before I give an answer to your demand,
I must beg leave to ask if you can produce undeniable evidence of your
being the identical person you really assume? If you are really the
Count de Melvil, you will excuse my caution. We cannot be too much on
our guard against fraud; though I must own you have not the air of an
impostor.”

Renaldo’s eyes began to sparkle at this preliminary question; to which
he replied, that he could procure the testimony of the Emperor’s
minister, to whom he had occasionally paid his respects since his first
arrival in England.

“If that be the case,” said the Jew, “take the trouble to call here
to-morrow morning, at eight o’clock, and I will carry you in my own
coach to the house of his excellency, with whom I have the honour to be
acquainted; and, if he has nothing to object against your character or
pretensions, I will contribute my assistance towards your obtaining
justice at the Imperial court.”

The Hungarian was so much confounded at this unexpected reception, that
he had not power to thank the merchant for his promised favour, but
stood motionless and silent, while the streams of emotion of the heart
was of more weight with the Jew, than the eloquent acknowledgment which
Ferdinand took the opportunity of making for his friend; and he was
fain to dismiss them a little abruptly, in order to prevent a second
discharge of that same rheum of which he had already complained.

Melvil recollected all that had happened as a dream, which had no
foundation in truth, and was all day long in a sort of delirium,
produced by the alternate gusts of hope and fear that still agitated
his bosom; for he was not yet without apprehension of being again
disappointed by some unlucky occurrence.

He did not, however, fail to be punctual to the hour of his
appointment, when the Jew told him, there would be no occasion for
visiting the ambassador, because Renaldo had been, the preceding day,
recognised by one of the clerks who had been employed as a purveyor in
the Imperial army; and who, knowing his family, confirmed everything he
had alleged. “After breakfast,” continued this benevolent Israelite, “I
will give you an order upon my banker for five hundred pounds, that you
may be enabled to appear at Vienna as the son and representative of
Count Melvil; and you shall also be furnished with a letter of
recommendation to a person of some influence at that court, whose
friendship and countenance may be of some service to your suit; for I
am now heartily engaged in your interest, in consequence of the fair
and unblemished character which I find you have hitherto maintained.”

The reader must appeal to his own heart, to acquire a just idea of
Renaldo’s feelings, when every tittle of these promises was fulfilled,
and the merchant refused to take one farthing by way of premium,
contenting himself with the slender security of a personal bond. He
was, in truth, overwhelmed with the obligation, and certainly disposed
to believe that his benefactor was something more than human. As for
Fathom, his sentiments took a different turn; and he scrupled not to
impute all this kindness to some deep-laid interested scheme, the scope
of which he could not at present comprehend.

After the tumults of the young gentleman’s joy had subsided, and he
found himself eased of that burdensome poverty under which he had
groaned so long, his thoughts, which before were dissipated upon the
various circumstances of distress, began to collect themselves in a
body, and to resume their deliberations upon a subject which they had
been long accustomed to consider; this was no other than the forlorn
Monimia, whose idea now emerged in his bosom, being disencumbered of
one part of the load by which it had been depressed. He mentioned her
name to Fathom with marks of the most melting compassion, deplored her
apostasy, and, while he protested that he had divorced her for ever
from his heart, expressed an inclination to see her once more before
his departure, that he might in person exhort her to penitence and
reformation.

Our adventurer, who dreaded such an interview as the infallible means
of his own ruin, resisted the proposal with the whole power of his
elocution. He affirmed, that Renaldo’s desire was a manifest proof that
he still retained part of the fatal poison which that enchantress had
spread within his veins; and that the sight of her, softened by his
reproaches into tears and affected contrition, would dispel his
resentment, disable his manhood, and blow the embers of his former
passion to such a rage, as would hurry him on to a reconciliation,
which would debase his honour, and ruin his future peace. In a word,
Ferdinand described the danger that would attend the meeting in such
emphatic terms, that the Hungarian started with horror at the picture
which he drew, and in this particular conformed with the admonition of
his friend.

One hundred pounds of the Jew’s money was immediately appropriated for
the payment of his most urgent debts; the like sum he presented to his
friend Fathom, with a solemn promise of sharing with him whatever good
fortune might await him in Germany. And though Monimia had forfeited
all title to his regard, so ill could he bear the prospect of her
distress, that he entrusted his dear companion with the half of what
remained, to be expended for her use, fully resolving to screen her
from the shocks and temptations of want, as the circumstances of his
future fate would allow.

Fathom, far from opposing, applauded his generosity with marks of
extreme wonder and admiration, assuring him, that she should be put in
possession of his bounty immediately after his departure, he being
unwilling to make her acquainted with her good fortune before that
period, lest, finding his affairs in a fair way of being retrieved, she
should be base enough to worship his returning prosperity, and, by
false professions, and artful blandishments, seek to ensnare his heart
anew.




CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT

COUNT FATHOM UNMASKS HIS BATTERY; IS REPULSED; AND VARIES HIS
OPERATIONS WITHOUT EFFECT.


Every necessary preparation being made, Renaldo, accompanied by our
adventurer, took the road to Dover, where he embarked in a packet-boat
for Calais, after having settled a correspondence with his dear
Ferdinand, from whom he did not part without tears. He had before
solicited him to be his fellow-traveller, that he might personally
enjoy the benefit of his conversation and superior sagacity; but these
entreaties he strenuously opposed, on pretence of his being determined
to push his fortune in England, which he considered as his native
country, and as the land in which, of all others, a man of merit has
the best encouragement. Such were the reasons he alleged for refusing
to attend his benefactor, who was himself eagerly desirous of attaining
a settlement in the island of Great Britain. But our hero’s real
motives for staying were of a very different complexion.—The reader is
already informed of his aim upon the fair orphan, which, at present,
was the chief spring of his conduct. He may also recollect such
passages of his life, as were sufficient to deter him from reappearing
at Presburg or Vienna. But, besides these reflections, he was detained
by a full persuasion that Renaldo would sink under the power and
influence of his antagonist, consequently be rendered incapable to
provide for his friends; and that he himself, fraught with wiles and
experience as he was, could not fail to make himself amends for what he
had suffered among a people equally rich and unthinking.

Melvil, having embraced our adventurer, and with a deep sigh bid him
take care of the unfortunate Monimia, committed himself to the sea,
and, by the assistance of a favourable gale, was in four hours safely
landed on the French shore; while Fathom took post-horses for London,
where he arrived that same night, and next day, in the forenoon, went
to visit the beauteous mourner, who had as yet received no intimation
of Renaldo’s departure or design. He found her in the attitude of
writing a letter to her inconstant lover, the contents of which the
reader will be acquainted with in due time. Her countenance,
notwithstanding the veil of melancholy by which it was overcast, seemed
altogether serene and composed; she was the picture of pious
resignation, and sat like PATIENCE on a monument, smiling at grief.
After having paid the compliment of the morning, Fathom begged pardon
for having omitted to visit her during three days, in which, he said,
his time had been wholly engrossed in procuring a proper equipage for
Count Melvil, who had at last bid an eternal adieu to the island of
Great Britain.

At this information the hapless Monimia fell back in her chair, and
continued some minutes in a swoon; from which being recovered, “Excuse
me, Mr. Fathom,” cried she with a deep sigh; “this, I hope, is the last
agony I shall feel from my unhappy passion.”—Then wiping the tears from
her lovely eyes, she retrieved her tranquillity, and desired to know by
what means Renaldo had been enabled to undertake his journey into the
empire. Our hero, upon this occasion, assumed the whole merit of having
promoted the interest of his friend, by giving her to understand, that
he, in consequence of an unforeseen windfall, had defrayed the expense
of the Count’s equipment; though he observed, that it was not without
reluctance he saw Renaldo make a wrong use of his friendship.

“Although I was happy,” proceeded this artful traitor, “in being able
to discharge my obligations to the house of Melvil, I could not help
feeling the most sensible chagrin, when I saw my assistance rendered
subservient to the triumphs of the youth’s baseness and infidelity; for
he chose, as the companion of his travels, the abandoned woman for whom
he had forsaken the all-perfect Monimia, whose virtue and
accomplishments did not preserve her sacred from his ungrateful
sarcasms and unmannerly ridicule. Believe me, madam, I was so shocked
at his conversation on that subject, and so much incensed at his want
of delicacy, that my temper was scarce sufficient for the ceremony of
parting. And, now that my debt to his family is over-paid, I have
solemnly renounced his correspondence.”

When she heard that, instead of betraying the least symptom of regret
or compassion for her unhappy fate, the perfidious youth had exulted
over her fall, and even made her a subject for his mirth, the blood
revisited her faded cheeks, and resentment restored to her eyes that
poignancy which sorrow had before overcome. Yet she scorned to give
speech to her indignation; but, forcing a smile, “Why should I repine,”
said she, “at the mortifications of a life which I despise, and from
which, I hope, Heaven speedily will set me free!”

Fathom, fired by her emotion, which had recalled all the graces of her
beauty, exclaimed in a rapture, “Talk not so contemptuously of this
life, which hath still a fund of happiness in store for the amiable,
the divine Monimia. Though one admirer hath proved an apostate to his
vows, your candour will not suffer you to condemn the whole sex. Some
there are, whose bosoms glow with passion equally pure, unalterable,
and intense. For my own part, I have sacrificed to a rigid punctilio of
honour the dearest ideas of my heart. I beheld your unrivalled charms,
and deeply felt their power. Yet, while a possibility of Melvil’s
reformation remained, and while I was restrained by my niggard fortune
from making a tender worthy of your acceptance, I combated with my
inclinations, and bore without repining the pangs of hopeless love.
But, now that my honour is disengaged, and my fortune rendered
independent, by the last will of a worthy nobleman, whose friendship I
was favoured with in France, I presume to lay myself at the feet of the
adorable Monimia, as the most faithful of admirers, whose happiness or
misery wholly depends upon her nod. Believe me, madam, these are not
the professions of idle gallantry—I speak the genuine, though
imperfect, language of my heart. Words, even the most pathetic, cannot
do justice to my love. I gaze upon your beauty with ravishment; but I
contemplate the graces of your soul with such awful veneration, that I
tremble while I approach you, as if my vows were addressed to some
superior being.”

During this declaration, which was pronounced in the most emphatic
manner, Monimia was successively agitated with shame, anger, and grief;
nevertheless, she summoned her whole philosophy to her aid, and, with a
tranquil, though determined air, begged he would not diminish the
obligations he had already conferred, by disturbing with such
unseasonable addresses a poor unhappy maid, who had detached all her
thoughts from earthly objects, and waited impatiently for that
dissolution which alone could put a period to her misfortunes.

Fathom, imagining that these were no other than the suggestions of a
temporary disappointment and despondence, which it was his business to
oppose with all his eloquence and art, renewed his theme with redoubled
ardour, and, at last, became so importunate in his desires, that
Monimia, provoked beyond the power of concealing her resentment, said,
she was heartily sorry to find herself under the necessity of telling
him, that, in the midst of her misfortunes, she could not help
remembering what she had been. Then, rising from her seat, with all the
dignity of displeasure, “Perhaps,” added she, “you have forgot who was
the father of the once happy Monimia.”

With these words she retired into another chamber, leaving our
adventurer confounded by the repulse he had sustained. Not that he was
discouraged from prosecuting his aim—on the contrary, this rebuff
seemed to add fresh vigour to his operations. He now thought it high
time to bring over Madam la Mer to his interest; and, to facilitate her
conversion, took an opportunity of bribing her with some inconsiderable
presents, after having amused her with a plausible tale of his passion
for Monimia, with whom she undertook the office of his mediatrix, on
the supposition that his intentions were honourable, and highly
advantageous to her lodger.

She was, first of all, invested with the office of obtaining pardon for
the offence he had given; and, in this negotiation she succeeded so
well, as to become an advocate for his suit; accordingly, she took all
occasions of magnifying his praise. His agreeable person was often the
subject of her discourse to the fair mourner. Her admiration dwelt upon
his politeness, good sense, and winning deportment; and she every day
retailed little stories of his benevolence and greatness of soul. The
defect in his birth she represented as a circumstance altogether
foreign from the consideration of his merit; especially in a nation
where such distinctions are as little respected as they will be in a
future state. She mentioned several persons of note, who basked in the
sunshine of power and fortune, without having enjoyed the least
hereditary assistance from their forefathers. One, she said, sprung
from the loins of an obscure attorney; another was the grandson of a
valet-de-chambre; a third was the issue of an accountant; and a fourth
the offspring of a woollen draper. All these were the children of their
own good works, and had raised themselves upon their personal virtues
and address; a foundation certainly more solid and honourable than a
vague inheritance derived from ancestors, in whose deserts they could
not be supposed to have borne the least share.

Monimia listened to all these arguments with great patience and
affability, though she at once dived into the source from which all
such insinuations flowed. She joined in the commendations of Fathom,
and owned herself a particular instance of that benevolence which the
old lady had so justly extolled; but, once for all, to prevent the
supplication which Madam la Mer was about to make, she solemnly
protested that her heart was altogether shut against any other earthly
engagement, and that her thoughts were altogether employed upon her
eternal salvation.

The assiduous landlady, perceiving the steadiness of her disposition,
thought proper to alter her method of proceeding, and, for the present,
suspended that theme by which she found her fair lodger disobliged.
Resolved to reconcile Monimia to life, before she would again recommend
Ferdinand to her love, she endeavoured to amuse her imagination, by
recounting the occasional incidents of the day, hoping gradually to
decoy her attention to those sublunary objects from which it had been
industriously weaned. She seasoned her conversation with agreeable
sallies; enlarged upon the different scenes of pleasure and diversion
appertaining to this great metropolis; practised upon her palate with
the delicacies of eating; endeavoured to shake her temperance with
repeated proffers and recommendations of certain cordials and
restoratives, which she alleged were necessary for the recovery of her
health; and pressed her to make little excursions into the fields that
skirt the town, for the benefit of air and exercise.

While this auxiliary plied the disconsolate Monimia on one hand, Fathom
was not remiss on the other. He now seemed to have sacrificed his
passion to her quiet; his discourse turned upon more indifferent
subjects. He endeavoured to dispel her melancholy with arguments drawn
from philosophy and religion. On some occasions, he displayed all his
fund of good humour, with a view to beguile her sorrow; he importuned
her to give him the pleasure of squiring her to some place of innocent
entertainment; and, finally, insisted upon her accepting a pecuniary
reinforcement to her finances, which he knew to be in a most
consumptive condition.




CHAPTER FORTY-NINE

MONIMIA’S HONOUR IS PROTECTED BY THE INTERPOSITION OF HEAVEN.


With that complacency and fortitude which were peculiar to herself,
this hapless stranger resisted all those artful temptations. Her
sustenance was barely such as exempted her from the guilt of being
accessory to her own death; her drink was the simple element. She
encouraged no discourse but that which turned upon the concerns of her
immortal part. She never went abroad, except in visits to a French
chapel in the neighbourhood; she refused the proffered assistance of
our adventurer with equal obstinacy and politeness, and with pleasure
saw herself wasting towards that period of mortality which was the
consummation of her wish. Yet her charms, far from melting away with
her constitution, seemed to triumph over the decays of nature. Her
shape and features still retained that harmony for which they had
always been distinguished. A mixture of majesty and sweetness diffused
itself in her looks, and her feebleness added to that soft and feminine
grace which attracts the sympathy, and engages the protection of every
humane beholder. The associates thus baffled in their attempts to
excite her ideas of pleasure, again shifted their plan, and resolved to
attack this forlorn beauty on the side of fear and mortification.

Our adventurer became less frequent in his visits, and more indifferent
in his language and deportment; while Madam la Mer gradually relaxed in
that complacency and respect with which she had hitherto behaved
towards her fair lodger. She even began to drop hints of disapprobation
and reproach against this pattern of innocence and beauty, and at
length grew bold enough to tell her, that her misfortunes could be
attributed to nothing but her own obstinacy and pride; that she had
been at great pains to disoblige the only person who was able and
willing to raise her above dependence; and that, if his protection
should be withdrawn, she must be exposed to the utmost extremity of
distress.

These insinuations, instead of producing the desired effect, inflamed
the indignation of Monimia, who, in a most dignified style of rebuke,
chid her for her indelicacy and presumption, observing, that she could
have no title to take such freedoms with lodgers, whose punctuality and
regular deportment left her no room to complain. Notwithstanding this
animated reply, she underwent the most deplorable anguish, when she
reflected upon the insolence of this woman, from whose barbarity she
had no resource; and, seeing no other possibility of redress than that
of appealing to the good offices of Fathom, she conquered her
reluctance so far, as to complain to him of Madam la Mer’s incivility.

Pleased with this application, he gave her to understand, with very
little ceremony or preamble, that it wholly depended upon herself
whether she should continue to be wretched, or be delivered at once
from all her cares and perplexity; that, notwithstanding the disdain
with which she had treated his addresses, he was still ready to lay
himself and his fortune at her feet; and that, if she should again
reject the disinterested proposal, the whole world and her own
conscience would charge upon herself whatever calamities she might be
subjected to in the sequel. Interpreting into a favourable hesitation
her silence, which was the result of wrath and amazement, he proceeded
to throw himself at her feet, and utter a romantic rhapsody, in the
course of which, laying aside all that restraint which he had hitherto
preserved, he seized her delicate hand, and pressed it to his lips;
nay, so far did he forget himself on this occasion, that he caught the
fair creature in his arms, and rudely ravished a kiss from those lips
which he had before contemplated with the most distant reverence of
desire.

Having thus broken down the fences of decorum, and being heated with
transport, he, in all probability, would have acted the part of young
Tarquin, and violated by force that sacred shrine of honour, beauty,
and unblemished truth, had not the wrath kindled by such an unexpected
outrage inspired her with strength and spirits sufficient to protect
her virtue, and intimidate the ruffian who could offer violence to such
perfection. She broke from his detested embrace with surprising
agility, and called aloud to her landlady for assistance; but that
discreet matron was resolved to hear nothing, and Fathom’s appetite
being whetted to a most brutal degree of eagerness, “Madam,” said he,
“all opposition is vain. What you have refused to my entreaties, you
shall yield to my power; and I am determined to force you to your own
advantage.”

So saying, he sprung towards her, with the most savage and impious
intent, when this amiable heroine snatching up his sword, which lay
upon a by-table, and unsheathing it instantaneously, presented the
point to his breast, and, while her eyes glanced with intolerable
keenness, “Villain!” cried she, “the spirit of my father animates my
bosom, and the vengeance of Heaven shall not be frustrated.” He was not
so much affected by his bodily danger, as awestruck at the manner of
her address, and the appearance of her aspect, which seemed to shine
with something supernatural, and actually disordered his whole
faculties, insomuch that he retreated without attempting to make the
least reply; and she, having secured the door after his departure, sat
down to ponder upon this shocking event.

Words are wanting to describe the accumulated horrors that took
possession of her mind, when she thus beheld all her presaging fears
realised, and found herself at the mercy of two wretches, who had now
pulled off the mask, after having lost all sentiments of humanity.
Common affliction was an agreeable reverie to what she suffered,
deprived of her parents, exiled from her friends and country, reduced
to the brink of wanting the most indispensable necessaries of life, in
a foreign land, where she knew not one person to whose protection she
could have recourse, from the inexpressible woes that environed her.
She complained to Heaven that her life was protracted, for the
augmentation of that misery which was already too severe to be endured;
for she shuddered at the prospect of being utterly abandoned in the
last stage of mortality, without one friend to close her eyes, or do
the last offices of humanity to her breathless corse. These were
dreadful reflections to a young lady who had been born to affluence and
splendour, trained up in all the elegance of education, by nature
fraught with that sensibility which refines the sentiment and taste,
and so tenderly cherished by her indulgent parents, that they suffered
not the winds of Heaven to visit her face too roughly.

Having passed the night in such agony, she rose at daybreak, and,
hearing the chapel bell toll for morning prayers, resolved to go to
this place of worship, in order to implore the assistance of Heaven.
She no sooner opened her chamber door, with this intent, than she was
met by Madam la Mer, who, after having professed her concern for what
had happened overnight, and imputed Mr. Fathom’s rudeness to the spirit
of intoxication, by which she had never before seen him possessed, she
endeavoured to dissuade Monimia from her purpose, by observing, that
her health would be prejudiced by the cold morning air; but finding her
determined, she insisted upon accompanying her to chapel, on pretence
of respect, though, in reality, with a view to prevent the escape of
her beauteous lodger. Thus attended, the hapless mourner entered the
place, and, according to the laudable hospitality of England, which is
the only country in Christendom where a stranger is not made welcome to
the house of God, this amiable creature, emaciated and enfeebled as she
was, must have stood in a common passage during the whole service, had
not she been perceived by a humane gentlewoman, who, struck with her
beauty and dignified air, and melted with sympathy at the ineffable
sorrow which was visible in her countenance, opened the pew in which
she sat, and accommodated Monimia and her attendant. If she was
captivated by her first appearance, she was not less affected by the
deportment of her fair guest, which was the pattern of genuine
devotion.

In a word, this good lady, who was a merchant’s widow in opulent
circumstances, was inflamed with a longing desire to know and befriend
the amiable stranger, who, after service, turning about to thank her
for her civility, Madam Clement, with that frankness which is the
result of true benevolence, told her, she was too much prepossessed in
her favour to let slip this opportunity of craving her acquaintance,
and of expressing her inclination to alleviate, if possible, that
affliction which was manifest in her looks.

Monimia, overwhelmed with gratitude and surprise at this unexpected
address, gazed upon the lady in silence, and when she repeated her
tenders of service, could make no other reply to her goodness, than by
bursting into a flood of tears. This was a species of eloquence which
did not pass unregarded by Madam Clement, who, while her own eyes were
bedewed with the drops of sympathy and compassion, took the lovely
orphan by the hand, and led her, without further ceremony, to her own
coach, that stood waiting at the door, whither they were followed by
Mrs. la Mer, who was so much confounded at the adventure, that she made
no objections to the proposal of the lady, who handed her lodger into
the carriage; but retired, with all possible despatch, to make Fathom
acquainted with this unforeseen event.

Meanwhile the agitation of Monimia, at this providential deliverance,
was such as had well-nigh destroyed her tender frame. The blood flushed
and forsook her cheeks by turns; she trembled from head to foot,
notwithstanding the consolatory assurances of Madam Clement, and,
without being able to utter one word, was conducted to the house of
that kind benefactress, where the violence of her transports
overpowered her constitution, and she sunk down upon a couch in a
swoon, from which she was not easily recovered. This affecting
circumstance augmented the pity, and interested the curiosity of Madam
Clement, who concluded there was something very extraordinary in the
case of the stranger, to produce these agonies; and grew impatient to
hear the particulars of her story.

Monimia no sooner retrieved the use of her faculties, than looking
around, and observing with what humane concern her new hostess was
employed in effecting her recovery, “Is this,” said she, “a flattering
illusion of the brain? or am I really under the protection of some
beneficent being, whom Heaven hath inspired with generosity to rescue
an hapless stranger from the most forlorn state of misery and woe?” Her
voice was at all times ravishingly sweet; and this exclamation was
pronounced with such pathetic fervour, that Madam Clement clasped her
in her arms, and kissing her with all the eagerness of maternal
affection, “Yes,” cried she, “fair creature, Heaven hath bestowed upon
me an heart to compassionate, and power, I hope, to lighten the burden
of your sorrows.”

She then prevailed upon her to take some nourishment, and afterwards to
recount the particulars of her fate; a task she performed with such
accuracy and candour, that Madam Clement, far from suspecting her
sincerity, saw truth and conviction in every circumstance of her tale;
and, having condoled her misfortunes, entreated her to forget them, or
at least look upon herself as one sheltered under the care and tuition
of a person whose study it would be to supply her want of natural
parents. This would have been an happy vicissitude of fortune, had it
not arrived too late; but such a sudden and unlooked-for transition not
only disordered the faculties of poor Monimia’s mind, but also
overpowered the organs of her body, already fatigued and enfeebled by
the distresses she had undergone; so that she was taken ill of a fever
that same night, and became delirious before morning, when a physician
was called to her assistance.

While this gentleman was in the house, Madam Clement was visited by
Fathom, who, after having complained, in the most insinuating manner
that she had encouraged his wife to abandon her duty, told her a
plausible story of his first acquaintance with Monimia, and his
marriage at the Fleet, which, he said, he was ready to prove by the
evidence of the clergyman who joined them, and that of Mrs. la Mer, who
was present at the ceremony. The good lady, although a little staggered
at the genteel appearance and engaging address of this stranger, could
not prevail upon herself to believe that she had been imposed upon by
her fair lodger, who by this time had given too convincing a proof of
her sincerity; nevertheless, in order to prevent any dispute that might
be prejudicial to the health or recovery of Monimia, she gave him to
understand, that she would not at present enter upon the merits of the
cause, but only assure him, that the young lady was actually bereft of
her senses, and in imminent danger of her life; for the truth of which
assertions she would appeal to his own observation, and the opinion of
the physician, who was then employed in writing a prescription for the
cure of her disease.

So saying, she conducted him into the chamber, where he beheld the
hapless virgin stretched upon a sick-bed, panting under the violence of
a distemper too mighty for her weakly frame, her hair dishevelled, and
discomposure in her looks; all the roses of her youth were faded, yet
all the graces of her beauty were not fled. She retained that sweetness
and symmetry, which death itself could not destroy; and though her
discourse was incoherent, her voice was still musical, resembling those
feathered songsters who warble their native wood-notes wild.

Fathom, as upon all other occasions, so on this, did behave like an
inimitable actor; he ran to the bedside, with all the trepidation of a
distracted lover; he fell upon his knees, and, while the tears rolled
down his cheeks, imprinted a thousand kisses on the soft hand of
Monimia, who regarding him with a lack-lustre and undistinguishing eye,
“Alas! Renaldo,” said she, “we were born to be unhappy.” “Would to
Heaven,” cried Ferdinand, in a transport of grief, “the wretch Renaldo
had never been born! that is the villain who seduced the affection of
this unfortunate woman. I admitted the traitor into my friendship and
confidence, relieved him in his necessities; and, like the ungrateful
viper, he hath stung the very bosom that cherished him in his
distress.” Then he proceeded to inform Madam Clement how he had
delivered that same Renaldo from prison, maintained him afterwards at a
great expense, and at length furnished him with a sum of money and
proper credentials to support his interest at the Court of Vienna.

Having finished this detail, he asked the physician’s sentiments of his
wife’s distemper, and being told that her life was in extreme jeopardy,
begged he would use his utmost endeavours in her behalf, and even made
him a tender of an extraordinary fee, which was refused. He also
thanked Madam Clement for her charity and benevolence towards a
stranger, and took his leave with many polite professions of gratitude
and esteem. He had no sooner quitted the house, than the physician, who
was a humane man, and a foreigner, began to caution the lady against
his insinuations, observing, that some circumstances of the story
concerning Renaldo were, to his particular knowledge, contrary to
truth; for that he himself had been applied to for letters of
recommendation in behalf of Count Melvil, by a Jew merchant of his
acquaintance, who had supplied the young gentleman with money
sufficient for his occasions, in consequence of a minute inquiry he had
made into the character of Renaldo, who was, by all reports, a youth of
strict honour and untainted morals.

Madam Clement, thus cautioned, entered into deliberation with her own
thoughts, and, comparing the particulars of this account with those of
Monimia’s own story, she concluded that Fathom was the very traitor he
himself had described; and that he had, by abusing the confidence of
both, effected a fatal breach between two innocent and deserving
lovers. She accordingly looked upon him with horror and detestation;
but nevertheless resolved to treat him with civility in the meantime,
that the poor young lady might not be disturbed in her last moments;
for she had now lost all hopes of her recovery. Yet the fever abated,
and in two days she retrieved the use of her reason; though the
distemper had affected her lungs, and she was in all appearance doomed
to linger a few weeks longer in a consumption.

Fathom was punctual in his visitation, though never admitted into her
presence after the delirium vanished; and he had the opportunity of
seeing her conveyed in a chariot to Kensington Gravel Pits, a place
which may be termed the last stage of many a mortal peregrination. He
now implicitly believed that death would in a few days baffle all his
designs upon the unfortunate Monimia; and foreseeing that, as he had
owned himself her husband, he might be obliged to defray the expenses
incurred by her sickness and burial, he very prudently intermitted in
his visits, and had recourse to the intelligence of his auxiliary.

As for Monimia, she approached the goal of life, not simply with
resignation, but with rapture. She enjoyed in tranquillity the
conversation of her kind benefactress, who never stirred from her
apartment; she was blessed with the spiritual consolation of a worthy
clergyman, who removed all her religious scruples; and she
congratulated herself on the near prospect of that land of peace where
sorrow is not known.

At length Mrs. la Mer gave notice to our adventurer of this amiable
young lady’s decease, and the time fixed for the interment. Upon which
these two virtuous associates took possession of a place from whence
they could, unperceived, behold the funeral. He must have a hard heart,
who, without an emotion of pity, can see the last offices performed to
a young creature cut off in the flower of youth and beauty, even though
he knows not her name, and is an utter stranger to her virtues. How
callous then must the soul of that wretch have been, who, without a
symptom of remorse or concern, saw the sable hearse adorned with white
plumes, as emblems of Monimia’s purity, pass before him, while her
incomparable merit stood full in his remembrance, and he knew himself
the wicked cause of her untimely fate!

Perfidious wretch! thy crimes turn out so atrocious, that I half repent
me of having undertaken to record thy memoirs; yet such monsters ought
to be exhibited to public view, that mankind may be upon their guard
against imposture; that the world may see how fraud is apt to overshoot
itself; and that, as virtue, though it may suffer for a while, will
triumph in the end; so iniquity, though it may prosper for a season,
will at last be overtaken by that punishment and disgrace which are its
due.




CHAPTER FIFTY

FATHOM SHIFTS THE SCENE, AND APPEARS IN A NEW CHARACTER.


Fathom’s expectations with respect to the fair orphan having thus
proved abortive, he lost no time in bewailing his miscarriage, but had
immediate recourse to other means of improving his small fortune,
which, at this period, amounted to near two hundred pounds. Whatever
inclination he had to resume the character he had formerly borne in the
polite world, he durst not venture to launch out again into the expense
necessary to maintain that station, because his former resources were
now stopped, and all the people of fashion by this time convinced of
his being a needy adventurer. Nevertheless, he resolved to sound the
sentiments of his old friends at a distance, and judge, from the
reception he should meet with, how far he might presume upon their
countenance and favour. For he rightly supposed, that if he could in
any shape contribute to their interest or amusement, they would easily
forgive his former pretensions to quality, arrogant as they were, and
still entertain him on the footing of a necessary acquaintance.

With this view, he one day presented himself at court in a very gay
suit of clothes, and bowed, at a distance, to many of his old
fashionable friends of both sexes, not one of whom favoured him with
any other notice, than that of a quarter curtsey, or slight inclination
of the head. For, by this time, the few that remembered him knew from
what retirement he now emerged, and avoided him accordingly as the jail
infection. But the greater part of those who had cultivated him in the
zenith of his fortune were now utter strangers to his person, which
they had actually forgot, amidst the succession of novelties that
surrounded them; or, if they did recollect his name, it was remembered
as an old fashion which had been many months out of date.

Notwithstanding these mortifying discouragements, our hero, that same
evening, effected a lodgment in a certain gaming-house not far from St.
James’s; and, as he played pretty high, and made a parade of his ready
money, he was soon recognised by divers persons of consequence, who
cordially welcomed him to England, on pretence of believing he had been
abroad, and with great complacency repeated their former professions of
friendship. Though this was a certain way of retaining the favour of
those worthies, while his finances continued to flourish, and his
payments were prompt, he knew the weakness of his funds too well, to
think they could bear the vicissitudes of play; and the remembrance of
the two British knights who had spoiled him at Paris, hung over his
imagination with the most frightful presages. Besides, he perceived
that gaming was now managed in such a manner, as rendered skill and
dexterity of no advantage. For the spirit of play having overspread the
land, like a pestilence, raged to such a degree of madness and
desperation, that the unhappy people who were infected, laid aside all
thoughts of amusement, economy, or caution, and risked their fortunes
upon issues equally extravagant, childish, and absurd.

The whole mystery of the art was reduced to the simple exercise of
tossing up a guinea, and the lust of laying wagers, which they indulged
to a surprising pitch of ridiculous intemperance. In one corner of the
room might be heard a pair of lordlings running their grandmothers
against each other, that is, betting sums on the longest liver; in
another the success of the wager depended upon the sex of the
landlady’s next child; and one of the waiters happening to drop down in
an apoplectic fit, a certain noble peer exclaimed, “Dead for a thousand
pounds.” The challenge was immediately accepted; and when the master of
the house sent for a surgeon to attempt the cure, the nobleman, who set
the price upon the patient’s head, insisted upon his being left to the
efforts of nature alone, otherwise the wager should be void. Nay, when
the landlord harped upon the loss he should sustain by the death of a
trusty servant, his lordship obviated the objection, by desiring that
the fellow might be charged in the bill.

In short, the rage of gaming seemed to have devoured all their other
faculties, and to have equalled the rash enthusiasm of the inhabitants
of Malacca in the East Indies, who are so possessed with that
pernicious spirit, that they sacrifice to it not only their fortunes,
but also their wives and children; and then letting their hair down
upon their shoulders, in imitation of the ancient Lacedaemonians when
they devoted themselves to death, those wretches unsheathe their
daggers, and murder every living creature in their way. In this,
however, they differ from the gamesters of our country, who never find
their senses, until they have lost their fortunes, and beggared their
families; whereas the Malays never run amuck, but in consequence of
misery and despair.

Such are the amusements, or rather such is the continual employment of
those hopeful youths who are destined by birth to be the judges of our
property, and pillars of our constitution. Such are the heirs and
representatives of those patriots who planned, and those heroes who
maintained, the laws and freedom of their country; who were the patrons
of merit, the fathers of the poor, the terror of vice and immorality,
and at once the ornaments and support of a happy nation.

Our adventurer considered all these circumstances with his wonted
sagacity, and, seeing upon what precarious footing he must stand,
should he rank himself with such society, he wisely came to the
resolution of descending one step in the degrees of life, and of taking
upon him the title of physician, under which he did not despair of
insinuating himself into the pockets of his patients, and into the
secrets of private families, so as to acquire a comfortable share of
practice, or captivate the heart of some heiress or rich widow, whose
fortune would at once render him independent and happy.

After this determination, his next care was to concert measures for his
first appearance in this new character; well knowing, that the success
of a physician, in a great measure, depends upon the external equipage
in which he first declares himself an adept in the healing art. He
first of all procured a few books on the subject of medicine, which he
studied with great attention during the remaining part of the winter
and spring, and repaired to Tunbridge with the first of the season,
where he appeared in the uniform of Aesculapius, namely, a plain suit,
full trimmed, with a voluminous tie-periwig; believing that in this
place he might glide, as it were, imperceptibly into the functions of
his new employment, and gradually accustom himself to the method and
form of prescription.

A man so well known in the gay world could not be supposed to effect
such a transformation without being observed; and therefore, in order
to anticipate the censure and ridicule of those who might be tempted to
make themselves merry at his expense, he, on his arrival at the wells,
repaired to the shop of an apothecary, and calling for pen, ink, and
paper, wrote a prescription, which he desired might be immediately made
up. While this was doing by the servant, he was invited into a parlour
by the master, with whom he entered into conversation touching the
properties of the Tunbridge water, which seemed to have been his
particular study; and indeed he had perused Rouzee’s treatise on that
subject with indefatigable assiduity. From this theme, he made
digressions into other parts of medicine, upon which he spoke with such
plausible elocution, that the apothecary, whose knowledge in that art
was not very profound, looked upon him as a physician of great learning
and experience, and hinted a desire of knowing his name and situation.

Fathom accordingly gave him to understand, that he had studied physic,
and taken his degrees at Padua, rather for his amusement, than with any
view of exercising medicine, as he then could not possibly foresee the
misfortunes which had since happened to his family, and by which he was
now compelled to have recourse to a profession that was very much
beneath the expectations of his birth. Yet he bore his disappointments
with resignation, and even good-humour, and blessed his stars for
having inclined him to the study of any branch of knowledge by which he
might be enabled to laugh at the vicissitudes of fortune. He then
observed, that he had practised with some applause at the hot well near
Bristol, before he thought he should be ever reduced to the necessity
of taking a fee, and that, in all probability, his metamorphosis, when
known, would furnish matter of surprise and merriment to some of his
old acquaintance.

The apothecary was equally struck with his polite address, and pleased
with his agreeable discourse. He consoled him for the misfortunes of
his family, by assuring him, that in England nothing could be more
honourable, or indeed profitable, than the character of a physician,
provided he could once wriggle himself into practice; and insinuated,
that, although he was restricted by certain engagements with other
persons of the faculty, he should be glad of an opportunity to show his
regard for Doctor Fathom. This was a very effectual method which our
hero took to intimate his new character to the public. By the industry
and communicative disposition of the apothecary, it was circulated in
half a day through every family in the place; and, next morning, when
Ferdinand appeared, the company forthwith assembled in separate groups,
and from each knot he heard his name reverberated in a whisper.

Having thus announced himself to all whom it might concern, and allowed
the ladies two days to discuss the merit of his transfiguration,
together with the novelty of the case, he ventured to salute, at a
distance, a lady and her daughter, who had been his patients at the hot
well; and, although they honoured his bow with the return of a slight
curtsey, they gave him not the least encouragement to make a nearer
approach. Notwithstanding this rebuff, he concluded, that, should the
health of either come in question, they would renew their application
to his skill, and what was refused by their pride would be granted by
their apprehension. Here, however, he happened to be mistaken in his
conjecture.

The young lady being seized with a violent headache and palpitation,
her mother desired the apothecary to recommend a physician; and the
person with whom he was contracted being at that time absent, he
proposed Doctor Fathom as a man of great ability and discretion. But
the good lady rejected the proposal with disdain, because she had
formerly known him in the character of a Count—though that very
character was the chief reason that had then induced her to crave his
advice.

Such is the caprice of the world in general, that whatever bears the
face of novelty captivates, or rather bewitches, the imagination, and
confounds the ideas of reason and common sense. If, for example, a
scullion, from the clinking of pewter, shall conceive a taste for the
clinking of rhyme, and make shift to bring together twenty syllables,
so as that the tenth and last shall have the like ending, the
composition is immediately extolled as a miracle; and what appeals to
the admiration is not the wit, the elegance, or poetry of the work, but
the uncultivated talent and humble station of the author. A reader does
not exclaim, “What a delicate sentiment! what a beautiful simile! what
easy and musical versification!”—but cries in rapture, “Heavens! what a
prodigy a poet from the scullery! a muse in livery! or, Apollo with a
trowel!”—The public is astonished into liberality—the scullion eats
from those trenchers he scoured before—the footman is admitted into the
coach behind which he was wont to stand—and the bricklayer, instead of
plastering walls, bedaubs his illustrious partner with the mortar of
his praise. Thus, lifted into a higher sphere, their talents receive
cultivation; they become professed bards, and though their subsequent
works bear evident marks of improvement, they are neglected among the
rest of their brethren, because that novelty, which recommended them in
the beginning, no longer remains.

So it fared with our adventurer in his new occupation. There was
something so extraordinary in a nobleman’s understanding medicine, and
so uncommon in a physician’s prescribing gratis, that the curiosity and
admiration of the company at Bristol were engaged, and they followed
his advice, as the direction of some supernatural intelligence. But,
now that he professed himself one of the faculty, and might be supposed
to have refreshed his memory, and reinforced his knowledge for the
occasion, he was as much overlooked as any other physician unsupported
by interest or cabal; or, at least, the notice he attracted was not at
all to the advantage of his character, because it wholly regarded the
decline of his fortune, which is a never-failing fund of disgrace.

These mortifications did not overcome the patience and perseverance of
Fathom, who foresaw, that the soothing hand of time would cast a veil
of oblivion over those scenes which were remembered to his prejudice;
and that, in the meantime, though he was excluded from the private
parties of the fair sex, in which his main hope of success was placed,
he should be able to insinuate himself into some degree of favour and
practice among the male patients; and some lucky cure, properly
displayed, might be the means of propagating his fame, and banishing
that reserve which at present interfered with his purpose. Accordingly,
it was not long before he found means to break that spell of universal
prejudice that hedged him in. At the ordinary which he frequented, his
polite carriage, facetious remarks, and agreeable stories soon
conciliated the regard of his fellow-guests, among whom he sometimes
rallied his own transformation with singular good-humour and success.
He was even witty upon his want of employment, and used to observe,
that a physician without practice had one comfort to which his brethren
were strangers, namely, that the seldomer he had occasion to prescribe,
the less he had upon his conscience on account of being accessory to
the death of his fellow-creatures.

Nothing so effectually blunts the shafts of ridicule, and defeats the
aims of slander, as this method of anticipation. In spite of the arrows
that were levelled against his reputation from every tea-table at
Tunbridge, he made his party good among almost all the gay young
gentlemen that frequented the place. Far from avoiding his company,
they began to court his conversation, and he was commonly seen in the
walks surrounded with a group of admirers.

Having thus paved the way for a total removal of the invidious
prepossession that obstructed his views, he, one night, while every
person was lulled in the arms of repose, and universal silence
prevailed, tuned his violin, and began to play some masterly airs, in a
tone so uncommonly expressive, and with such ravishing dexterity of
execution, that a certain lady, who lodged in the same house, being
waked by the music, and ignorant of the source from which it flowed,
listened with rapture, as to the harp of an angel, and, wrapping
herself in a loose gown, rose and opened her chamber door, in order to
discover in what apartment the musician resided. She no sooner entered
the passage, than she found her fellow-lodgers already assembled on the
same occasion; and there they remained during the best part of the
night, transported by the harmony which our hero produced.

Doctor Fathom was immediately known to be the author of this
entertainment; and thus retrieved the benefit of that admiration which
he had forfeited by appearing in the shape of a physician. For, as
people had formerly wondered to see a count skilled in medicine, they
were now amazed to find a physician such a master in music.

The good effects of this stratagem were almost instantaneous. His
performance became the topic of discourse among all the fashionable
company. His male friends complimented him from the information of the
other sex; and that lady whom he had regaled, instead of that shyness
and disdain with which she used to receive his salutation, at their
very next meeting in the thoroughfare, returned his bow with marks of
profound respect. Nay, at midnight, she, with the rest, took post in
the same place where they had been stationed before; and, by frequent
tittering, and repeated whispers, gave intimation to Fathom, that they
would be glad of a second serenade. But he was too well acquainted with
the human passions to indulge this their desire. It was his interest to
inflame their impatience, rather than to gratify their expectation; and
therefore he tantalised them for some hours, by tuning his violin, and
playing some flourishes, which, however, produced nothing to fulfil
their wishes.

At the ordinary, he was accosted by a gentleman, a lodger in the same
house, who assured him, that the ladies would take it as a great favour
if he would let them know when he intended to amuse himself again with
his instrument, that they might not, by falling asleep beforehand,
deprive themselves of the pleasure of hearing his music. To this
message he replied, with an air of consequence and reserve, that,
though music was not the art he professed, he should be always
complaisant enough to entertain the ladies to the utmost of his power,
when their commands were signified to him in a manner suited to his
character; but that he would never put himself on the footing of an
itinerate harper, whose music is tolerated through the medium of a
board partition. The gentleman having reported this answer to his
constituents, they empowered him to invite Doctor Fathom to breakfast,
and he was next morning introduced with the usual ceremony, and treated
with uncommon regard by all the females of the house, assembled for his
reception.

Having thus broken the ice of their aversion in one part, so as that
the beams of his personal accomplishments had room to operate, he soon
effected a general thaw in his favour, and found himself growing once
more into request amongst the most amiable part of the creation. His
company was coveted, and his taste consulted in their balls, concerts,
and private assemblies; and he recompensed the regard they paid to him
with an incessant exertion of his agreeable talents, politeness, and
good-humour.




CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE

TRIUMPHS OVER A MEDICAL RIVAL.


Yet, in the midst of all this attention, his medical capacity seemed to
be quite forgot. They respected his good breeding, were charmed with
his voice, and admired the fine touches of his hand upon the violin;
but in cultivating the fiddler, they utterly neglected the physician;
and in vain did he attempt to divide their regard, by taking all
opportunities to turn the conversation into a more interesting channel.
It was to little purpose he endeavoured to arouse the wonder of his
audience with frequent descriptions of portentous maladies and amazing
cures he had seen and performed in the course of his study and practice
abroad; and to no effect did he publicly busy himself in making
experiments on the mineral water, in which he pretended to have made
several new and important discoveries. These efforts did not make a
lasting impression upon the minds of the company; because they saw
nothing surprising in a physician’s being acquainted with all the
mysteries of his art; and, as their custom was already bespoke for
others of the profession, whom it was their interest to employ, our
adventurer might have starved amidst the caresses of his acquaintance,
had not he derived considerable advantage from a lucky accident in the
course of his expectancy.

A gentlewoman’s daughter, of a weakly constitution, by drinking the
waters, had so far recovered her health and complexion, as to allure
the affection of a young squire in the neighbourhood, who amused her
for some time with his addresses, until his heart was seduced by the
charms of another young lady lately arrived at the wells. The forsaken
nymph, shocked at this disgrace and mortification, relapsed into her
former languishing disorder; and was by her mother put under the
management and prescription of a physician, who had been an industrious
enemy of Fathom from his first appearance at Tunbridge. The patient,
though violently chagrined at the levity of her quondam admirer, was
not altogether without hope, that the very same inconstancy which had
prompted him to leave her, might in time induce him to return, after
the novelty of his new passion should be wore off; and this hope served
to support her under the sorrow and disgrace of her disappointment. At
length, however, the squire and his new mistress disappeared; and some
busybody was officious enough to communicate this piece of news to the
forlorn shepherdess, with this additional circumstance, that they were
gone to a neighbouring parish to be joined in the bands of wedlock.

These fatal tidings were no sooner imparted to the abandoned Phillis,
than she was seized with an hysteric fit; and, what rendered the
accident more unfortunate, her physician had been called to the
country, and was not expected at Tunbridge till next day. The
apothecary was immediately summoned; and, being either puzzled by the
symptoms, or afraid of encroaching upon the province of his superiors,
advised the old lady to send for Doctor Fathom without delay. She had
no other objection to this expedient, but the enmity which she knew
subsisted between the two leeches; yet, hearing that her own doctor
would not consult with Fathom upon his return but, perhaps renounce the
patient, by which means her daughter’s health might be endangered, she
would not solicit our hero’s assistance, until the young lady had
remained seven hours speechless and insensible; when, her fear
prevailing over every other consideration, she implored the advice of
our adventurer, who, having made the necessary interrogations, and felt
the patient’s pulse, which was regular and distinct, found reason to
conclude that the fit would not last much longer, and, after having
observed that she was in a very dangerous way, prescribed some
medicines for external application; and, to enhance their opinion of
his diligence and humanity, resolved to stay in the room and observe
their effect.

His judgment did not fail him on this occasion. In less than half an
hour after his embrocations had been applied, she recovered the use of
her tongue, opened her eyes, and having, in delirious exclamations,
upbraided her perfidious lover, became quite sensible and composed,
though she continued extremely low and dejected. To remedy these
sinkings, certain cordials were immediately administered, according to
the prescription of Doctor Fathom, upon whom extraordinary encomiums
were bestowed by all present, who believed he had actually rescued her
from the jaws of death; and as he was by this time let into the secrets
of the family, he found himself in a fair way of being an egregious
favourite of the old gentlewoman; when, unluckily, his brother, having
dismissed his country patient with uncommon despatch, entered the
apartment, and eyed his rival with looks of inexpressible rage; then,
surveying the patient, and the phials that stood upon the table, by
turns, “What, in the name of God!” cried he, “is the meaning of all
this trash!”

“Really, doctor,” replied the mother, a little confounded at being thus
taken by surprise, “Biddy has been taken dangerously ill, and lain
seven or eight hours in a severe fit, from which I am confident she
would never have recovered without the help of a physician; and as you
were absent, we had recourse to this gentleman, whose prescription hath
had a happy and surprising effect.” “Effect!” cried this offended
member of the faculty, “pshaw!—stuff!—who made you judge of effects or
causes?” Then advancing to the patient, “What has been the matter, Miss
Biddy, that you could not wait till my return?”

Here Fathom interposing, “Sir,” said he, “if you will step into the
next room, I will communicate my sentiments of the case, together with
the method upon which I have proceeded, that we may deliberate upon the
next step that is to be taken.” Instead of complying with this
proposal, he seated himself in a chair, with his back to our
adventurer, and, while he examined Miss Biddy’s pulse, gave him to
understand, that he should not consult with him about the matter.

Fathom, not in the least disconcerted at this uncivil answer, walked
round his antagonist, and, placing himself in his front, desired to
know his reason for treating him with such supercilious contempt. “I am
resolved,” said the other, “never to consult with any physician who has
not taken his degrees at either of the English universities.” “Upon the
supposition,” replied our adventurer, “that no person can be properly
educated for the profession at any other school.” “You are in the
right,” answered Doctor Looby; “that is one of many reasons I have to
decline the consultation.”

“How far you are in the right,” retorted Fathom, “I leave the world to
judge, after I have observed, that, in your English universities, there
is no opportunity of studying the art; no, not so much as a lecture
given on the subject. Nor is there one physician of note in this
kingdom who has not derived the greatest part of his medical knowledge
from the instructions of foreigners.”

Looby, incensed at this asseveration, which he was not prepared to
refute, exclaimed, in a most infuriate accent, “Who are you?—whence
came you?—where was you bred? You are one of those, I believe, who
graduate themselves, and commence doctors, the Lord knows how; an
interloper, who, without licence or authority, comes hither to take the
bread out of the mouths of gentlemen who have been trained to the
business in a regular manner, and bestowed great pains and expense to
qualify themselves for the profession. For my own part, my education
cost me fifteen hundred pounds.”

“Never was money laid out to less purpose,” said Ferdinand; “for it
does not appear that you have learned so much as the basis of medical
requirements, namely, that decorum and urbanity which ought to
distinguish the deportment of every physician. You have even debased
the noblest and most beneficial art that ever engaged the study of
mankind, which cannot be too much cultivated, and too little
restrained, in seeking to limit the practice of it to a set of
narrow-minded, illiberal wretches, who, like the lowest handicraftsmen,
claim the exclusive privileges of a corporation. Had you doubted my
ability, you ought to have satisfied yourself in a manner consistent
with decency and candour; but your behaviour on this occasion is such a
malicious outrage upon good manners and humanity, that, were it not for
my regard to these ladies, I would chastise you for your insolence on
the spot. Meanwhile, madam,” addressing himself to the mother, “you
must give me leave to insist upon your dismissing either that
gentleman, or me, without hesitation.”

This peremptory language had an instantaneous effect upon the hearers.
Looby’s face grew pale, and his nether lip began to tremble. The
patient was dismayed, and the old gentlewoman concerned and perplexed.
She earnestly besought the gentlemen to be reconciled to each other,
and enter into a friendly consultation upon her daughter’s distemper;
but, finding both equally averse to accommodation, and Fathom becoming
more and more importunate in his demand, she presented him with a
double fee; and giving him to understand that Doctor Looby had long
attended the family, and was intimately acquainted with her own and
Biddy’s constitution, said, she hoped he would not take it amiss if she
retained her old physician.

Though our hero was much mortified at this triumph of his rival, he
made a virtue of necessity, and retired with great complaisance,
wishing that Miss Biddy might never again be the subject of such a
disagreeable dispute. Whether the patient was frighted at this
altercation, or displeased with her mother’s decision against an
agreeable young fellow, who had, as it were, recalled her from the
grave, and made himself master of the secret that rankled at her heart,
or the disease had wound up her nerves for another paroxysm, certain it
is, she all of a sudden broke forth into a violent peal of laughter,
which was succeeded by the most doleful cries, and other expressions of
grief; then she relapsed into a fit, attended with strong convulsions,
to the unspeakable terror of the old gentlewoman, who entreated Doctor
Looby to be expeditious in his prescription. Accordingly he seized the
pen with great confidence, and a whole magazine of antihysteric
medicines were, in different forms, externally and internally applied.

Nevertheless, either nature was disturbed in her own efforts by these
applications, or the patient was resolved to disgrace the doctor. For
the more remedies that were administered, her convulsions became the
more violent; and in spite of all his endeavours, he could not overcome
the obstinacy of the distemper. Such a miscarriage, upon the back of
his rival’s success, could not fail to overwhelm him with confusion;
especially as the mother baited him with repeated entreaties to do
something for the recovery of her daughter. At length, after having
exercised her patience in vain for several hours, this affectionate
parent could no longer suppress the suggestions of her concern, but, in
an incoherent strain, told him that her duty would not suffer her to be
longer silent in an affair on which depended the life of her dear
child. That she had seen enough to believe he had mistaken the case of
poor Biddy, and he could not justly blame her for recalling Doctor
Fathom, whose prescription had operated in a miraculous manner.

Looby, shocked at this proposal, protested against it with great
vehemence, as an expedient highly injurious to himself. “My remedies,”
said he, “are just beginning to take effect, and, in all probability,
the fit will not last much longer; so that, by calling in another
person at this juncture, you will defraud me of that credit which is my
due, and deck my adversary with trophies to which he has no
pretension.” She was prevailed upon, by this remonstrance, to wait
another half hour, when perceiving, as yet, no alteration for the
better, and being distracted with her fears, which reproached her with
want of natural affection, she sent a message to Doctor Fathom,
desiring to see him with all possible despatch.

He was not slow in obeying the call, but hastening to the scene of
action, was not a little surprised to find Looby still in the
apartment. This gentleman, since better might not be, resolved to
sacrifice his pride to his interest, and, rather than lose his patient
altogether, and run the risk of forfeiting his reputation at the same
time, stayed with intention to compromise his difference with Fathom,
that he might not be wholly excluded from the honour of the cure, in
case it could be effected. But he had reckoned without his host in his
calculation of the Count’s placability; for, when he put on his
capitulating face, and, after a slight apology for his late behaviour,
proposed that all animosity should subside in favour of the young lady,
whose life was at stake, our hero rejected his advances with infinite
disdain, and assured the mother, in a very solemn tone, that, far from
consulting with a man who had treated him so unworthily, he would not
stay another minute in the house, unless he should see him discarded; a
satisfaction barely sufficient to atone for the affront he himself had
suffered by the unjust preference she had before given to his rival.

There was no remedy. Looby was obliged to retreat in his turn; then our
adventurer, approaching the bedside, reconnoitred the patient, examined
the medicines which had been administered, and lifting up his eyes in
expressive silence, detached the footman with a new order to the
apothecary. It was well the messenger used expedition, otherwise Doctor
Fathom would have been anticipated by the operation of nature; for, the
fit having almost run its career, Miss Biddy was on the point of
retrieving her senses, when the frontal prescribed by Fathom was
applied; to the efficacy of this, therefore, was ascribed her recovery,
when she opened her eyes, and began to pour forth unconnected
ejaculations; and in a few moments after, she was persuaded to swallow
a draught prepared for the purpose, her perception returned, and
Ferdinand gained the reputation of having performed a second miracle.

But he was furnished with a piece of intelligence, of much more energy
than all she had taken, and so soon as he concluded she was capable to
bear the news without any dangerous emotion, he, among other articles
of chit-chat culled for her amusement, took the opportunity of telling
the company, that Squire Stub (the cause of Miss Biddy’s disorder) had,
in his way to matrimony, been robbed of his bride, by a gentleman to
whom she had been formerly engaged. He had waited for her on purpose at
an inn on the road, where he found means to appease her displeasure,
which he had, it seems, incurred, and to supersede her new lover, whom
she quitted without ceremony; upon which the squire had returned to
Tunbridge, cursing her levity, yet blessing his good stars for having
so seasonably prevented his ruin, which would have infallibly been the
consequence of his marrying such an adventurer.

It would be superfluous to observe, that these tidings operated like an
admirable specific on the spirits of the young lady, who, while she
affected to pity the squire, was so much overjoyed at his
disappointment, that her eyes began to sparkle with uncommon vivacity,
and in less than two hours after the last of those terrible attacks,
she was restored to a better state of health than she had enjoyed for
many weeks. Fathom was not forgot amidst the rejoicings of the family.
Besides an handsome gratuity for the effects of his extraordinary
skill, the old lady favoured him with a general invitation to her
house, and the daughter not only considered him as the restorer of her
health, and angel of her good fortune, but also began to discover an
uncommon relish for his conversation; so that he was struck with the
prospect of succeeding Squire Stub in her affection. A conquest which,
if sanctioned by the approbation of the mother, would console him for
all the disappointments he had sustained; for Miss Biddy was entitled
to a fortune of ten thousand pounds, provided she should marry with the
consent of her parent, who was the sole executrix of the father’s will.

Animated with the hope of such an advantageous match, our adventurer
missed no opportunity of improving the lodgment he had made, while the
two ladies failed not to extol his medical capacity among all their
female acquaintances. By means of this circulation, his advice was
demanded in several other cases, which he managed with such an imposing
air of sagacity and importance, that his fame began to spread, and
before the end of the season, he had ravished more than one half of the
business from his competitor. Notwithstanding these fortunate events,
he foresaw, that he should find great difficulty in transplanting his
reputation, so as to take root in London, which was the only soil in
which he could propose to rise to any degree of prosperity and
independence; and this reflection was grounded upon a maxim which
universally prevails among the English people, namely, to overlook and
wholly neglect, on their return to the metropolis, all the connexions
they may have chanced to acquire during their residence at any of the
medical wells. And this social disposition is so scrupulously
maintained, that two persons who lived in the most intimate
correspondence at Bath or Tunbridge, shall in four-and-twenty hours so
totally forget their friendship, as to meet in St. James’s Park,
without betraying the least token of recognition; so that one would
imagine these mineral waters were so many streams issuing from the
river Lethe, so famed of old for washing away all traces of memory and
recollection.

Aware of this oblivious principle, Doctor Fathom collected all his
qualifications, in order to make such an impression upon the heart of
Miss Biddy, as would resist all her endeavours to shake him from her
remembrance; and his efforts succeeded so well, that Squire Stub’s
advances to a reconciliation were treated with manifest indifference.
In all probability our hero would have made a very advantageous
campaign, had not his good fortune been retarded by an obstruction,
which, as he did not perceive it, he could not possibly surmount. In
displaying his accomplishments to captivate the daughter, he had
unwittingly made an absolute conquest of the mother, who superintended
the conduct of Miss Biddy with such jealous vigilance, that he could
find no opportunity of profiting by the progress he had made in her
heart; for the careful matron would never lose sight of her, no, not
for one moment.

Had the old lady given the least intimation to our adventurer, of the
sentiments she entertained in his behalf, his complaisance was of such
a pliable texture, that he would have quitted his other pursuit, and
made her the sole object of his attention. But she either depended upon
the effect of his own good taste and discernment, or was too proud to
disclose a passion which he had hitherto overlooked.




CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO

REPAIRS TO THE METROPOLIS, AND ENROLS HIMSELF AMONG THE SONS OF PAEAN.


Before this affair could be brought to a proper explanation, the season
being almost ended, the ladies departed from Tunbridge, and in a little
time Doctor Fathom followed them to London, having previously obtained
permission to visit them in that metropolis. He had solicited the same
favour of some other families, in which he hoped to take root, though
he knew they were pre-engaged to different physicians; and resolving to
make his first medical appearance in London with some eclat, he not
only purchased an old chariot, which was new painted for the purpose,
but likewise hired a footman, whom he clothed in laced livery, in order
to distinguish himself from the common run of his brethren.

This equipage, though much more expensive than his finances could bear,
he found absolutely necessary to give him a chance for employment; as
every shabby retainer to physic, in this capital, had provided himself
with a vehicle, which was altogether used by way of a travelling
sign-post, to draw in customers; so that a walking physician was
considered as an obscure pedlar, trudging from street to street, with
his pack of knowledge on his shoulders, and selling his remnants of
advice by retail. A chariot was not now set up for the convenience of a
man sinking under the fatigue of extensive practice, but as a piece of
furniture every way as necessary as a large periwig with three tails;
and a physician, let his merit, in other respects, be never so
conspicuous, can no more expect to become considerable in business,
without the assistance of this implement, than he can hope to live
without food, or breathe without a windpipe.

This requisite is so well understood, that, exclusive of those who
profess themselves doctors, every raw surgeon, every idle apothecary,
who can make interest with some foolhardy coachmaker, may be seen
dancing the bays in all places of public resort, and grinning to one
another from their respective carriages. Hence proceed many of those
cruel accidents which are recorded in the daily papers. An apothecary’s
horses take fright, and run away with his chariot, which is heard of no
more. An eminent surgeon being overturned, is so terrified at the
thoughts of mutilation, that he resolves to walk on foot all the days
of his life; and the coachman of a physician of great practice, having
the misfortune to be disabled by a fall from the box, his master can
never find another to supply his place.

None of these observations escaped the penetrating eye of Fathom, who,
before he pretended to seat himself in this machine, had made proper
inquiry into all the other methods practised, with a view to keep the
wheels in motion. In his researches, he found that the great world was
wholly engrossed by a few practitioners who had arrived at the summit
of reputation, consequently were no longer obliged to cultivate those
arts by which they rose; and that the rest of the business was
parcelled out into small enclosures, occupied by different groups of
personages, male and female, who stood in rings, and tossed the ball
from one to another, there being in each department two sets, the
individuals of which relieved one another occasionally. Every knot was
composed of a waiting-woman, nurse, apothecary, surgeon, and physician,
and sometimes a midwife was admitted into the party; and in this manner
the farce was commonly performed.

A fine lady, fatigued with idleness, complains of the vapours, is
deprived of her rest, though not so sick as to have recourse to
medicine. Her favourite maid, tired with giving her attendance in the
night, thinks proper, for the benefit of her own repose, to complain of
a violent headache, and recommends to her mistress a nurse of approved
tenderness and discretion; at whose house, in all likelihood, the said
chambermaid hath oft given the rendezvous to a male friend. The nurse,
well skilled in the mysteries of her occupation, persuades the patient,
that her malady, far from being slight or chimerical, may proceed to a
very dangerous degree of the hysterical affection, unless it be nipt in
the bud by some very effectual remedy. Then she recounts a surprising
cure performed by a certain apothecary, and appeals to the testimony of
the waiting-woman, who being the gossip of his wife, confirms the
evidence, and corroborates the proposal. The apothecary being summoned,
finds her ladyship in such a delicate situation, that he declines
prescribing, and advises her to send for a physician without delay. The
nomination of course falls to him, and the doctor being called,
declares the necessity of immediate venesection, which is accordingly
performed by a surgeon of the association.

This is one way of beginning the game. Though the commencement often
varies, and sometimes the apothecary and sometimes the physician opens
the scene; but, be that as it will, they always appear in a string,
like a flight of wild geese, and each confederacy maintains a
correspondence with one particular undertaker. Fathom, upon these
considerations, set up his rest in the first floor of an apothecary in
the neighbourhood of Charing Cross, to whom he was introduced by a
letter from a friend at Tunbridge, and who being made acquainted with
his ability and scheme, promised to let slip no opportunity of serving
him; and, indeed, seemed to espouse his interest with great alacrity.
He introduced him to some of his patients, on the strength of a gratis
visit, sounded forth his praise among all the good women of his
acquaintance; and even prevailed upon him to publish advertisements,
importing that he would every day, at a certain time and place, give
his advice to the poor for nothing; hoping that, by means of some lucky
cure, his fame might be extended, and his practice grow into request.

In the meantime his chariot rolled along through all the most
frequented streets, during the whole forenoon, and, at the usual hour,
he never failed to make his appearance at the medical coffee-house,
with all that solemnity of feature and address, by which the modern
sons of Paean are distinguished; not but that he was often puzzled
about the decision of his diurnal route. For the method of driving up
one street and down another, without halting, was become such a stale
expedient, that the very ’prentices used to stand at the shop doors,
and ridicule the vain parade. At length, however, he perused the map of
London with great diligence, and, having acquired a distinct idea of
its topography, used to alight at the end of long narrow thoroughfares
and paved courts, where the chariot was ordered to wait till his
return; and, walking with great gravity through the different turnings
of these alleys, regain his carriage by another passage, and resume his
seat with an air of vast importance. With a view to protract the time
of his supposed visits, he would, at one place, turn aside to a wall;
at another, cheapen an urinal; at a third corner, read a quack
advertisement, or lounge a few minutes in some bookseller’s shop; and,
lastly, glide into some obscure coffee-house, and treat himself with a
dram of usquebaugh.

The other means used to force a trade, such as ordering himself to be
called from church, alarming the neighbourhood with knocking at his
door in the night, receiving sudden messages in places of resort, and
inserting his cures by way of news in the daily papers, had been so
injudiciously hackneyed by every desperate sculler in physic, that they
had lost their effect upon the public, and therefore were excluded from
the plan of our adventurer, whose scheme, for the present, was to exert
himself in winning the favour of those sage Sibyls, who keep, as it
were, the temple of medicine, and admit the young priest to the service
of the altar; but this he considered as a temporary project only, until
he should have acquired interest enough to erect an hospital, lock, or
infirmary, by the voluntary subscription of his friends, a scheme which
had succeeded to a miracle with many of the profession, who had raised
themselves into notice upon the carcases of the poor.

Yet even this branch was already overstocked, insomuch that almost
every street was furnished with one of these charitable receptacles,
which, instead of diminishing the taxes for the maintenance of the
poor, encouraged the vulgar to be idle and dissolute, by opening an
asylum to them and their families, from the diseases of poverty and
intemperance. For it remains to be proved, that the parish rates are
decreased, the bills of mortality lessened, the people more numerous,
or the streets less infested with beggars, notwithstanding the immense
sums yearly granted by individuals for the relief of the indigent.

But, waiving these reflections, Doctor Fathom hoped, that his landlord
would be a most useful implement for extending his influence, and, for
that reason, admitted him into a degree of partnership, after being
fully convinced that he was not under articles to any other physician.
Nevertheless, he was very much mistaken in reckoning on the importance
of his new ally, who was, like himself, a needy adventurer, settled
upon credit, and altogether unemployed, except among the very refuse of
the people, whom no other person would take the trouble to attend. So
that our hero got little else than experience and trouble, excepting a
few guineas which he made shift to glean among sojourners, with whom he
became occasionally acquainted, or young people, who had been
unfortunate in their amours.

In the midst of these endeavours, he did not omit his duty to the old
gentlewoman, whose daughter he had cured at Tunbridge; and was always
received with particular complacency, which, perhaps, he, in some
measure, owed to his genteel equipage, that gave credit to every door
before which it was seen; yet, Miss Biddy was as inaccessible as ever,
while the mother became more and more warm in her civilities, till at
length, after having prepared him with some extraordinary compliments,
she gave him to understand, that Biddy was no better than a
giddy-headed girl, far from being unexceptionable in her moral
character, and particularly deficient in duty and gratitude to her, who
had been always a tender and indulgent parent; she was therefore
determined to punish the young minx for her levity and want of natural
affection, by altering her own condition, could she find a worthy and
agreeable man, on whom she could bestow her hand and fortune without a
blush.

The film was instantly removed from Fathom’s eyes by this declaration,
which she uttered with such a significancy of look, as thrilled to his
soul with joyful presage, while he replied, it would, indeed, be a
difficult task to find a man who merited such happiness and honour;
but, surely, some there were, who would task their faculties to the
uttermost, in manifesting their gratitude, and desire of rendering
themselves worthy of such distinction. Though this answer was
pronounced in such a manner as gave her to understand he had taken the
hint, she would not cheapen her condescension so much as to explain
herself further at that juncture, and he was very well contented to woo
her on her own terms; accordingly he began to season his behaviour with
a spice of gallantry, when he had opportunities of being particular
with this new inamorata, and, in proportion to the returns she made, he
gradually detached himself from Miss Biddy, by intermitting, and, at
last, discontinuing those ardent expressions of love and admiration,
which he had made shift to convey in private looks and stolen whispers,
during the rancorous inspection of her mother.

Such alteration could not long escape the jealous eyes of the young
lady, no more than the cause of this alienation, which, in a moment,
converted all her love into irreconcilable hate, and filled her whole
soul with the most eager desire of vengeance. For she now not only
considered him as a mercenary wretch, who had slighted her attractions
for the sordid gratifications of avarice, but also as an interloper,
who wanted to intercept her fortune, in the odious character of a
father-in-law. But, before she could bring her aim to any ripeness of
contrivance, her mother, having caught cold at church, was seized with
a rheumatic fever, became delirious in less than three days, and,
notwithstanding all the prescriptions and care of her admirer, gave up
the ghost, without having retrieved the use of her senses, or been able
to manifest, by will, the sentiments she entertained in favour of her
physician, who, as the reader will easily perceive, had more reasons
than one to be mortally chagrined at this event.

Miss Biddy being thus put in possession of the whole inheritance, not
only renounced all correspondence with Doctor Fathom, by forbidding him
the house, but likewise took all opportunities of prejudicing his
character, by hinting, that her dear mamma had fallen a sacrifice to
his ignorance and presumption.




CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE

ACQUIRES EMPLOYMENT IN CONSEQUENCE OF A LUCKY MISCARRIAGE.


These ill offices, however, far from answering her purpose, had a quite
contrary effect. For, in consequence of her invectives, he was, in a
few days, called to the wife of a merchant, who piously hoped, that his
practice would not give Miss Biddy the lie. The patient had long
lingered under a complication of distempers, and being in no immediate
danger of her life, Doctor Fathom was in no hurry to strike a decisive
stroke; till the husband growing impatient of delay, and so explicit in
his hints, that it was impossible to misapprehend his meaning, our
adventurer resolved to do something effectual for his satisfaction, and
prescribed a medicine of such rough operation, as he thought must
either oblige his employer, or produce a change in the lady’s
constitution, that would make a noise in the world, and bring a new
accession to his fame.

Proceeding upon these maxims, he could not be disappointed. The remedy
played its part with such violence, as reduced the patient to
extremity, and the merchant had actually bespoke an undertaker; when,
after a series of swoonings and convulsions, nature so far prevailed,
as to expel, at once, the prescription and the disease; yet the
good-natured husband was so much affected with the agonies to which he
saw the wife of his bosom exposed by this specific, that, although the
effect of it was her perfect recovery, he could never bear the sight of
Fathom for the future, nor even hear his name mentioned, without giving
signs of horror and indignation. Nay, he did not scruple to affirm,
that, had our adventurer been endowed with the least tincture of
humanity, he would have suffered the poor woman to depart in peace,
rather than restore her to health, at the expense of such anxiety and
torture.

On the other hand, this extraordinary cure was blazoned abroad by the
good lady and her gossips, with such exaggerations as roused the
astonishment of the public, and concurred with the report of his last
miscarriage to bring him upon the carpet, as the universal subject of
discourse. When a physician becomes the town talk, he generally
concludes his business more than half done, even though his fame should
wholly turn upon his malpractice; insomuch that some members of the
faculty have been heard to complain, that they never had the good
fortune to be publicly accused of homicide; and it is well known, that
a certain famous empiric, of our day, never flourished to any degree of
wealth and reputation till after he had been attacked in print, and
fairly convicted of having destroyed a good number of the human
species. Success raised upon such a foundation would, by a disciple of
Plato, and some modern moralists, be ascribed to the innate virtue and
generosity of the human heart, which naturally espouses the cause that
needs protection. But I, whose notions of human excellence are not
quite so sublime, am apt to believe it is owing to that spirit of
self-conceit and contradiction, which is, at least, as universal, if
not as natural, as the moral sense so warmly contended for by those
ideal philosophers.

The most infamous wretch often finds his account in these principles of
malevolence and self-love. For wheresoever his character falls under
discussion there is generally some person present, who, either from an
affectation of singularity, or envy to the accusers, undertakes his
defence, and endeavours to invalidate the articles of his impeachment,
until he is heated by altercation, and hurried into more effectual
measures for his advantage. If such benefits accrue to those who have
no real merit to depend upon, surely our hero could not but reap
something extraordinary from the debates to which he now gave rise; as,
by the miraculous cure he had affected, all his patient’s friends, all
the enemies of her husband, all those who envied his other adversary,
were interested in his behalf, exclusive of such admirers as surprise
and curiosity might engage in his cause.

Thus wafted upon the wings of applause, his fame soon diffused itself
into all the corners of this great capital. The newspapers teemed with
his praise; and in order to keep up the attention of the public, his
emissaries, male and female, separated into different coffee-houses,
companies, and clubs, where they did not fail to comment upon these
articles of intelligence. Such a favourable incident is, of itself,
sufficient to float the bark of a man’s fortune. He was, in a few days,
called to another lady, labouring under the same disorder he had so
successfully dispelled, and she thought herself benefited by his
advice. His acquaintance naturally extended itself among the visitants
and allies of his patients; he was recommended from family to family;
the fees began to multiply; a variety of footmen appeared every day at
his door; he discontinued his sham circuit, and looking upon the
present conjuncture, as that tide in his affairs, which, according to
Shakespeare, when taken at the full, leads on to fortune, he resolved
that the opportunity should not be lost, and applied himself with such
assiduity to his practice, that, in all likelihood, he would have
carried the palm from all his contemporaries, had he not split upon the
same rock which had shipwrecked his hopes before.

We have formerly descanted upon that venereal appetite which glowed in
the constitution of our adventurer, and with all his philosophy and
caution could hardly keep within bounds. The reader, therefore, will
not be much surprised to learn, that, in the exercise of his
profession, he contracted an intimacy with a clergyman’s wife, whom he
attended as a physician, and whose conjugal virtue he subdued by a long
and diligent exertion of his delusive arts, while her mind was
enervated by sickness, and her husband abroad upon his necessary
occasions. This unhappy patient, who was a woman of an agreeable person
and lively conversation, fell a sacrifice to her own security and
self-conceit; her want of health had confined her to a sedentary life,
and her imagination being active and restless, she had spent those
hours in reading which other young women devote to company and
diversion, but, as her studies were not superintended by any person of
taste, she had indulged her own fancy without method or propriety. The
Spectator taught her to be a critic and philosopher; from plays she
learned poetry and wit, and derived her knowledge of life from books of
history and adventures. Fraught with these acquisitions, and furnished
by nature with uncommon vivacity, she despised her own sex, and courted
the society of men, among whom she thought her talents might be more
honourably displayed, fully confident of her own virtue and sagacity,
which enabled her to set all their arts at defiance.

Thus qualified, she, in an evil hour, had recourse to the advice of our
adventurer, for some ailment under which she had long laboured, and
found such relief from his skill as very much prepossessed her in his
favour. She was no less pleased with his obliging manners than with his
physic, and found much entertainment in his conversation, so that the
acquaintance proceeded to a degree of intimacy, during which he
perceived her weak side, and being enamoured of her person, flattered
her out of all her caution. The privilege of his character furnished
him with opportunities to lay snares for her virtue, and, taking
advantage of that listlessness, languor, and indolence of the spirits,
by which all the vigilance of the soul is relaxed, he, after a long
course of attention and perseverance, found means to make shipwreck of
her peace.

Though he mastered her chastity, he could not quiet her conscience,
which incessantly upbraided her with breach of the marriage vow; nor
did her undoer escape without a share of the reproaches suggested by
her penitence and remorse. This internal anxiety co-operating with her
disease, and perhaps with the medicines he prescribed, reduced her to
the brink of the grave; when her husband returned from a neighbouring
kingdom, in consequence of her earnest request, joined to the
information of her friends, who had written to him an account of the
extremity in which she was. The good man was afflicted beyond measure
when he saw himself upon the verge of losing a wife whom he had always
tenderly loved; but what were his emotions, when she, taking the first
opportunity of his being alone with her, accosted him to this effect:

“I am now hastening towards that dissolution from which no mortal is
exempted, and though the prospect of futurity is altogether clouded and
uncertain, my conscience will not allow me to plunge into eternity
without unburdening my mind, and, by an ingenuous confession, making
all the atonement in my power for the ingratitude I have been guilty
of, and the wrongs I have committed against a virtuous husband, who
never gave me cause of complaint. You stand amazed at this preamble,
but alas! how will you be shocked when I own that I have betrayed you
in your absence, that I have trespassed against God and my marriage
vow, and fallen from the pride and confidence of virtue to the most
abject state of vice; yes, I have been unfaithful to your bed, having
fallen a victim to the infernal insinuations of a villain, who took
advantage of my weak and unguarded moments. Fathom is the wretch who
hath thus injured your honour, and ruined my unsuspecting innocence. I
have nothing to plead in alleviation of my crime but the most sincere
contrition of heart, and though, at any other juncture, I could not
expect your forgiveness, yet, as I now touch the goal of life, I trust
in your humanity and benevolence for that pardon which will lighten the
sorrows of my soul, and those prayers which I hope will entitle me to
favour at the throne of grace.”

The poor husband was so much overwhelmed with grief and confusion at
this unexpected address that he could not recollect himself till after
a pause of several minutes, when uttering a hollow groan, “I will not,”
said he, “aggravate your sufferings, by reproaching you with my wrongs,
though your conduct hath been but an ill return for all my tenderness
and esteem. I look upon it as a trial of my Christian patience, and
bear my misfortune with resignation; meanwhile, I forgive you from my
heart, and fervently pray that your repentance may be acceptable to the
Father of Mercy.” So saying, he approached her bedside, and embraced
her in token of his sincerity. Whether this generous condescension
diffused such a composure upon her spirits as tended to the ease and
refreshment of nature, which had been almost exhausted by disease and
vexation, certain it is, that from this day she began to struggle with
her malady in surprising efforts, and hourly gained ground, until her
health was pretty well re-established.

This recovery was so far beyond the husband’s expectation, that he
began to make very serious reflections on the event, and even to wish
he had not been quite so precipitate in pardoning the backslidings of
his wife; for, though he could not withhold his compassion from a dying
penitent, he did not at all relish the thoughts of cohabiting, as
usual, with a wife self-convicted of the violation of the matrimonial
contract; he therefore considered his declaration as no more than a
provisional pardon, to take place on condition of her immediate death,
and, in a little time, not only communicated to her his sentiments on
this subject, but also separated himself from her company, secured the
evidence of her maid, who had been confidant in her amour with Fathom,
and immediately set on foot a prosecution against our adventurer, whose
behaviour to his wife he did not fail to promulgate, with all its
aggravating circumstances. By these means the doctor’s name became so
notorious that every man was afraid of admitting him into his house,
and every woman ashamed of soliciting his advice.




CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR

HIS ECLIPSE, AND GRADUAL DECLINATION.


Misfortunes seldom come single; upon the back of this hue and cry he
unluckily prescribed phlebotomy to a gentleman of some rank, who
chanced to expire during the operation, and quarrelled with his
landlord the apothecary, who charged him with having forgot the good
offices he had done him in the beginning of his career, and desired he
would provide himself with another lodging.

All these mishaps, treading upon the heels of one another, had a very
mortifying effect upon his practice. At every tea-table his name was
occasionally put to the torture, with that of the vile creature whom he
had seduced, though it was generally taken for granted by all those
female casuists, that she must have made the first advances, for it
could not be supposed that any man would take much trouble in laying
schemes for the ruin of a person whose attractions were so slender,
especially considering the ill state of her health, a circumstance that
seldom adds to a woman’s beauty or good-humour; besides, she was always
a pert minx, that affected singularity, and a masculine manner of
speaking, and many of them had foreseen that she would, some time or
other, bring herself into such a premunire. At all gossipings, where
the apothecary or his wife assisted, Fathom’s pride, ingratitude, and
malpractice were canvassed; in all clubs of married men he was
mentioned with marks of abhorrence and detestation, and every medical
coffee-house rung with his reproach. Instances of his ignorance and
presumption were quoted, and many particulars feigned for the purpose
of defamation, so that our hero was exactly in the situation of a
horseman, who, in riding at full speed for the plate, is thrown from
the saddle in the middle of the race, and left without sense or motion
upon the plain.

His progress, though rapid, had been so short, that he could not be
supposed to have laid up store against such a day of trouble, and as he
still cherished hopes of surmounting those obstacles which had so
suddenly started up in his way, he would not resign his equipage nor
retrench his expenses, but appeared as usual in all public places with
that serenity and confidence of feature which he had never deposited,
and maintained his external pomp upon the little he had reserved in the
days of his prosperity, and the credit he had acquired by the
punctuality of his former payments. Both these funds, however, failed
in a very little time, his lawsuit was a gulf that swallowed up all his
ready money, and the gleanings of his practice were scarce sufficient
to answer his pocket expenses, which now increased in proportion to the
decrease of business, for, as he had more idle time, and was less
admitted into private families, so he thought he had more occasion to
enlarge his acquaintance among his own sex, who alone were able to
support him in his disgrace with the other. He accordingly listed
himself in several clubs, and endeavoured to monopolise the venereal
branch of trade, though this was but an indifferent resource, for
almost all his patients of this class were such as either could not, or
would not, properly recompense the physician.

For some time he lingered in this situation, without going upwards or
downwards, floating like a wisp of straw at the turning of the tide,
until he could no longer amuse the person of whom he had hired his
coach-horses, or postpone the other demands, which multiplied upon him
every day. Then was his chariot overturned with a hideous crash, and
his face so much wounded with the shivers of the glass, which went to
pieces in the fall, that he appeared in the coffee-house with half a
dozen black patches upon his countenance, gave a most circumstantial
detail of the risk he had run, and declared, that he did not believe he
should ever hazard himself again in any sort of wheel carriage.

Soon after this accident, he took an opportunity of telling his
friends, in the same public place, that he had turned away his footman
on account of his drunkenness, and was resolved, for the future, to
keep none but maids in his service, because the menservants are
generally impudent, lazy, debauched, or dishonest; and after all,
neither so neat, handy, or agreeable as the other sex. In the rear of
this resolution, he shifted his lodgings into a private court, being
distracted with the din of carriages, that disturb the inhabitants who
live towards the open street; and gave his acquaintance to understand,
that he had a medical work upon the anvil, which he could not finish
without being indulged in silence and tranquillity. In effect, he
gradually put on the exteriors of an author. His watch, with an
horizontal movement by Graham, which he had often mentioned, and shown
as a very curious piece of workmanship, began, about this time, to be
very much out of order, and was committed to the care of a mender, who
was in no hurry to restore it. His tie-wig degenerated into a major; he
sometimes appeared without a sword, and was even observed in public
with a second day’s shirt. At last, his clothes became rusty; and when
he walked about the streets, his head turned round in a surprising
manner, by an involuntary motion in his neck, which he had contracted
by a habit of reconnoitring the ground, that he might avoid all
dangerous or disagreeable encounters.

Fathom, finding himself descending the hill of fortune with an acquired
gravitation, strove to catch at every twig, in order to stop or retard
his descent. He now regretted the opportunities he had neglected, of
marrying one of several women of moderate fortune, who had made
advances to him in the zenith of his reputation; and endeavoured, by
forcing himself into a lower path of life than any he had hitherto
trod, to keep himself afloat, with the portion of some tradesman’s
daughter, whom he meant to espouse. While he exerted himself in this
pursuit, he happened, in returning from a place about thirty miles from
London, to become acquainted, in the stage-coach, with a young woman of
a very homely appearance, whom, from the driver’s information, he
understood to be the niece of a country justice, and daughter of a
soap-boiler, who had lived and died in London, and left her, in her
infancy, sole heiress of his effects, which amounted to four thousand
pounds. The uncle, who was her guardian, had kept her sacred from the
knowledge of the world, resolving to effect a match betwixt her and his
own son; and it was with much difficulty he had consented to this
journey, which she had undertaken as a visit to her own mother, who had
married a second husband in town.

Fraught with these anecdotes, Fathom began to put forth his gallantry
and good-humour, and, in a word, was admitted by the lady to the
privilege of an acquaintance, in which capacity he visited her during
the term of her residence in London; and, as there was no time to be
lost, declared his honourable intentions. He had such a manifest
advantage, in point of personal accomplishments, over the young
gentleman who was destined for her husband, that she did not disdain
his proposals; and, before she set out for the country, he had made
such progress in her heart, that the day was actually fixed for their
nuptials, on which he faithfully promised to carry her off in a coach
and six. How to raise money for this expedition was all the difficulty
that remained; for, by this time, his finances were utterly dried up,
and his credit altogether exhausted. Upon a very pressing occasion, he
had formerly applied himself to a certain wealthy quack, who had
relieved his necessities by lending him a small sum of money, in return
for having communicated to him a secret medicine, which he affirmed to
be the most admirable specific that ever was invented. The nostrum had
been used, and, luckily for him, succeeded in the trial; so that the
empiric, in the midst of his satisfaction, began to reflect, that this
same Fathom, who pretended to be in possession of a great many
remedies, equally efficacious, would certainly become a formidable
rival to him in his business, should he ever be able to extricate
himself from his present difficulties.

In consequence of these suggestions, he resolved to keep our
adventurer’s head under water, by maintaining him in the most abject
dependence. Accordingly he had, from time to time, accommodated him
with small trifles, which barely served to support his existence, and
even for these had taken notes of hand, that he might have a scourge
over his head, in case he should prove insolent or refractory. To this
benefactor Fathom applied for a reinforcement of twenty guineas, which
he solicited with the more confidence, as that sum would certainly
enable him to repay all other obligations. The quack would advance the
money upon no other condition, than that of knowing the scheme, which
being explained, he complied with Ferdinand’s request; but, at the same
time, privately despatched an express to the young lady’s uncle, with a
full account of the whole conspiracy; so that, when the doctor arrived
at the inn, according to appointment, he was received by his worship in
person, who gave him to understand, that his niece had changed her
mind, and gone fifty miles farther into the country to visit a
relation. This was a grievous disappointment to Fathom, who really
believed his mistress had forsaken him through mere levity and caprice,
and was not undeceived till several months after her marriage with her
cousin, when, at an accidental meeting in London, she explained the
story of the secret intelligence, and excused her marriage, as the
effect of rigorous usage and compulsion.

Had our hero been really enamoured of her person, he might have
probably accomplished his wishes, notwithstanding the steps she had
taken. But this was not the case. His passion was of a different
nature, and the object of it effectually without his reach. With regard
to his appetite for women, as it was an infirmity of his constitution,
which he could not overcome, and as he was in no condition to gratify
it at a great expense, he had of late chosen a housekeeper from the
hundreds of Drury, and, to avoid scandal, allowed her to assume his
name. As to the intimation which had been sent to the country justice,
he immediately imputed it to the true author, whom he marked for his
vengeance accordingly; but, in the meantime, suppressed his resentment,
because he in some measure depended upon him for subsistence. On the
other hand, the quack, dreading the forwardness and plausibility of our
hero, which might, one time or other, render him independent, put a
stop to those supplies, on pretence of finding them inconvenient; but,
out of his friendship and goodwill to Fathom, undertook to procure for
him such letters of recommendation as would infallibly make his fortune
in the West Indies, and even to set him out in a genteel manner for the
voyage. Ferdinand perceived his drift, and thanked him for his generous
offer, which he would not fail to consider with all due deliberation;
though he was determined against the proposal, but obliged to
temporise, that he might not incur the displeasure of this man, at
whose mercy he lay. Meanwhile the prosecution against him in Doctors’
Commons drew near a period, and the lawyers were clamorous for money,
without which, he foresaw he should lose the advantage which his cause
had lately acquired by the death of his antagonist’s chief evidence; he
therefore, seeing every other channel shut up, began to doubt, whether
the risk of being apprehended or slain in the character of a
highwayman, was not overbalanced by the prospect of being acquitted of
a charge which had ruined his reputation and fortune, and actually
entertained thoughts of taking the air on Hounslow Heath, when he was
diverted from this expedient by a very singular adventure.




CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE

AFTER DIVERS UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORTS, HE HAS RECOURSE TO THE MATRIMONIAL
NOOSE.


Chancing to meet with one of his acquaintance at a certain
coffee-house, the discourse turned upon the characters of mankind,
when, among other oddities, his friend brought upon the carpet a
certain old gentlewoman of such a rapacious disposition, that, like a
jackdaw, she never beheld any metalline substance, without an
inclination, and even an effort to secrete it for her own use and
contemplation. Nor was this infirmity originally produced from
indigence, inasmuch as her circumstances had been always affluent, and
she was now possessed of a considerable sum of money in the funds;
notwithstanding which, the avarice of her nature tempted her to let
lodgings, though few people could live under the same roof with such an
original, who, rather than be idle, had often filched pieces of her own
plate, and charged her servants with the theft, or hinted suspicion of
her lodgers. Fathom, struck with the description, soon perceived how
this woman’s disease might be converted to his advantage; and after
having obtained sufficient intelligence, on pretence of satisfying his
curiosity, he visited the widow, in consequence of a bill at her door,
and actually hired an apartment in her house, whither he forthwith
repaired with his inamorata.

It was not long before he perceived that his landlady’s character had
not been misrepresented. He fed her distemper with divers
inconsiderable trinkets, such as copper medals, corkscrews, odd
buckles, and a paltry seal set in silver, which were, at different
times, laid as baits for her infirmity, and always conveyed away with
remarkable eagerness, which he and his Dulcinea took pleasure in
observing from an unsuspected place. Thus confirmed in his opinion, he,
at length, took an opportunity of exposing a metal watch that belonged
to his mistress, and saw it seized with great satisfaction, in the
absence of his helpmate, who had gone abroad on purpose. According to
instruction, she soon returned, and began to raise a terrible clamour
about the loss of her watch; upon which she was condoled by her
landlady, who seemed to doubt the integrity of the maid, and even
proposed that Mrs. Fathom should apply to some justice of the peace for
a warrant to search the servant’s trunk. The lady thanked her for the
good advice, in compliance with which she had immediate recourse to a
magistrate, who granted a search warrant, not against the maid, but the
mistress; and she, in a little time, returned with the constable at her
back.

These precautions being taken, Doctor Fathom desired a private
conference with the old gentlewoman, in which he gave her to
understand, that he had undoubted proofs of her having secreted, not
only the watch, but also several other odd things of less consequence,
which he lost since his residence in her house. He then showed the
warrant he had obtained against her, and asked if she had anything to
offer why the constable should not do his duty? Inexpressible were the
anguish and confusion of the defendant, when she found herself thus
entrapped, and reflected, that she was on the point of being detected
of felony; for she at once concluded, that the snare was laid for her,
and knew that the officer of justice would certainly find the unlucky
watch in one of the drawers of her scrutoire.

Tortured with these suggestions, afraid of public disgrace, and
dreading the consequence of legal conviction, she fell on her knees
before the injured Fathom, and, after having imputed her crime to the
temptations of necessity, implored his compassion, promised to restore
the watch, and everything she had taken, and begged he would dismiss
the constable, that her reputation might not suffer in the eye of the
world.

Ferdinand, with a severity of countenance purposely assumed, observed
that, were she really indigent, he had charity enough to forgive what
she had done; but, as he knew her circumstances were opulent, he looked
upon this excuse as an aggravation of her guilt, which was certainly
the effect of a vicious inclination; and he was therefore determined to
prosecute her with the utmost severity of the law, as an example and
terror to others, who might be infected with the same evil disposition.
Finding him deaf to all her tears and entreaties, she changed her note,
and offered him one hundred guineas, if he would compromise the affair,
and drop the prosecution, so as that her character should sustain no
damage. After much argumentation, he consented to accept of double the
sum, which being instantly paid in East India bonds, Doctor Fathom told
the constable, that the watch was found; and for once her reputation
was patched up. This seasonable supply enabled our hero to stand trial
with his adversary, who was nonsuited, and also to mend his external
appearance, which of late had not been extremely magnificent.

Soon after this gleam of good fortune, a tradesman, to whom he was
considerably indebted, seeing no other probable means to recover his
money, introduced Fathom to the acquaintance of a young widow who
lodged at his house, and was said to be in possession of a considerable
fortune. Considering the steps that were taken, it would have been
almost impossible for him to miscarry in his addresses. The lady had
been bred in the country, was unacquainted with the world, and of a
very sanguine disposition, which her short trial of matrimony had not
served to cool. Our adventurer was instructed to call at the
tradesman’s house, as if by accident, at an appointed time, when the
widow was drinking tea with her landlady. On these occasions he always
behaved to admiration. She liked his person, and praised his
politeness, good-humour, and good sense; his confederates extolled him
as a prodigy of learning, taste, and good-nature; they likewise
represented him as a person on the eve of eclipsing all his competitors
in physic. An acquaintance and intimacy soon ensued, nor was he
restricted in point of opportunity. In a word, he succeeded in his
endeavours, and, one evening, on pretence of attending her to the play,
he accompanied her to the Fleet, where they were married, in presence
of the tradesman and his wife, who were of the party.

This grand affair being accomplished to his satisfaction, he, next day,
visited her brother, who was a counsellor of the Temple, to make him
acquainted with the step his sister had taken; and though the lawyer
was not a little mortified to find that she had made such a clandestine
match, he behaved civilly to his new brother-in-law, and gave him to
understand, that his wife’s fortune consisted of a jointure of one
hundred and fifty pounds a year, and fifteen hundred pounds bequeathed
to her during her widowhood, by her own father, who had taken the
precaution of settling it in the hands of trustees, in such a manner as
that any husband she might afterwards espouse should be restricted from
encroaching upon the capital, which was reserved for the benefit of her
heirs. This intimation was far from being agreeable to our hero, who
had been informed, that this sum was absolutely at the lady’s disposal,
and had actually destined the greatest part of it for the payment of
his debts, for defraying the expense of furnishing an elegant house,
and setting up a new equipage.

Notwithstanding this disappointment, he resolved to carry on his plan
upon the credit of his marriage, which was published in a very pompous
article of the newspapers; a chariot was bespoke, a ready furnished
house immediately taken, and Doctor Fathom began to reappear in all his
former splendour.

His good friend the empiric, alarmed at this event, which not only
raised our adventurer into the sphere of a dangerous rival, but also
furnished him with means to revenge the ill office he had sustained at
his hands on the adventure of the former match—for, by this time,
Fathom had given him some hints, importing, that he was not ignorant of
his treacherous behaviour—roused, I say, by these considerations, he
employed one of his emissaries, who had some knowledge of Fathom’s
brother-in-law, to prejudice him against our adventurer, whom he
represented as a needy sharper, not only overwhelmed with debt and
disgrace, but likewise previously married to a poor woman, who was
prevented by nothing but want from seeking redress at law. To confirm
these assertions, he gave him a detail of Fathom’s encumbrances, which
he had learned for the purpose, and even brought the counsellor into
company with the person who had lived with our hero before marriage,
and who was so much incensed at her abrupt dismission, that she did not
scruple to corroborate these allegations of the informer.

The lawyer, startled at this intelligence, set on foot a minute inquiry
into the life and conversation of the doctor, which turned out so
little to the advantage of his character and circumstances, that he
resolved, if possible, to disunite him from his family; and, as a
previous step, repeated to his sister all that he had heard to the
prejudice of her husband, not forgetting to produce the evidence of his
mistress, who laid claim to him by a prior title, which, she pretended,
could be proved by the testimony of the clergyman who joined them. Such
an explanation could not fail to inflame the resentment of the injured
wife, who, at the very first opportunity, giving a loose to the
impetuosity of her temper, upbraided our hero with the most bitter
invectives for his perfidious dealing.

Ferdinand, conscious of his own innocence, which he had not always to
plead, far from attempting to soothe her indignation, assumed the
authority and prerogative of a husband, and sharply reprehended her for
her credulity and indecent warmth. This rebuke, instead of silencing,
gave new spirit and volubility to her reproaches, in the course of
which she plainly taxed him with want of honesty and affection, and
said that, though his pretence was love, his aim was no other than a
base design upon her fortune.

Fathom, stung with these accusations, which he really did not deserve,
replied with uncommon heat, and charged her in his turn with want of
sincerity and candour, in the false account she had given of that same
fortune before marriage. He even magnified his own condescension, in
surrendering his liberty to a woman who had so little to recommend her
to the addresses of the other sex; a reflection which provoked this
mild creature to such a degree of animosity, that, forgetting her duty
and allegiance, she lent him a box on the ear with such energy as made
his eyes water; and he, for the honour of manhood and sovereignty,
having washed her face with a dish of tea, withdrew abruptly to a
coffee-house in the neighbourhood, where he had not long remained, when
his passion subsided, and he then saw the expediency of an immediate
reconciliation, which he resolved to purchase, even at the expense of a
submission.

It was pity that such a salutary resolution had not been sooner taken.
For, when he returned to his own house, he understood, that Mrs. Fathom
had gone abroad in a hackney-coach; and, upon examining her apartment,
in lieu of her clothes and trinkets, which she had removed with
admirable dexterity and despatch, he found this billet in one of the
drawers of her bureau:—“Sir, being convinced that you are a cheat and
an impostor, I have withdrawn myself from your cruelty and
machinations, with a view to solicit the protection of the law; and I
doubt not but I shall soon be able to prove, that you have no just
title to, or demand upon, the person or effects of the unfortunate
Sarah Muddy.”

The time had been when Mr. Fathom would have allowed Mrs. Muddy to
refine at her leisure, and blessed God for his happy deliverance; but
at present the case was quite altered. Smarting as he was from the
expense of lawsuits, he dreaded a prosecution for bigamy, which, though
he had justice on his side, he knew he could not of himself support.
Besides, all his other schemes of life were frustrated by this unlucky
elopement. He therefore speedily determined to anticipate, as much as
in him lay, the malice of his enemies, and to obtain, without delay,
authentic documents of his marriage. With this view, he hastened to the
house of the tradesman, who, with his wife, had been witness to the
ceremony and consummation; and, in order to interest them the more
warmly in his cause, made a pathetic recital of this unhappy breach, in
which he had suffered such injury and insult. But all his rhetoric
would not avail. Mrs. Muddy had been beforehand with him, and had
proved the better orator of the two; for she had assailed this honest
couple with such tropes and figures of eloquence, as were altogether
irresistible.

Nevertheless, they heard our hero to an end, with great patience. Then
the wife, who was the common mouth upon all such occasions, contracting
her features into a very formal disposition, “I’ll assure you,” said
she, “Doctor Fathom, my husband and I have been in a very great
terrification and numplush, to hear such bad things of a person, whom,
as one may say, we thought a worthy gentleman, and were ready to serve
at all times, by day and by night, as the saying is. And besides, for
all that, you know, and God knows, as we are dustrious people, and work
hard for what we get, and we have served gentlemen to our own harm,
whereby my husband was last Tuesday served with a siserary, being that
he was bound for an officer that ran away. And I said to my husband,
Timothy, says I, ’tis a very hard thing for one to ruin one’s self for
stranger people—There’s Doctor Fathom, says I, his account comes to
nine-and-forty pounds seven shillings and fourpence halfpenny; and you
know, doctor, that was before your last bill began. But, howsomever,
little did I think, as how a gentleman of your learning would go to
deceive a poor gentlewoman, when you had another wife alive.”

In vain did our adventurer endeavour to vindicate himself from this
aspersion; the good woman, like a great many modern disputants,
proceeded with her declamation, without seeming to hear what was said
on the other side of the question; and the husband was altogether
neutral. At length, Ferdinand, finding all his protestations
ineffectual, “Well,” said he, “though you are resolved, I see, to
discredit all that I can say in opposition to that scandalous slander,
of which I can easily acquit myself in a court of justice, surely you
will not refuse to grant me a certificate, signifying that you were
present at the ceremony of my marriage with this unhappy woman.” “You
shall excuse us,” replied the female orator; “people cannot be too wary
in signing their names in this wicked world; many a one has been
brought to ruination by signing his name, and my husband shall not,
with my goodwill, draw himself into such a primmineery.”

Fathom, alarmed at this refusal, earnestly argued against the
inhumanity and injustice of it, appealing to their own consciences for
the reasonableness of his proposal; but, from the evasive answers of
the wife, he had reason to believe, that, long before the time of
trial, they would take care to have forgotten the whole transaction.

Though he was equally confounded and incensed at this instance of their
perfidy, he durst not manifest his indignation, conscious of the
advantage they had over him in divers respects; but repaired, without
loss of time, to the lodging of the clergyman who had noosed him,
resolved to consult his register, and secure his evidence. Here too his
evil genius had got the start of him; for the worthy ecclesiastic not
only could not recollect his features, or find his name in the
register, but, when importuned by his pressing remonstrances, took
umbrage at the freedom of his behaviour, and threatened, if he would
not immediately take himself away, to raise the posse of the Fleet, for
the safety of his own person.

Rather than put the pastor to the trouble of alarming his flock, he
retreated with a heavy heart, and went in quest of his mistress, whom
he had dismissed at his marriage, in hopes of effecting a
reconciliation, and preventing her from joining in the conspiracy
against him. But, alas! he met with such a reception as he had reason
to expect from a slighted woman, who had never felt any real attachment
for his person. She did not upbraid him with his cruelty in leaving her
as a mistress, but, with a species of effrontery never enough to be
admired, reproached him with his villany, in abandoning her, who was
his true and lawful wife, to go and ruin a poor gentlewoman, by whose
fortune he had been allured.

When he attempted to expostulate with this virago, upon the barbarity
of this assertion, she very prudently declined engaging in private
conversation with such an artful and wicked man; and, calling up the
people of the house, insisted upon his being conducted to the door.




CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX

IN WHICH HIS FORTUNE IS EFFECTUALLY STRANGLED.


The last resource, and that upon which he least depended, was the
advice and assistance of his old friend the empiric, with whom he still
maintained a slight correspondence; and to whose house he steered his
course, in great perplexity and tribulation. That gentleman, instead of
consoling him with assurances of friendship and protection, faithfully
recapitulated all the instances of his indiscretion and misconduct,
taxed him with want of sincerity in the West India affair, as well as
with want of honesty in this last marriage, while his former wife was
alive; and, finally, reminded him of his notes, which he desired might
be immediately taken up, as he (the quack) had present occasion for a
sum of money.

Ferdinand, seeing it would be impracticable to derive any succour from
this quarter, sneaked homewards, in order to hold a consultation with
his own thoughts; and the first object that presented itself to his
eyes when he entered his apartment, was a letter from the tradesman,
with his account inclosed, amounting to forty-five pounds, which the
writer desired might be paid without delay. Before he had time to
peruse the articles, he received a summons, in consequence of a bill of
indictment for bigamy, found against him in Hicks’ Hall, by Sarah
Muddy, widow; and, while he was revolving measures to avert these
storms, another billet arrived from a certain attorney, giving him to
understand, that he had orders from Doctor Buffalo, the quack, to sue
him for the payment of several notes, unless he would take them up in
three days from the date of this letter.

Such a concurrence of sinister events made a deep impression upon the
mind of our adventurer. All his fortitude was insufficient to bear him
up against this torrent of misfortunes; his resources were all dried
up, his invention failed, and his reflection began to take a new turn.
“To what purpose,” said he to himself, “have I deserted the paths of
integrity and truth, and exhausted a fruitful imagination, in
contriving schemes to betray my fellow-creatures, if, instead of
acquiring a splendid fortune, which was my aim, I have suffered such a
series of mortifications, and at last brought myself to the brink of
inevitable destruction? By a virtuous exertion of those talents I
inherit from nature and education, I might, long before this time, have
rendered myself independent, and, perhaps, conspicuous in life. I might
have grown up like a young oak, which, being firmly rooted in its
kindred soil, gradually raises up its lofty head, expands its leafy
arms, projects a noble shade, and towers the glory of the plain. I
should have paid the debt of gratitude to my benefactors, and made
their hearts sing with joy for the happy effects of their benevolence.
I should have been a bulwark to my friends, a shelter to my neighbours
in distress. I should have run the race of honour, seen my fame
diffused like a sweet-smelling odour, and felt the ineffable pleasure
of doing good. Whereas I am, after a vicissitude of disappointments,
dangers, and fatigues, reduced to misery and shame, aggravated by a
conscience loaded with treachery and guilt. I have abused the
confidence and generosity of my patron; I have defrauded his family,
under the mask of sincerity and attachment; I have taken the most cruel
and base advantages of virtue in distress; I have seduced unsuspecting
innocence to ruin and despair; I have violated the most sacred trust
reposed in me by my friend and benefactor; I have betrayed his love,
torn his noble heart asunder, by means of the most perfidious slander
and false insinuations; and, finally, brought to an untimely grave the
fairest pattern of human beauty and perfection. Shall the author of
these crimes pass with impunity? Shall he hope to prosper in the midst
of such enormous guilt? It were an imputation upon Providence to
suppose it! Ah, no! I begin to feel myself overtaken by the eternal
justice of Heaven! I totter on the edge of wretchedness and woe,
without one friendly hand to save me from the terrible abyss!”

These reflections, which, perhaps, the misery of his fellow-creatures
would never have inspired, had he himself remained without the verge of
misfortune, were now produced from the sensation of his own calamities;
and, for the first time, his cheeks were bedewed with the drops of
penitence and sorrow. “Contraries,” saith Plato, “are productive of
each other.” Reformation is oftentimes generated from unsuccessful
vice; and our adventurer was, at this juncture, very well disposed to
turn over a new leaf in consequence of those salutary suggestions;
though he was far from being cured beyond the possibility of a relapse.
On the contrary, all the faculties of his soul were so well adapted,
and had been so long habituated to deceit, that, in order to extricate
himself from the evils that environed him, he would not, in all
probability, have scrupled to practise it upon his own father, had a
convenient opportunity occurred.

Be that as it may, he certainly, after a tedious and fruitless exercise
of his invention, resolved to effect a clandestine retreat from that
confederacy of enemies which he could not withstand, and once more join
his fortune to that of Renaldo, whom he proposed to serve, for the
future, with fidelity and affection, thereby endeavouring to atone for
the treachery of his former conduct. Thus determined, he packed up his
necessaries in a portmanteau, attempted to amuse his creditors with
promises of speedy payment, and, venturing to come forth in the dark,
took a place in the Canterbury stage-coach, after having converted his
superfluities into ready money. These steps were not taken with such
privacy as to elude the vigilance of his adversaries; for, although he
had been cautious enough to transport himself and his baggage to the
inn on Sunday evening, and never doubted that the vehicle, which set
out at four o’clock on Monday morning, would convey him out of the
reach of his creditors, before they could possibly obtain a writ for
securing his person, they had actually taken such precautions as
frustrated all his finesse; and the coach being stopped in the borough
of Southwark, Doctor Fathom was seized by virtue of a warrant obtained
on a criminal indictment, and was forthwith conducted to the prison of
the King’s Bench; yet, not before he had, by his pathetic
remonstrances, excited the compassion, and even drawn tears from the
eyes of his fellow-passengers.

He no sooner recollected himself from the shock which must have been
occasioned by this sinister incident, than he despatched a letter to
his brother-in-law, the counsellor, requesting an immediate conference,
in which he promised to make such a proposal as would save him all the
expense of a lawsuit and trial, and, at the same time, effectually
answer all the purposes of both. He was accordingly favoured with a
visit from the lawyer, to whom, after the most solemn protestations of
his own innocence, he declared, that, finding himself unable to wage
war against such powerful antagonists, he had resolved even to abandon
his indubitable right, and retire into another country, in order to
screen himself from persecution, and remove all cause of disquiet from
the prosecutrix, when he was, unfortunately, prevented by the warrant
which had been executed against him. He said he was still willing, for
the sake of his liberty, to sign a formal renunciation of his
pretensions to Mrs. Fathom and her fortune, provided the deeds could be
executed, and the warrant withdrawn, before he should be detained by
his other creditors; and, lastly, he conjured the barrister to spare
himself the guilt and the charge of suborning evidence for the
destruction of an unhappy man, whose misfortune was his only fault.

The lawyer felt the force of his expostulations; and though he would by
no means suppose him innocent of the charge of bigamy, yet, under the
pretext of humanity and commiseration, he undertook to persuade his
sister to accept of a proper release, which, he observed, would not be
binding, if executed during the confinement of Fathom; he therefore
took his leave, in order to prepare the papers, withdraw the action,
and take such other measures as would hinder the prisoner from giving
him the slip. Next day, he returned with an order to release our hero,
who, being formally discharged, was conducted by the lawyer to a tavern
in the neighbourhood, where the releases were exchanged, and everything
concluded with amity and concord. This business being happily
transacted, Fathom stept into a hackney-coach, with his baggage, and
was followed by a bailiff, who told him, with great composure, that he
was again a prisoner, at the suit of Doctor Buffalo, and desired the
coachman to reconduct him to the lodging he had so lately discharged.

Fathom, whose fortitude had been hitherto of the pagan temper, was now
fain to reinforce it with the philosophy of Christian resignation,
though he had not as yet arrived to such a pitch of self-denial as to
forgive the counsellor, to whose double dealing he imputed this new
calamity. After having received the compliments of the jailer on his
recommitment, he took pen, ink, and paper, and composed an artful and
affecting epistle to the empiric, imploring his mercy, flattering his
weakness, and demonstrating the bad policy of cooping up an unhappy man
in a jail, where he could never have an opportunity of doing justice to
his creditors; nor did he forget to declare his intention of retiring
into another country, where he might have some chance of earning a
subsistence, which he had so long toiled for to no purpose in England.
This last declaration he made in consequence of the jealous disposition
of the quack, who he knew had long looked upon him in the odious light
of an interloping rival. However, he reaped no benefit from this
supplication, which served only to gratify the pride of Buffalo, who
produced the extravagant encomiums which Fathom had bestowed upon him,
as so many testimonials of his foe’s bearing witness to his virtue.




CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN

FATHOM BEING SAFELY HOUSED, THE READER IS ENTERTAINED WITH A
RETROSPECT.


But now it is high time to leave our adventurer to chew the cud of
reflection and remorse in this solitary mansion, that we may trace
Renaldo in the several steps he took to assert his right, and do
justice to his family. Never man indulged a more melancholy train of
ideas than that which accompanied him in his journey to the Imperial
court. For, notwithstanding the manifold reasons he had to expect a
happy issue to his aim, his imagination was incessantly infected with
something that chilled his nerves and saddened his heart, recurring,
with quick succession, like the unwearied wave that beats upon the
bleak, inhospitable Greenland shore. This, the reader will easily
suppose, was no other than the remembrance of the forlorn Monimia,
whose image appeared to his fancy in different attitudes, according to
the prevalence of the passions which raged in his bosom. Sometimes he
viewed her in the light of apostasy, and then his soul was maddened
with indignation and despair. But these transitory blasts were not able
to efface the impressions she had formerly made upon his heart;
impressions which he had so often and so long contemplated with
inconceivable rapture. These pictures still remained, representing her
fair as the most perfect idea of beauty, soft and tender as an angel of
mercy and compassion, warmed with every virtue of the heart, and
adorned with every accomplishment of human nature. Yet the alarming
contrast came still in the rear of this recollection; so that his soul
was by turns agitated by the tempests of horror, and overwhelmed by the
floods of grief.

He recalled the moment on which he first beheld her, with that pleasing
regret which attends the memory of a dear deceased friend. Then he
bitterly cursed it, as the source of all his misfortunes and
affliction. He thanked Heaven for having blessed him with a friend to
detect her perfidy and ingratitude; and then ardently wished he had
still continued under the influence of her delusion. In a word, the
loneliness of his situation aggravated every horror of his reflection;
for, as he found himself without company, his imagination was never
solicited, or his attention diverted from these subjects of woe; and he
travelled to Brussels in a reverie, fraught with such torments as must
have entirely wrecked his reason, had not Providence interposed in his
behalf. He was, by his postillion, conducted to one of the best inns of
the place, where he understood the cloth was already laid for supper;
and as the ordinary is open to strangers in all these houses of
entertainment, he introduced himself into the company, with a view to
alleviate, in some measure, his sorrow and chagrin, by the conversation
of his fellow-guests. Yet he was so ill prepared to obtain the relief
which he courted, that he entered the apartment, and sat down to table,
without distinguishing either the number or countenances of those who
were present, though he himself did not long remain so unregarded. His
mien and deportment produced a prepossession in his favour; and the air
of affliction, so remarkable in his visage, did not fail to attract
their sympathy and observation.

Among the rest, was an Irish officer in the Austrian service, who
having eyed Renaldo attentively, “Sir,” said he, rising, “if my eyes
and memory do not deceive me, you are the Count de Melvil, with whom I
had the honour to serve upon the Rhine during the last war.” The youth,
hearing his own name mentioned, lifted up his eyes, and at once
recognising the other to be a gentleman who had been a captain in his
father’s regiment, ran forwards, and embraced him with great affection.

This was, in divers respects, a fortunate rencontre for young Melvil;
as the officer was not only perfectly well acquainted with the
situation of the Count’s family, but also resolved, in a few days, to
set out for Vienna, whither he promised to accompany Renaldo, as soon
as he understood his route lay the same way. Before the day fixed for
their departure arrived, this gentleman found means to insinuate
himself so far into the confidence of the Count, as to learn the cause
of that distress which he had observed in his features at their first
meeting; and being a gentleman of uncommon vivacity, as well as
sincerely attached to the family of Melvil, to which he had owed his
promotion, he exerted all his good-humour and good sense in amusing the
fancy, and reasoning down the mortification of the afflicted Hungarian.
He in particular endeavoured to wean his attention from the lost
Monimia, by engaging it upon his domestic affairs, and upon the wrongs
of his mother and sister, who, he gave him to understand, were
languishing under the tyranny of his father-in-law.

This was a note that effectually roused him from the lethargy of his
sorrow; and the desire of taking vengeance on the oppressor, who had
ruined his fortune, and made his nearest relations miserable, so
entirely engrossed his thoughts, as to leave no room for other
considerations. During their journey to Austria, Major Farrel, (that
was the name of his fellow-traveller,) informed him of many
circumstances touching his father’s house, to which himself was an
utter stranger.

“The conduct of your mother,” said he, “in marrying Count Trebasi, was
not at all agreeable either to the friends of the Count de Melvil, or
to her own relations, who knew her second husband to be a man of a
violent temper, and rapacious disposition, which the nature of his
education and employment had served rather to inflame than allay; for
you well know he was a partisan during the whole course of the late
war. They were, moreover, equally surprised and chagrined, when they
found she took no step to prevent his seizing upon that inheritance
which of right belonged to you, and which, by the laws of Hungary, is
unalienable from the heir of blood. Nevertheless, they are now fully
convinced, that she hath more than sufficiently atoned for her
indiscretion, by the barbarity of her husband, who hath not only
secluded her from all communication with her friends and acquaintance,
but even confined her to the west tower of your father’s house, where
she is said to be kept close prisoner, and subjected to all sorts of
inconvenience and mortification. This severity she is believed to have
incurred in consequence of having expostulated to him upon his unjust
behaviour to you and Mademoiselle, whom he hath actually shut up in
some convent in Vienna, which your relations have not as yet been able
to discover. But the memory of your noble father is so dear to all
those who were favoured with his friendship, and the sufferings of the
Countess and Mademoiselle have raised such a spirit of resentment
against her cruel jailor, that nothing is wanted but your presence to
begin the prosecution, and give a sanction to the measures of your
friends, which will in a little time restore your family to the
fruition of its rights and fortune. For my own part, my dear Count, I
consider myself as one wholly indebted to your house for the rank and
expectation I now enjoy; and my finances, interest, and person, such as
they are, I dedicate to your service.”

Renaldo was not slow in making his acknowledgments to this generous
Hibernian, whom he informed of his scheme, recounting to him his
uncommon transaction with the benevolent Jew, and communicating the
letters of recommendation he had received by his means to some of the
first noblemen at the Imperial court. Meanwhile, he burned with
impatience to chastise Count Trebasi for his perfidious conduct to the
widow and the fatherless, and would have taken the road to Presburg,
without touching at Vienna, in order to call him to a severe account,
had not he been strenuously opposed by Major Farrel, who represented
the imprudence of taking such a step before he had secured a proper
protection from the consequences with which it might be attended.

“It is not,” said he, “your own life and fortune only which depend upon
your behaviour in this emergency, but also the quiet and happiness of
those who are most dear to your affection. Not you alone, but likewise
your mother and sister, would infallibly suffer by your temerity and
precipitation. First of all, deliver your credentials at court, and let
us join our endeavours to raise an interest strong enough to
counterbalance that of Trebasi. If we succeed, there will be no
necessity for having recourse to personal measures. He will be
compelled to yield up your inheritance which he unjustly detains, and
to restore your sister to your arms; and if he afterwards refuses to do
justice to the Countess, you will always have it in your power to
evince yourself the son of the brave Count de Melvil.”

These just and salutary representations had a due effect upon Renaldo,
who no sooner arrived at the capital of Austria, than he waited upon a
certain prince of distinction, to whose patronage he was commended; and
from whom he met with a very cordial reception, not only on account of
his credentials, but also for the sake of his father, who was well
known to his highness. He heard his complaints with great patience and
affability, assured him of his assistance and protection, and even
undertook to introduce him to the empress-queen, who would not suffer
the weakest of her subjects to be oppressed, much less disregard the
cause of an injured young nobleman, who, by his own services, and those
of his family, was peculiarly entitled to her favour.

Nor was he the only person whose countenance and patronage Melvil
solicited upon this occasion; he visited all the friends of his father,
and all his mother’s relations, who were easily interested in his
behalf; while Major Farrel contributed all his efforts in strengthening
the association. So that a lawsuit was immediately commenced against
Count Trebasi, who on his side was not idle, but prepared with
incredible industry for the assault, resolving to maintain with his
whole power the acquisition he had made.

The laws of Hungary, like those of some other countries I could name,
afford so many subterfuges for the purposes of perfidy and fraud, that
it is no wonder our youth began to complain of the slow progress of his
affair; especially as he glowed with the most eager desire of
redressing the grievances of his parent and sister, whose sufferings he
did not doubt were doubled since the institution of his process against
their tormentor. He imparted his sentiments on this head to his friend;
and, as his apprehensions every moment increased, plainly told him he
could no longer live without making some effort to see those with whom
he was so nearly connected in point of blood and affection. He
therefore resolved to repair immediately to Presburg; and, according to
the intelligence he should procure, essay to see and converse with his
mother, though at the hazard of his life.




CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT

RENALDO ABRIDGES THE PROCEEDINGS AT LAW, AND APPROVES HIMSELF THE SON
OF HIS FATHER.


The Major, finding him determined, insisted upon attending him in this
expedition, and they set out together for Presburg, where they
privately arrived in the dark, resolving to keep themselves concealed
at the house of a friend, until they should have formed some plan for
their future operations. Here they were informed that Count Trebasi’s
castle was altogether inaccessible; that all the servants who were
supposed to have the least veneration or compassion for the Countess
were dismissed; and that, since Renaldo was known to be in Germany, the
vigilance and caution of that cruel husband was redoubled to such a
degree, that nobody knew whether his unfortunate lady was actually
alive or dead.

Farrel perceiving Melvil exceedingly affected with this intimation, and
hearing him declare that he would never quit Presburg until he should
have entered the house, and removed his doubts on that interesting
subject, not only argued with great vehemence against such an attempt,
as equally dangerous and indiscreet, but solemnly swore he would
prevent his purpose, by discovering his design to the family, unless he
would promise to listen to a more moderate and feasible expedient. He
then proposed that he himself should appear in the equipage of one of
the travelling Savoyards who stroll about Europe, amusing ignorant
people with the effects of a magic lanthorn, and in that disguise
endeavour to obtain admittance from the servants of Trebasi, among whom
he might make such inquiries as would deliver Melvil from his present
uneasy suspense.

This proposal was embraced, though reluctantly, by Renaldo, who was
unwilling to expose his friend to the least danger or disgrace; and the
Major being next day provided with the habit and implements of his new
profession, together with a ragged attendant who preceded him,
extorting music from a paltry viol, approached the castle gate, and
proclaimed his show so naturally in a yell, partaking of the scream of
Savoy and the howl of Ireland, that one would have imagined he had been
conductor to Madam Catherina from his cradle. So far his stratagem
succeeded; he had not long stood in waiting before he was invited into
the court-yard, where the servants formed a ring, and danced to the
efforts of his companion’s skill; then he was conducted into the
buttery, where he exhibited his figures on the wall, and his princess
on the floor; and while they regaled him in this manner with scraps and
sour wine, he took occasion to inquire about the old lady and her
daughter, before whom he said he had performed in his last
peregrination. Though this question was asked with all that air of
simplicity which is peculiar to these people, one of the domestics took
the alarm, being infected with the suspicions of his master, and
plainly taxed the Major with being a spy, threatening at the same time
that he should be stripped and searched.

This would have been a very dangerous experiment for the Hibernian, who
had actually in his pocket a letter to the Countess from her son, which
he hoped fortune might have furnished him with an opportunity to
deliver. When he therefore found himself in this dilemma, he was not at
all easy in his own mind. However, instead of protesting his innocence
in an humble and beseeching strain, in order to acquit himself of the
charge, he resolved to elude the suspicion by provoking the wrath of
his accuser, and, putting on the air of vulgar integrity affronted,
began to reproach the servant in very insolent terms for his unfair
supposition, and undressed himself in a moment to the skin, threw his
tattered garments in the face of his adversary, telling him he would
find nothing there which he would not be very glad to part with; at the
same time raising his voice, he, in the gibberish of the clan he
represented, scolded and cursed with great fluency, so that the whole
house resounded with the noise. The valet’s jealousy, like a smaller
fire, was in a trice swallowed up in the greater flame of his rage
enkindled by this abrupt address. In consequence of which, Farrel was
kicked out at the gate, naked as he was to the waist, after his
lanthorn had been broke to pieces on his head; and there he was joined
by his domestic, who had not been able to recover his apparel and
effect a retreat, without incurring marks of the same sort of
distinction.

The Major, considering the risk he must have run in being detected,
thought himself cheaply quit for this moderate discipline, though he
was really concerned for his friend Renaldo, who, understanding the
particulars of the adventure, determined, as the last effort, to ride
round the castle in the open day, on pretence of taking the air, when,
peradventure, the Countess would see him from the place of her
confinement, and favour him with some mark or token of her being alive.

Though his companion did not much relish this plan, which he foresaw
would expose him to the insults of Trebasi, yet, as he could not
contrive a better, he acquiesced in Renaldo’s invention, with the
proviso that he would defer the execution of it until his father-in-law
should be absent in the chase, which was a diversion he every day
enjoyed.

Accordingly they set a proper watch, and lay concealed until they were
informed of Trebasi’s having gone forth; when they mounted their
horses, and rode into the neighbourhood of the castle. Having made a
small excursion in the adjoining fields, they drew nearer the walls,
and at an easy pace had twice circled them, when Farrel descried, at
the top of a tower, a white handkerchief waved by a woman’s hand
through the iron bars that secured the window. This signal being
pointed out to Renaldo, his heart began to throb with great violence;
he made a respectful obeisance towards the part in which it appeared,
and perceiving the hand beckoning him to approach, advanced to the very
buttress of the turret; upon which, seeing something drop, he alighted
with great expedition, and took up a picture of his father in
miniature, the features of which he no sooner distinguished, than the
tears ran down his cheeks; he pressed the little image to his lips with
the most filial fervour; then conveying it to his bosom, looked up to
the hand, which waved in such a manner as gave him to understand it was
high time to retire. Being by this time highly persuaded that his kind
monitor was no other than the Countess herself, he pointed to his
heart, in token of his filial affection, and laying his hand on his
sword, to denote his resolution of doing her justice, he took his leave
with another profound bow, and suffered himself to be reconducted to
his lodging.

Every circumstance of this transaction was observed by the servants of
Count Trebasi, who immediately despatched a messenger to their lord,
with an account of what had happened. Alarmed at this information, from
which he immediately concluded that the stranger was young Melvil, he
forthwith quitted the chase, and returning to the castle by a private
postern, ordered his horse to be kept ready saddled, in hope that his
son-in-law would repeat the visit to his mother. This precaution would
have been to no purpose, had Renaldo followed the advice of Farrel, who
represented the danger of returning to a place where the alarm was
undoubtedly given by his first appearance; and exhorted him to return
to Vienna for the prosecution of his suit, now that he was satisfied of
his mother’s being alive. In order to strengthen this admonition, he
bade him recollect the signal for withdrawing, which was doubtless the
effect of maternal concern, inspired by the knowledge of the Count’s
vigilance and vindictive disposition.

Notwithstanding these suggestions, Melvil persisted in his resolution
of appearing once more below the tower, on the supposition that his
mother, in expectation of his return, had prepared a billet for his
acceptance, from which he might obtain important intelligence. The
Major, seeing him lend a deaf ear to his remonstrances, was contented
to attend him in his second expedition, which he pressed him to
undertake that same afternoon, as Trebasi had taken care to circulate a
report of his having gone to dine at the seat of a nobleman in the
neighbourhood. Our knight-errant and his squire, deceived by this
finesse, presented themselves again under the prison of the Countess,
who no sooner beheld her son return, than she earnestly entreated him
to be gone, by the same sign which she had before used; and he, taking
it for granted that she was debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper,
and that she had nothing more to expect, consented to retire, and had
already moved to some distance from the house, when, in crossing a
small plantation that belonged to the castle, they were met by Count
Trebasi and another person on horseback.

At sight of this apparition, the blood mounted into Renaldo’s cheeks,
and his eyes began to lighten with eagerness and indignation; which was
not at all diminished by the ferocious address of the Count, who
advancing to Melvil, with a menacing air. “Before you proceed,” said
he, “I must know with what view you have been twice to-day patroling
round my enclosures, and reconnoitring the different avenues of my
house. You likewise carry on a clandestine correspondence with some
person in the family, of which my honour obliges me to demand an
explanation.”

“Had your actions been always regulated by the dictates of honour,”
replied Renaldo, “I should never have been questioned for riding round
that castle, which you know is my rightful inheritance; or excluded
from the sight of a parent who suffers under your tyranny and
oppression. It is my part, therefore, to expostulate; and, since
fortune hath favoured me with an opportunity of revenging our wrongs in
person, we shall not part until you have learned that the family of the
Count de Melvil is not to be injured with impunity. Here is no
advantage on either side, in point of arms or number; you are better
mounted than I am, and shall have the choice of the ground on which our
difference ought to be brought to a speedy determination.”

Trebasi, whose courage was not of the sentimental kind, but purely
owing to his natural insensibility of danger, instead of concerting
measures coolly for the engagement, or making any verbal reply to this
defiance, drew a pistol, without the least hesitation, and fired it at
the face of Renaldo, part of whose left eyebrow was carried off by the
ball. Melvil was not slow in returning the compliment, which, as it was
deliberate, proved the more decisive. For the shot entering the Count’s
right breast, made its way to the backbone with such a shock, as struck
him to the ground; upon which the other alighted, in order to improve
the advantage he had gained.

During this transaction, Farrel had well-nigh lost his life by the
savage behaviour of Trebasi’s attendant, who had been a hussar officer,
and who, thinking it was his duty to imitate the example of his patron
on this occasion, discharged a pistol at the Major, before he had the
least intimation of his design. The Hibernian’s horse being a common
hireling, and unaccustomed to stand fire, no sooner saw the flash of
Trebasi’s pistol, than, starting aside, he happened to plunge into a
hole, and was overturned at the very instant when the hussar’s piece
went off, so that no damage ensued to his rider, who, pitching on his
feet, flew with great nimbleness to his adversary, then, laying hold on
one leg, dismounted him in a twinkling, and, seizing his throat as he
lay, would have soon despatched him without the use of firearms, had he
not been prevented by his friend Renaldo, who desired him to desist,
observing that his vengeance was already satisfied, as the Count seemed
to be in the agonies of death. The Major was loth to quit his prey, as
he thought his aggressor had acted in a treacherous manner; but
recollecting that there was no time to lose, because, in all
probability, the firing had alarmed the castle, he took his leave of
the vanquished hussar, with a couple of hearty kicks, and, mounting his
horse, followed Melvil to the house of a gentleman in the
neighbourhood, who was kinsman to the Countess, and very well disposed
to grant him a secure retreat, until the troublesome consequences of
this rencontre should be overblown.

Trebasi, though to the young gentleman he seemed speechless and
insensible, had neither lost the use of his reason nor of his tongue,
but affected that extremity, in order to avoid any further conversation
with the victor. He was one of those people who never think of death
until he knocks at the door, and then earnestly entreat him to excuse
them for the present, and be so good as to call another time. The Count
had so often escaped unhurt, in the course of his campaigns, that he
looked upon himself as invulnerable, and set all danger at defiance.
Though he had hitherto taken no care of the concerns of his soul, he
had a large fund of superstition at bottom; and, when the surgeon, who
examined his wound, declared it was mortal, all the terrors of futurity
took hold on his imagination, all the misdemeanours of his life
presented themselves in aggravated colours to his recollection.

He implored the spiritual assistance of a good priest in the
neighbourhood, who, in the discharge of his own conscience, gave him to
understand that he had little mercy to expect, unless he would, as much
as lay in his power, redress the injuries he had done to his
fellow-creatures. As nothing lay heavier upon his soul than the cruelty
and fraud he had practised upon the family of Count Melvil, he
earnestly besought this charitable clergyman to mediate his pardon with
the Countess, and at the same time desired to see Renaldo before his
death, that he might put him in possession of his paternal estate, and
solicit his forgiveness for the offence he had given.

His lady, far from waiting for the priest’s intercession, no sooner
understood the lamentable situation of her husband, and found herself
at liberty, than she hastened to his apartment, expressed the utmost
concern for his misfortune, and tended him with truly conjugal
tenderness and fidelity. Her son gladly obeyed the summons, and was
received with great civility and satisfaction by his father-in-law,
who, in presence of the judge and divers gentlemen assembled for that
purpose, renounced all right and title to the fortune he had so
unjustly usurped; disclosed the name of the convent to which
Mademoiselle de Melvil had been conveyed, dismissed all the agents of
his iniquity, and being reconciled to his son-in-law, began to prepare
himself in tranquillity for his latter end.

The Countess was overwhelmed with an excess of joy, while she embraced
her long-lost son, who had proved himself so worthy of his father. Yet
this joy was embittered, by reflecting that she was made a widow by the
hands of that darling son. For, though she knew his honour demanded the
sacrifice, she could not lay aside that regard and veneration which is
attached to the name of husband; and therefore resolved to retire into
a monastery, where she could spend the remainder of her life in
devotion, without being exposed to any intercourse which might
interfere with the delicacy of her sentiments on that subject.




CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE

HE IS THE MESSENGER OF HAPPINESS TO HIS SISTER, WHO REMOVES THE FILM
WHICH HAD LONG OBSTRUCTED HIS PENETRATION, WITH REGARD TO COUNT FATHOM.


As the most endearing affection had always subsisted between Renaldo
and his sister, he would not one moment deny himself the pleasure of
flying to her embrace, and of being the glad messenger of her
deliverance. Soon, therefore, as he understood the place of her
retreat, and had obtained a proper order to the abbess, signed by Count
Trebasi, he set out post for Vienna, still accompanied by his faithful
Hibernian, and, arriving at the convent, found the abbess and the whole
house so engrossed in making preparations for the ceremony of giving
the veil next day to a young woman who had fulfilled the term of her
probation, that he could not possibly see his sister with that leisure
and satisfaction which he had flattered himself with enjoying at this
meeting; and therefore he was fain to bridle his impatience for two
days, and keep his credentials until the hurry should be over, that
Mademoiselle might have no intimation of her good fortune, except from
his own mouth.

In order to fill up this tedious interval, he visited his friends at
court, who were rejoiced to hear the happy issue of his excursion to
Presburg; the prince, who was his particular patron, desired he would
make himself perfectly easy with regard to the death of Count Trebasi,
for he would take care to represent him in such a light to the
empress-queen, as would screen him from any danger or prosecution on
that account. His highness, moreover, appointed the following day for
performing the promise he had made of presenting him to that august
princess, and in the meantime prepossessed her so much in his favour,
that when he approached her presence, and was announced by his noble
introductor, she eyed him with a look of peculiar complacency, saying,
“I am glad to see you returned to my dominions. Your father was a
gallant officer, who served our house with equal courage and fidelity;
and as I understand you tread in his footsteps, you may depend upon my
favour and protection.”

He was so much overwhelmed with this gracious reception, that, while he
bowed in silence, the drops of gratitude trickled from his eyes; and
her imperial majesty was so well pleased with this manifestation of his
heart, that she immediately gave directions for promoting him to the
command of a troop of horse. Thus fortune seemed willing, and indeed
eager to discharge the debt she owed him for the different calamities
he had undergone. And as he looked upon the generous Hebrew to be the
sole source of his success, he did not fail to make him acquainted with
the happy effects of his recommendation and friendship, and to express,
in the warmest terms, the deep sense he had of his uncommon
benevolence, which, by the bye, was still greater, with regard to
Renaldo, than the reader as yet imagines; for he not only furnished him
with money for his present occasions, but also gave him an unlimited
credit on a banker in Vienna, to whom one of his letters was directed.

The ceremony of the nun’s admission being now performed, and the
convent restored to its former quiet, Melvil hastened thither on the
wings of brotherly affection, and presented his letter to the abbess,
who having perused the contents, by which she learned that the family
disquiets of Count Trebasi no longer subsisted, and that the bearer was
the brother of Mademoiselle, she received him with great politeness,
congratulated him on this happy event, and, begging he would excuse her
staying with him in the parlour, on pretence of business, withdrew,
saying, she would immediately send in a young lady who would console
him for her absence. In a few minutes he was joined by his sister, who,
expecting nothing less than to see Renaldo, no sooner distinguished his
features, than she shrieked aloud with surprise, and would have sunk
upon the floor, had not he supported her in his embrace.

Such a sudden apparition of her brother at any time, or in any place,
after their long separation, would have strongly affected this sensible
young lady; but to find him so abruptly in a place where she thought
herself buried from the knowledge of all her relations, occasioned such
commotions in her spirits as had well-nigh endangered her reason. For
it was not till after a considerable pause, that she could talk to him
with connexion or coherence. However, as those transports subsided,
they entered into a more deliberate and agreeable conversation; in the
course of which, he gradually informed her of what had passed at the
castle; and inexpressible was the pleasure she felt in learning that
her mother was released from captivity, herself restored to freedom,
and her brother to the possession of his inheritance, by the only means
to which she had always prayed these blessings might be owing.

As she had been treated with uncommon humanity by the abbess, she would
not consent to leave the convent until he should be ready to set out
for Presburg; so that they dined together with that good lady, and
passed the afternoon in that mutual communication with which a brother
and sister may be supposed to entertain themselves on such an occasion.
She gave him a detail of the insults and mortifications she had
suffered from the brutality of her father-in-law, and told him, that
her confinement in this monastery was owing to Trebasi having
intercepted a letter to her from Renaldo, signifying his intention to
return to the empire, in order to assert his own right, and redress his
grievances. Then turning the discourse upon the incidents of his
peregrinations, she in a particular manner inquired about that
exquisite beauty who had been the innocent source of all his
distresses, and upon whose perfections he had often, in his letters to
his sister, expatiated with indications of rapture and delight.

This inquiry in a moment blew up that scorching flame which had been
well-nigh stifled by other necessary avocations. His eyes gleamed, his
cheeks glowed and grew pale alternately, and his whole frame underwent
an immediate agitation; which being perceived by Mademoiselle, she
concluded that some new calamity was annexed to the name of Monimia,
and, dreading to rip up a wound which she saw was so ineffectually
closed, she for the present suppressed her curiosity and concern, and
industriously endeavoured to introduce some less affecting subject of
conversation. He saw her aim, approved of her discretion, and, joining
her endeavours, expressed his surprise at her having omitted to signify
the least remembrance of her old favourite, Fathom, whom he had left in
England. He had no sooner pronounced this name, than she suffered some
confusion in her turn; from which, however, recollecting herself,
“Brother,” said she, “you must endeavour to forget that wretch, who is
altogether unworthy of retaining the smallest share of your regard.”

Astonished, and indeed angry, at this expression, which he considered
as the effect of malicious misrepresentation, he gently chid her for
her credulity in believing the envious aspersion of some person, who
repined at the superior virtue of Fathom, whom he affirmed to be an
honour to the human species.

“Nothing is more easy,” replied the young lady, “than to impose upon a
person, who, being himself unconscious of guile, suspects no deceit.
You have been a dupe, dear brother, not to the finesse of Fathom, but
to the sincerity of your own heart. For my own part, I assume no honour
to my own penetration in having comprehended the villany of that
impostor, which was discovered, in more than one instance, by accidents
I could not possibly foresee.

“You must know, that Teresa, who attended me from my childhood, and in
whose honesty I reposed such confidence, having disobliged some of the
inferior servants, was so narrowly watched in all her transactions, as
to be at last detected in the very act of conveying a piece of plate,
which was actually found concealed among her clothes.

“You may guess how much I was astonished when I understood this
circumstance. I could not trust to the evidence of my own senses, and
should have still believed her innocent, in spite of ocular
demonstration, had not she, in the terrors of being tried for felony,
promised to make a very material discovery to the Countess, provided
she would take such measures as would save her life.

“This request being complied with, she, in my hearing, opened up such
an amazing scene of iniquity, baseness, and ingratitude, which had been
acted by her and Fathom, in order to defraud the family to which they
were so much indebted, that I could not have believed the human mind
capable of such degeneracy, or that traitor endowed with such
pernicious cunning and dissimulation, had not her tale been congruous,
consistent, and distinct, and fraught with circumstances that left no
room to doubt the least article of her confession; on consideration of
which she was permitted to go into voluntary exile.”

She then explained their combination in all the particulars, as we have
already recounted them in their proper place, and finally observed,
that the opinion she had hence conceived of Fathom’s character, was
confirmed by what she had since learned of his perfidious conduct
towards that very nun who had lately taken the veil.

Perceiving her brother struck dumb with astonishment, and gaping with
the most eager attention, she proceeded to relate the incidents of his
double intrigue with the jeweller’s wife and daughter, as they were
communicated to her by the nun, who was no other than the individual
Wilhelmina. After those rivals had been forsaken by their gallant,
their mutual animosities and chagrin served to whet the attention and
invention of each; so that in a little time the whole mystery stood
disclosed to both. The mother had discovered the daughter’s
correspondence with Fathom, as we have formerly observed, by means of
that unfortunate letter which he unwittingly committed to the charge of
the old beldame; and, as soon as she understood he was without the
reach of all solicitation or prosecution, imparted this billet to her
husband, whose fury was so ungovernable, that he had almost sacrificed
Wilhelmina with his own hands, especially when, terrified by his
threats and imprecations, she owned that she had bestowed the chain on
this perfidious lover. However, this dreadful purpose was prevented,
partly by the interposition of his wife, whose aim was not the death
but immurement of his daughter, and partly by the tears and
supplication of the young gentlewoman herself, who protested, that,
although the ceremony of the church had not been performed, she was
contracted to Fathom by the most solemn vows, to witness which he
invoked all the saints in heaven.

The jeweller, upon cooler consideration, was unwilling to lose the last
spark of hope that glittered among the ruins of his despair, and
resisted all the importunities of his wife, who pressed him to consult
the welfare of his daughter’s soul, in the fond expectation of finding
some expedient to lure back the chain and its possessor. In the
meantime Wilhelmina was daily and hourly exposed to the mortifying
animadversions of her mamma, who, with all the insolence of virtue,
incessantly upbraided her with the backslidings of her vicious life,
and exhorted her to reformation and repentance. This continual triumph
lasted for many months, till at length, a quarrel happening between the
mother and the gossip at whose house she used to give the rendezvous to
her admirers, that incensed confidante, in the precipitation of her
anger, promulgated the history of those secret meetings; and, among the
rest, her interviews with Fathom were brought to light.

The first people who hear news of this sort are generally those to whom
they are most unwelcome. The German was soon apprised of his wife’s
frailty, and considered the two females of his house as a couple of
devils incarnate, sent from hell to exercise his patience. Yet, in the
midst of his displeasure, he found matter of consolation, in being
furnished with a sufficient reason for parting with his helpmate, who
had for many years kept his family in disquiet. He therefore, without
hazarding a personal conference, sent proposals to her by a friend,
which she did not think proper to reject; and seeing himself restored
to the dominion of his own house, exerted his sway so tyrannically,
that Wilhelmina became weary of her life, and had recourse to the
comforts of religion, of which she soon became enamoured, and begged
her father’s permission to dedicate the rest of her life to the duties
of devotion. She was accordingly received in this convent, the
regulations of which were so much to her liking, that she performed the
task of probation with pleasure, and voluntarily excluded herself from
the vanities of this life. It was here she had contracted an
acquaintance with Mademoiselle de Melvil, to whom she communicated her
complaints of Fathom, on the supposition that he was related to the
Count, as he himself had often declared.

While the young lady rehearsed the particulars of this detail, Renaldo
sustained a strange vicissitude of different passions. Surprise,
sorrow, fear, hope, and indignation raised a most tumultuous conflict
in his bosom. Monimia rushed upon his imagination in the character of
innocence betrayed by the insinuations of treachery. He with horror
viewed her at the mercy of a villain, who had broken all the ties of
gratitude and honour.

Affrighted at the prospect, he started from his seat, exclaiming, in
the most unconnected strain of distraction and despair, “Have I then
nourished a serpent in my bosom! Have I listened to the voice of a
traitor, who hath murdered my peace! who hath torn my heart-strings
asunder, and perhaps ruined the pattern of all earthly perfection. It
cannot be. Heaven would not suffer such infernal artifice to take
effect. The thunder would be levelled against the head of the accursed
projector.”

From this transport, compared with his agitation when he mentioned
Monimia, his sister judged that Fathom had been the occasion of a
breach between the two lovers; and this conjecture being confirmed by
the disjointed answers he made to her interrogations upon the affair,
she endeavoured to calm his apprehensions, by representing that he
would soon have an opportunity of returning to England, where the
misunderstanding might be easily cleared up; and that, in the meantime,
he had nothing to fear on account of the person of his mistress, in a
country where individuals were so well protected by the laws and
constitution of the realm. At length he suffered himself to be
flattered with the fond hope of seeing Monimia’s character triumph in
the inquiry, of retrieving that lost jewel, and of renewing that
ravishing intercourse and exalted expectation which had been so cruelly
cut off. He now wished to find Fathom as black as he had been
exhibited, that Monimia’s apostasy might be numbered among the
misrepresentations of his treachery and fraud.

His love, which was alike generous and ardent, espoused the cause, and
he no longer doubted her constancy and virtue. But when he reflected
how her tender heart must have been wrung with anguish at his
unkindness and cruelty, in leaving her destitute in a foreign land; how
her sensibility must have been tortured in finding herself altogether
dependent upon a ruffian, who certainly harboured the most baleful
designs upon her honour; how her life must be endangered both by his
barbarity and her own despair—I say, when he reflected on these
circumstances, he shuddered with horror and dismay; and that very night
despatched a letter to his friend the Jew, entreating him, in the most
pressing manner, to employ all his intelligence in learning the
situation of the fair orphan, that she might be protected from the
villany of Fathom, until his return to England.




CHAPTER SIXTY

HE RECOMPENSES THE ATTACHMENT OF HIS FRIEND; AND RECEIVES A LETTER THAT
REDUCES HIM TO THE VERGE OF DEATH AND DISTRACTION.


This step being taken, his mind in some measure retrieved its former
tranquillity. He soothed himself with the prospect of a happy
reconciliation with the divine Monimia, and his fancy was decoyed from
every disagreeable presage by the entertaining conversation of his
sister, with whom in two days he set out for Presburg, attended by his
friend the Major, who had never quitted him since their meeting at
Brussels. Here they found Count Trebasi entirely rid of the fever which
had been occasioned by his wound, and in a fair way of doing well; a
circumstance that afforded unspeakable pleasure to Melvil, whose manner
of thinking was such, as would have made him unhappy, could he have
charged himself with the death of his mother’s husband, howsoever
criminal he might have been.

The Count’s ferocity did not return with his health. His eyes were
opened by the danger he had incurred, and his sentiments turned in a
new channel. He heartily asked pardon of Mademoiselle for the rigorous
usage she had suffered from the violence of his temper; thanked Renaldo
for the seasonable lesson he had administered to him; and not only
insisted upon being removed from the castle to a house of his own in
Presburg, but proffered to make immediate restitution of all the rents
which he had unjustly converted to his own use.

These things being settled in the most amicable manner, to the entire
satisfaction of the parties concerned, as well as of the neighbouring
noblesse, among whom the house of Melvil was in universal esteem,
Renaldo resolved to solicit leave at the Imperial court to return to
England, in order to investigate that affair of Monimia, which was more
interesting than all the points he had hitherto adjusted. But, before
he quitted Presburg, his friend Farrel taking him aside one day,
“Count,” said he, “will you give me leave to ask, if, by my zeal and
attachment for you, I have had the good fortune to acquire your
esteem?” “To doubt that esteem,” replied Renaldo, “were to suspect my
gratitude and honour, of which I must be utterly destitute before I
lose the sense of those obligations I owe to your gallantry and
friendship—obligations which I long for a proper occasion to repay.”

“Well then,” resumed the Major, “I will deal with you like a downright
Swiss, and point out a method by which you may shift the load of
obligation from your own shoulders to mine. You know my birth, rank,
and expectations in the service; but perhaps you do not know, that, as
my expense has always unavoidably exceeded my income, I find myself a
little out at elbows in my circumstances, and want to piece them up by
matrimony. Of those ladies with whom I think I have any chance of
succeeding, Mademoiselle de Melvil seems the best qualified to render
my situation happy in all respects. Her fortune is more than sufficient
to disembarrass my affairs; her good sense will be a seasonable check
upon my vivacity; her agreeable accomplishments will engage a
continuation of affection and regard. I know my own disposition well
enough to think I shall become a most dutiful and tractable husband;
and shall deem myself highly honoured in being more closely united to
my dear Count de Melvil, the son and representative of that worthy
officer under whom my youth was formed. If you will therefore sanction
my claim, I will forthwith begin my approaches, and doubt not, under
your auspices, to bring the place to a capitulation.”

Renaldo was pleased with the frankness of this declaration, approved of
his demand, and desired him to depend upon his good offices with his
sister, whom he sounded that same evening upon the subject,
recommending the Major to her favour, as a gentleman well worthy of her
choice. Mademoiselle, who had never been exercised in the coquetries of
her sex, and was now arrived at those years when the vanity of youth
ought to yield to discretion, considered the proposal as a philosopher,
and after due deliberation candidly owned she had no objection to the
match. Farrel was accordingly introduced in the character of a lover,
after the permission of the Countess had been obtained; and he carried
on his addresses in the usual form, so much to the satisfaction of all
concerned in the event, that a day was appointed for the celebration of
his nuptials, when he entered into peaceable possession of his prize.

A few days after this joyful occasion, while Renaldo was at Vienna,
where he had been indulged with leave of absence for six months, and
employed in making preparations for his journey to Britain, he was one
evening presented by his servant with a package from London, which he
no sooner opened, than he found enclosed a letter directed to him, in
the handwriting of Monimia. He was so much affected at sight of those
well-known characters, that he stood motionless as a statue, eager to
know the contents, yet afraid to peruse the billet. While he hesitated
in this suspense, he chanced to cast his eye on the inside of the
cover, and perceived the name of his Jewish friend at the bottom of a
few lines, importing, that the enclosed was delivered to him by a
physician of his acquaintance, who had recommended it in a particular
manner to his care. This intimation served only to increase the
mystery, and whet his impatience; and as he had the explanation in his
hand, he summoned all his resolution to his aid, and, breaking the
seal, began to read these words: “Renaldo will not suppose that this
address proceeds from interested motives, when he learns, that, before
it can be presented to his view, the unfortunate Monimia will be no
more.”

Here the light forsook Renaldo’s eyes, his knees knocked together, and
he fell at full length insensible on the floor. His valet, hearing the
noise, ran into the apartment, lifted him upon a couch, and despatched
a messenger for proper assistance, while he himself endeavoured to
recall his spirits by such applications as chance afforded. But before
the Count exhibited any signs of life, his brother-in-law entered his
chamber by accident, and as soon as he recollected himself from the
extreme confusion and concern produced by this melancholy spectacle, he
perceived the fatal epistle, which Melvil, though insensible, still
kept within his grasp; justly suspecting this to be the cause of that
severe paroxysm, he drew near the couch, and with difficulty read what
is above rehearsed, and the sequel, to this effect:—

“Yes, I have taken such measures as will prevent it from falling into
your hands, until after I shall have been released from a being
embittered with inexpressible misery and anguish. It is not my
intention, once loved, and ah! still too fondly remembered youth, to
upbraid you as the source of that unceasing woe which hath been so long
the sole inhabitant of my lonely bosom. I will not call you inconstant
or unkind. I dare not think you base or dishonourable; yet I was
abruptly sacrificed to a triumphant rival, before I had learned to bear
such mortification; before I had overcome the prejudices which I had
imbibed in my father’s house. I was all at once abandoned to despair,
to indigence, and distress, to the vile practices of a villain, who, I
fear, hath betrayed us both. What have not I suffered from the insults
and vicious designs of that wretch, whom you cherished in your bosom!
Yet to these I owe this near approach to that goal of peace, where the
canker-worm of sorrow will expire. Beware of that artful traitor; and,
oh! endeavour to overcome that levity of disposition, which, if
indulged, will not only stain your reputation, but also debauch the
good qualities of your heart. I release you, in the sight of Heaven,
from all obligations. If I have been injured, let not my wrongs be
visited on the head of Renaldo, for whom shall be offered up the last
fervent prayers of the hapless Monimia.”

This letter was a clue to the labyrinth of Melvil’s distress. Though
the Major had never heard him mention the name of this beauty, he had
received such hints from his own wife, as enabled him to comprehend the
whole of the Count’s disaster. By the administration of stimulating
medicines, Renaldo recovered his perception; but this was a cruel
alternative, considering the situation of his thoughts. The first word
he pronounced was Monimia, with all the emphasis of the most violent
despair. He perused the letter, and poured forth incoherent execrations
against Fathom and himself. He exclaimed, in a frantic tone, “She is
lost for ever! murdered by my unkindness! We are both undone by the
infernal arts of Fathom! execrable monster! Restore her to my arms. If
thou art not a fiend in reality, I will tear out thy false heart.”

So saying, he sprung upon his valet, who would have fallen a sacrifice
to his undistinguishing fury, had not he been saved by the
interposition of Farrel and the family, who disengaged him from his
master’s gripe by dint of force; yet, notwithstanding their joint
endeavours, he broke from this restraint, leaped upon the floor, and
seizing his sword, attempted to plunge it in his own breast. When he
was once more overcome by numbers, he cursed himself, and all those who
withheld him; swore he would not survive the fair victim who had
perished by his credulity and indiscretion; and the agitation of his
spirits increased to such a degree, that he was seized with strong
convulsions, which nature was scarce able to sustain. Every medical
expedient was used to quiet his perturbation, which at length yielded
so far as to subside into a continual fever and confirmed delirium,
during which he ceased not to pour forth the most pathetic complaints,
touching his ruined love, and to rave about the ill-starred Monimia.
The Major, half distracted by the calamity of his friend, would have
concealed it from the knowledge of his family, had not the physician,
by despairing of his life, laid him under the necessity of making them
acquainted with his condition.

The Countess and Mrs. Farrel were no sooner informed of his case than
they hastened to the melancholy scene, where they found Renaldo
deprived of his senses, panting under the rage of an exasperated
disease. They saw his face distorted, and his eyes glaring with frenzy;
they heard him invoke the name of Monimia with a tenderness of accent
which even the impulse of madness could not destroy. Then, with a
sudden transition of tone and gesture, he denounced vengeance against
her betrayer, and called upon the north wind to cool the fervour of his
brain. His hair hung in dishevelled parcels, his cheeks were wan, his
looks ghastly, his vigour was fled, and all the glory of his youth
faded; the physician hung his head in silence, the attendants wrung
their hands in despair, and the countenance of his friend was bathed in
tears.

Such a picture would have moved the most obdurate heart; what
impression then must it have made upon a parent and sister, melting
with all the enthusiasm of affection! The mother was struck dumb, and
stupefied with grief; the sister threw herself on the bed in a
transport of sorrow, caught her loved Renaldo in her arms, and was,
with great difficulty, torn from his embrace. Such was the dismal
reverse that overtook the late so happy family of Melvil; such was the
extremity to which the treachery of Fathom had reduced his best
benefactor!

Three days did nature struggle with surprising efforts, and then the
constitution seemed to sink under the victorious fever; yet, as his
strength diminished, his delirium abated, and on the fifth morning he
looked round, and recognised his weeping friends. Though now exhausted
to the lowest ebb of life, he retained the perfect use of speech, and
his reason being quite unclouded, spoke to each with equal kindness and
composure; he congratulated himself upon the sight of shore after the
horrors of such a tempest; called upon the Countess and his sister, who
were not permitted to see him at such a conjuncture; and being apprised
by the Major of his reason for excluding them from his presence, he
applauded his concern, bequeathed them to his future care, and took
leave of that gentleman with a cordial embrace. Then he desired to be
left in private with a certain clergyman, who regulated the concerns of
his soul, and he being dismissed, turned his face from the light, in
expectation of his final discharge. In a few minutes all was still and
dreary, he was no longer heard to breathe, no more the stream of life
was perceived to circulate, he was supposed to be absolved from all his
cares, and an universal groan from the bystanders announced the decease
of the gallant, generous, and tender-hearted Renaldo.

“Come hither, ye whom the pride of youth and health, of birth and
affluence inflames, who tread the flowery maze of pleasure, trusting to
the fruition of ever-circling joys; ye who glory in your
accomplishments, who indulge the views of ambition, and lay schemes for
future happiness and grandeur, contemplate here the vanity of life!
behold how low this excellent young man is laid! mowed down even in the
blossom of his youth, when fortune seemed to open all her treasures to
his worth!”

Such were the reflections of the generous Farrel, who, while he
performed the last office of friendship, in closing the eyes of the
much-lamented Melvil, perceived a warmth on the skin, which the hand of
death seldom leaves unextinguished. This uncommon sensation he reported
to the physician, who, though he could feel no pulsation of the heart
or arteries, conjectured that life still lingered in some of its
interior haunts, and immediately ordered such applications to the
extremities and surface of the body, as might help to concentrate and
reinforce the natural heat.

By these prescriptions, which for some time produced no sensible
effect, the embers were, in all probability, kept glowing, and the
vital power revived, for, after a considerable pause, respiration was
gradually renewed at long intervals, a languid motion was perceived at
the heart, a few feeble and irregular pulsations were felt at the
wrist, the clay-coloured livery of death began to vanish from his face,
the circulation acquired new force, and he opened his eyes with a sigh,
which proclaimed his return from the shades of death.

When he recovered the faculty of swallowing, a cordial was
administered, and whether the fever abated, in consequence of the
blood’s being cooled and condensed during the recess of action in the
solids, or nature, in that agony, had prepared a proper channel for the
expulsion of the disease, certain it is, he was from this moment rid of
all bodily pain; he retrieved the animal functions, and nothing
remained of his malady but an extreme weakness and languor, the effect
of nature’s being fatigued in the battle she had won.

Unutterable was the joy that took possession of his mother and sister
when Farrel flew into her apartment to intimate this happy turn. Scarce
could they be restrained from pouring forth their transports in the
presence of Renaldo, who was still too feeble to endure such
communication; indeed, he was extremely mortified and dejected at this
event, which had diffused such pleasure and satisfaction among his
friends, for though his distemper was mastered, the fatal cause of it
still rankled at his heart, and he considered this respite from death
as a protraction of his misery.

When he was congratulated by the Major on the triumph of his
constitution, he replied, with a groan, “I would to heaven it had been
otherwise, for I am reserved for all the horrors of the most poignant
sorrow and remorse. O Monimia! Monimia! I hoped by this time to have
convinced thy gentle shade, that I was, at least intentionally,
innocent of that ruthless barbarity which hath brought thee to an
untimely grave. Heaven and earth! do I still survive the consciousness
of that dire catastrophe! and lives the atrocious villain who hath
blasted all our hopes!”

With these last words the fire darted from his eyes, and his brother,
snatching this occasional handle for reconciling him to life, joined in
his exclamations against the treacherous Fathom, and observed, that he
should not, in point of honour, wish to die, until he should have
sacrificed that traitor to the manes of the beauteous Monimia. This
incitement acted as a spur upon exhausted nature, causing the blood to
circulate with fresh vigour, and encouraging him to take such
sustenance as would recruit his strength, and repair the damage which
his health had sustained.

His sister assiduously attended him in his recovery, flattering his
appetite, and amusing his sorrow at the same time; the clergyman
assailed his despondence with religious weapons, as well as with
arguments drawn from philosophy; and the fury of his passions being
already expended, he became so tractable as to listen to his
remonstrances. But notwithstanding the joint endeavours of all his
friends, a deep fixed melancholy remained after every consequence of
his disease had vanished. In vain they essayed to elude his grief by
gaiety and diversions, in vain they tried to decoy his heart into some
new engagement.

These kind attempts served only to feed and nourish that melancholy
which pined within his bosom. Monimia still haunted him in the midst of
these amusements, while his reflection whispered to him, “Pleasures
like these I might have relished with her participation.” That darling
idea mingled in all the female assemblies at which he was present,
eclipsing their attractions, and enhancing the bitterness of his loss;
for absence, enthusiasm, and even his despair had heightened the charms
of the fair orphan into something supernatural and divine.

Time, that commonly weakens the traces of remembrance, seemed to deepen
its impressions in his breast; nightly, in his dreams, did he converse
with his dear Monimia, sometimes on the verdant bank of a delightful
stream, where he breathed, in soft murmurs, the dictates of his love
and admiration; sometimes reclined within the tufted grove, his arm
encircled and sustained her snowy neck, whilst she, with looks of love
ineffable, gazed on his face, invoking Heaven to bless her husband and
her lord. Yet, even in these illusions was his fancy oft alarmed for
the ill-fated fair. Sometimes he viewed her tottering on the brink of a
steep precipice, far distant from his helping hand; at other times she
seemed to sail along the boisterous tide, imploring his assistance,
then would he start with horror from his sleep, and feel his sorrows
more than realised; he deserted his couch, he avoided the society of
mankind, he courted sequestered shades where he could indulge his
melancholy; there his mind brooded over his calamity until his
imagination became familiar with all the ravages of death; it
contemplated the gradual decline of Monimia’s health, her tears, her
distress, her despair at his imagined cruelty; he saw, through that
perspective, every blossom of her beauty wither, every sparkle vanish
from her eyes; he beheld her faded lips, her pale cheek, and her
inanimated features, the symmetry of which not death itself was able to
destroy. His fancy conveyed her breathless corse to the cold grave,
o’er which, perhaps, no tear humane was shed, where her delicate limbs
were consigned to dust, where she was dished out a delicious banquet to
the unsparing worm.

Over these pictures he dwelt with a sort of pleasing anguish, until he
became so enamoured of her tomb, that he could no longer resist the
desire that compelled him to make a pilgrimage to the dear hallowed
spot, where all his once gay hopes lay buried; that he might nightly
visit the silent habitation of his ruined love, embrace the sacred
earth with which she was now compounded, moisten it with his tears, and
bid the turf lie easy on her breast. Besides the prospect of this
gloomy enjoyment, he was urged to return to England, by an eager desire
of taking vengeance on the perfidious Fathom, as well as of acquitting
himself of the obligations he owed in that kingdom, to those who had
assisted him in his distress. He therefore communicated his intention
to Farrel, who would have insisted upon attending him in the journey,
had not he been conjured to stay and manage Renaldo’s affairs in his
absence. Every previous step being taken, he took leave of the Countess
and his sister, who had, with all their interest and elocution, opposed
his design, the execution of which, they justly feared, would, instead
of dissipating, augment his chagrin; and now, seeing him determined,
they shed a flood of tears at his departure, and he set out from Vienna
in a post-chaise, accompanied by a trusty valet-de-chambre on
horseback.




CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE

RENALDO MEETS WITH A LIVING MONUMENT OF JUSTICE, AND ENCOUNTERS A
PERSONAGE OF SOME NOTE IN THESE MEMOIRS.


As this domestic was very well qualified for making all the proper
dispositions, and adjusting every necessary article on the road,
Renaldo totally abstracted himself from earthly considerations, and
mused without ceasing on that theme which was the constant subject of
his contemplation. He was blind to the objects that surrounded him; he
scarce ever felt the importunities of nature; and had not they been
reinforced by the pressing entreaties of his attendant, he would have
proceeded without refreshment or repose. In this absence of mind did he
traverse a great part of Germany, in his way to the Austrian
Netherlands, and arrived at the fortress of Luxemburg, where he was
obliged to tarry a whole day on account of an accident which had
happened to his chaise. Here he went to view the fortifications; and as
he walked along the ramparts, his ears were saluted with these words:
“Heaven bless the noble Count de Melvil! will not he turn the eyes of
compassion on an old fellow-soldier reduced to misfortune and
disgrace?”

Surprised at this address, which was attended with the clanking of
chains, Renaldo lifted up his eyes, and perceived the person who spoke
to be one of two malefactors shackled together, who had been sentenced
for some crime to work as labourers on the fortifications. His face was
so covered with hair, and his whole appearance so disguised by the
squalid habit which he wore, that the Count could not recollect his
features, until he gave him to understand that his name was Ratchcali.
Melvil immediately recognised his fellow-student at Vienna, and his
brother-volunteer upon the Rhine, and expressed equal surprise and
concern at seeing him in such a deplorable situation.

Nothing renders the soul so callous and insensible as the searing
brands of infamy and disgrace. Without betraying the least symptoms of
shame or confusion, “Count,” says he, “this is the fate of war, at
least of the war in which I have been engaged, ever since I took leave
of the Imperial army, and retreated with your old companion Fathom.
Long life to that original genius! If he is not unhappily eclipsed by
some unfortunate interposition, before his terrene parts are purified,
I foresee that he will shine a star of the first magnitude in the world
of adventure.”

At mention of this detested name, Renaldo’s heart began to throb with
indignation; yet he suppressed the emotion, and desired to know the
meaning of that splendid encomium which he had bestowed upon his
confederate. “It would be quite unnecessary,” replied Ratchcali, “for a
man in my present situation to equivocate or disguise the truth. The
nature of my disgrace is perfectly well known. I am condemned to hard
labour for life; and unless some lucky accident, which I cannot now
foresee, shall intervene, all I can expect is some alleviation of my
hard lot from the generosity of such gentlemen as you, who
compassionate the sufferings of your fellow-creatures. In order to
engage your benevolence the more in my behalf, I shall, if you will
give me the hearing, faithfully inform you of some particulars, which
it may import you to know, concerning my old acquaintance Ferdinand
Count Fathom, whose real character hath perhaps hitherto escaped your
notice.”

Then he proceeded to give a regular detail of all the strokes of
finesse which he, in conjunction with our adventurer, had practised
upon Melvil and others, during their residence at Vienna, and the
campaigns they had made upon the Rhine. He explained the nature of the
robbery which was supposed to have been done by the Count’s valet,
together with the manner of their desertion. He described his
separation from Fathom, their meeting at London, the traffic they
carried on in copartnership; and the misfortune that reduced Ferdinand
to the condition in which he was found by Melvil.

“After having gratified the honest lawyer,” said he, “with a share of
the unfortunate Fathom’s spoils, and packed up all my own valuable
effects, my new auxiliary Maurice and I posted to Harwich, embarked in
the packet-boat, and next day arrived at Helvoetsluys; from thence we
repaired to the Hague, in order to mingle in the gaieties of the place,
and exercise our talents at play, which is there cultivated with
universal eagerness. But, chancing to meet with an old acquaintance,
whom I did not at all desire to see, I found it convenient to withdraw
softly to Rotterdam; from whence we set out for Antwerp; and, having
made a tour of the Austrian Netherlands, set up our rest at Brussels,
and concerted a plan for laying the Flemings under contribution.

“From our appearance we procured admission into the most polite
assemblies, and succeeded to a wonder in all our operations; until our
career was unfortunately checked by the indiscretion of my ally, who,
being detected in the very act of conveying a card, was immediately
introduced to a magistrate. And this minister of justice was so
curious, inquisitive, and clear-sighted, that Count Maurice, finding it
impossible to elude his penetration, was fain to stipulate for his own
safety, by giving up his friend to the cognisance of the law. I was
accordingly apprehended, before I knew the cause of my arrest; and
being unhappily known by some soldiers of the Prince’s guard, my
character turned out so little to the approbation of the inquisitors,
that all my effects were confiscated for the benefit of the state, and
I was by a formal sentence condemned to labour on the fortifications
all the days of my life; while Maurice escaped at the expense of five
hundred stripes, which he received in public from the hands of the
common executioner.

“Thus have I, without evasion or mental reservation, given a faithful
account of the steps by which I have arrived at this barrier, which is
likely to be the ne plus ultra of my peregrinations, unless the
generous Count de Melvil will deign to interpose his interest in behalf
of an old fellow-soldier, who may yet live to justify his mediation.”

Renaldo had no reason to doubt the truth of this story, every
circumstance of which tended to corroborate the intelligence he had
already received touching the character of Fathom, whom he now
considered with a double portion of abhorrence, as the most abandoned
miscreant that nature had ever produced. Though Ratchcali did not
possess a much higher place in his opinion, he favoured him with marks
of his bounty, and exhorted him, if possible, to reform his heart; but
he would by no means promise to interpose his credit in favour of a
wretch self-convicted of such enormous villany and fraud. He could not
help moralising upon this rencontre, which inspired him with great
contempt for human nature. And next day he proceeded on his journey
with a heavy heart, ruminating on the perfidy of mankind, and, between
whiles, transported with the prospect of revenging all his calamities
upon the accursed author.

While he was wrapped up in these reveries, his carriage rolled along,
and had already entered a wood between Mons and Tournay, when his dream
was suddenly interrupted by the explosion of several pistols that were
fired among the thickets at a little distance from the road. Roused at
this alarm, he snatched his sword that stood by him, and springing from
the chaise, ran directly towards the spot, being close followed by his
valet, who had alighted and armed himself with a pistol in each hand.
About forty yards from the highway, they arrived in a little glade or
opening, where they saw a single man standing at bay against five
banditti, after having killed one of their companions, and lost his own
horse, that lay dead upon the ground.

Melvil seeing this odds, and immediately guessing their design, rushed
among them without hesitation, and in an instant ran his sword through
the heart of one whose hand was raised to smite the gentleman behind,
while he was engaged with the rest in front. At the same time the valet
disabled another by a shot in the shoulder; so that the number being
now equal on both sides, a furious combat ensued, every man being
paired with an antagonist, and each having recourse to swords, as all
their pieces had been discharged. Renaldo’s adversary, finding himself
pressed with equal fury and skill, retreated gradually among the trees,
until he vanished altogether into the thickest of the wood; and his two
companions followed his example with great ease, the valet-de-chambre
being hurt in the leg, and the stranger so much exhausted by the wounds
he had received before Renaldo’s interposition, that, when the young
gentleman approached to congratulate him on the defeat of the robbers,
he, in advancing to embrace his deliverer, dropped down motionless on
the grass.

The Count, with that warmth of sympathy and benevolence which was
natural to his heart, lifted up the wounded cavalier in his arms, and
carried him to the chaise, in which he was deposited, while the
valet-de-chambre reloaded his pistols, and prepared for a second
attack, as they did not doubt that the banditti would return with a
reinforcement. However, before they reappeared, Renaldo’s driver
disengaged him from the wood, and in less than a quarter of an hour
they arrived at a village, where they halted for assistance to the
stranger, who, though still alive, had not recovered the use of his
senses.

After he was undressed, and laid in a warm bed, a surgeon examined his
body, and found a wound in his neck by a sword, and another in his
right side, occasioned by a pistol-shot; so that his prognostic was
very dubious. Meanwhile, he applied proper dressings to both; and, in
half an hour after this administration, the gentleman gave some tokens
of perception. He looked around him with a wildness of fury in his
aspect, as if he had thought himself in the hands of the robbers by
whom he had been attacked. But, when he saw the assiduity with which
the bystanders exerted themselves in his behalf, one raising his head
from the pillow, while another exhorted him to swallow a little wine
which was warmed for the purpose; when he beheld the sympathising looks
of all present, and heard himself accosted in the most cordial terms by
the person whom he recollected as his deliverer, all the severity
vanished from his countenance; he took Renaldo’s hand, and pressed it
to his lips; and, while the tears gushed from his eyes, “Praised be
God,” said he, “that virtue and generosity are still to be found among
the sons of men.”

Everybody in the apartment was affected by this exclamation; and
Melvil, above all the rest, felt such emotions as he could scarcely
restrain. He entreated the gentleman to believe himself in the midst of
such friends as would effectually secure him from all violence and
mortification; he conjured him to compose the perturbation of his
spirits, and quiet the apprehensions of his mind with that reflection;
and protested, that he himself would not quit the house while his
attendance should be deemed necessary for the stranger’s cure, or his
conversation conducive to his amusement.

These assurances, considered with the heroic part which the young
Hungarian had already acted in his behalf, inspired the cavalier with
such a sublime idea of Melvil, that he gazed upon him with silent
astonishment, as an angel sent from heaven for his succour; and, in the
transport of his gratitude, could not help exclaiming, “Sure Providence
hath still something in reserve for this unfortunate wretch, in whose
favour such a miracle of courage and generosity hath interposed!”

Being accommodated with proper care and attendance, his constitution in
a little time overcame the fever; and, at the third dressing, the
surgeon declared him out of all danger from his wounds. Then was
Renaldo indulged with opportunities of conversing with the patient, and
of inquiring into the particulars of his fortune and designs in life,
with a view to manifest the inclination he felt to serve him in his
future occasions.

The more this stranger contemplated the character of the Count, the
more his amazement increased, on account of his extraordinary
benevolence in favour of a person whose merit he could not possibly
know; he even expressed his surprise on this subject to Renaldo, who at
length told him, that, although his best offices should always be ready
for the occasions of any gentleman in distress, his particular
attachment and regard to him was improved by an additional
consideration. “I am no stranger,” said he, “to the virtues and honour
of the gallant Don Diego de Zelos.”

“Heaven and earth!” cried the stranger, starting from his seat with
extreme emotion, “do I then live to hear myself addressed by that
long-lost appellation! my heart glows at the expression! my spirits are
kindled with a flame that thrills through every nerve! Say, young
gentleman, if you are really an inhabitant of earth, by what means are
you acquainted with the unhappy name of Zelos?”

In answer to this eager interrogation, Renaldo gave him to understand,
that in the course of his travels, he had resided a short time at
Seville, where he had frequently seen Don Diego, and often heard his
character mentioned with uncommon esteem and veneration. “Alas!”
replied the Castilian, “that justice is no longer done to the wretched
Zelos; his honours are blasted, and his reputation canker-bitten by the
venomous tooth of slander.”

He then proceeded to unfold his misfortunes, as they have already been
explained in the former part of these memoirs; at the recapitulation of
which, the heart of Melvil, being intendered by his own calamities, was
so deeply affected, that he re-echoed the groans of Don Diego, and wept
over his sufferings with the most filial sympathy. When he repeated the
story of that cruel fraud which was practised upon him by the faithless
Fadini, Melvil, whose mind and imagination teemed with the villanies of
Fathom, was immediately struck with the conjecture of his being the
knave; because, indeed, he could not believe that any other person was
so abandoned by principle and humanity as to take such a barbarous
advantage of a gentleman in distress.




CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO

HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND, AND MIDNIGHT PILGRIMAGE TO MONIMIA’S TOMB.


He considered the date of that unparalleled transaction, which agreed
with his conjecture, and from the inquiries he made concerning the
person of the traitor, gathered reasons sufficient to confirm his
supposition. Thus certified, “That is the villain,” cried the Count,
“whose infernal arts have overwhelmed me with such misery as Heaven
itself hath made no remedy to dispel! To revenge my wrongs on that
perfidious miscreant, is one of the chief reasons for which I deign to
drag about an hateful being. O Don Diego! what is life, when all its
enjoyments are so easily poisoned by the machinations of such a worm!”
So saying, he smote his breast in all the agony of woe, and besought
the Spaniard to relate the steps he took in consequence of this
disaster.

The Castilian’s cheeks reddened at this information, which enforced his
own resentment, and casting up his eyes to heaven, “Sacred powers!”
cried he, “let him not perish, before you bring him within my reach.
You ask me, noble cavalier, what measures I took in this abyss of
misery? For the first day, I was tortured with apprehensions for the
friendly Fadini, fearing that he had been robbed and murdered for the
jewels which he had, perhaps, too unwarily exposed to sale. But this
terror soon vanished before the true presages of my fate, when, on the
morrow, I found the whole family in tears and confusion, and heard my
landlord pour forth the most bitter imprecations against the fugitive,
who had deflowered his daughter, and even robbed the house. You will
ask, which of the passions of my heart were interested on this
occasion? they were shame and indignation. All my grief flowed in
another channel; I blushed to find my judgment deceived; I scorned to
complain; but, in my heart, denounced vengeance against my base
betrayer. I silently retired to my apartment, in order to commune with
my own thoughts.

“I had borne greater calamities without being driven to despair; I
summoned all my fortitude to my assistance, and resolved to live in
spite of affliction. Thus determined, I betook myself to the house of a
general officer, whose character was fair in the world; and having
obtained admission in consequence of my Oriental appearance, ‘To a man
of honour,’ said I, ‘the unfortunate need no introduction. My habit
proclaims me a Persian; this passport from the States of Holland will
confirm that supposition. I have been robbed of jewels to a
considerable value, by a wretch whom I favoured with my confidence; and
now, reduced to extreme indigence, I come to offer myself as a soldier
in the armies of France. I have health and strength sufficient to
discharge that duty. Nor am I unacquainted with a military life, which
was once my glory and occupation. I therefore sue for your protection,
that I may be received, though in the lowest order of them that serve
the King; and that your future favour may depend upon my behaviour in
that capacity.’

“The general, surprised at my declaration, surveyed me with uncommon
attention; he perused my certificate; asked divers questions concerning
the art of war, to which I returned such answers as convinced him that
I was not wholly ignorant in that particular. In short, I was enlisted
as a volunteer in his own regiment, and soon after promoted to the rank
of a subaltern, and the office of equerry to his own son, who, at that
time, had attained to the degree of colonel, though his age did not
exceed eighteen years.

“This young man was naturally of a ferocious disposition, which had
been rendered quite untractable by the pride of birth and fortune,
together with the licence of his education. As he did not know the
respect due to a gentleman, so he could not possibly pay it to those
who were, unfortunately, under his command. Divers mortifications I
sustained with that fortitude which became a Castilian who lay under
obligations to the father; till, at length, laying aside all decorum,
he smote me. Sacred Heaven! he smote Don Diego de Zelos, in presence of
his whole household.

“Had my sword been endowed with sensation, it would of itself have
started from its scabbard at this indignity offered to its master. I
unsheathed it without deliberation, saying, ‘Know, insolent boy, he is
a gentleman whom thou hast outraged; and thou hast thus cancelled the
ties which have hitherto restrained my indignation.’ His servants would
have interposed, but he commanded them to retire; and, flushed with
that confidence which the impetuosity of his temper inspired, he drew,
in his turn, and attacked me with redoubled rage; but his dexterity
being very unequal to his courage, he was soon disarmed, and
overthrown; when, pointing my sword to his breast, ‘In consideration of
thy youth and ignorance,’ said I, ‘I spare that life which thou hast
forfeited by thy ungenerous presumption.’

“With these words, I put up my weapon, retired through the midst of his
domestics, who, seeing their master safe, did not think proper to
oppose my passage, and, mounting my horse, in less than two hours
entered the Austrian dominions, resolving to proceed as far as Holland,
that I might embark in the first ship for Spain, in order to wash away,
with my own blood, or that of my enemies, the cruel stain which hath so
long defiled my reputation.

“This was the grievance that still corroded my heart, and rendered
ineffectual the inhuman sacrifice I had made to my injured honour. This
was the consideration that incessantly prompted, and still importunes
me to run every risk of life and fortune, rather than leave my fame
under such an ignominious aspersion. I purpose to obey this internal
call. I am apt to believe it is the voice of Heaven—of that Providence
which manifested its care by sending such a generous auxiliary to my
aid, when I was overpowered by banditti, on the very first day of my
expedition.”

Having in this manner gratified the curiosity of his deliverer, he
expressed a desire of knowing the quality of him to whom he was so
signally obliged; and Renaldo did not scruple to make the Castilian
acquainted with his name and family. He likewise communicated the story
of his unfortunate love, with all the symptoms of unutterable woe,
which drew tears from the noble-hearted Spaniard, while, with a groan,
that announced the load which overwhelmed his soul, “I had a daughter,”
said he, “such as you describe the peerless Monimia; had Heaven decreed
her for the arms of such a lover, I, who am now the most wretched,
should have been the most happy parent upon earth.”

Thus did these new friends alternately indulge their mutual sorrow, and
concert measures for their future operations. Melvil earnestly
solicited the Castilian to favour him with his company to England,
where, in all probability, both would enjoy the gloomy satisfaction of
being revenged upon their common betrayer, Fathom; and, as a farther
inducement, he assured him, that, as soon as he should have
accomplished the melancholy purposes of his voyage, he would accompany
Don Diego to Spain, and employ his whole interest and fortune in his
service. The Spaniard, thunderstruck at the extravagant generosity of
this proposal, could scarce believe the evidence of his own senses;
and, after some pause, replied, “My duty would teach me to obey any
command you should think proper to impose; but here my inclination and
interest are so agreeably flattered, that I should be equally
ungrateful and unwise, in pretending to comply with reluctance.”

This point being settled, they moved forwards to Mons, as soon as Don
Diego was in a condition to bear the shock of such a removal, and there
remaining until his wounds were perfectly cured, they hired a
post-chaise for Ostend, embarked in a vessel at that port, reached the
opposite shore of England, after a short and easy passage, and arrived
in London without having met with any sinister accident on the road.

As they approached this capital, Renaldo’s grief seemed to regurgitate
with redoubled violence. His memory was waked to the most minute and
painful exertion of its faculties; his imagination teemed with the most
afflicting images, and his impatience became so ardent, that never
lover panted more eagerly for the consummation of his wishes, than
Melvil, for an opportunity of stretching himself upon the grave of the
lost Monimia. The Castilian was astonished, as well as affected, at the
poignancy of his grief, which, as a proof of his susceptibility and
virtue, endeared him still more to his affection; and though his own
misfortunes had rendered him very unfit for the office of a comforter,
he endeavoured, by soothing discourse, to moderate the excess of his
friend’s affliction.

Though it was dark when they alighted at the inn, Melvil ordered a
coach to be called; and, being attended by the Spaniard, who would not
be persuaded to quit him upon such an occasion, he repaired to the
house of the generous Jew, whose rheum distilled very plentifully at
his approach. The Count had already acquitted himself in point of
pecuniary obligations to this benevolent Hebrew; and now, after having
made such acknowledgments as might be expected from a youth of his
disposition, he begged to know by what channel he had received that
letter which he had been so kind as to forward to Vienna.

Joshua, who was ignorant of the contents of that epistle, and saw the
young gentleman extremely moved, would have eluded his inquiry, by
pretending he had forgot the circumstance; but when he understood the
nature of the case which was not explained without the manifestation of
the utmost inquietude, he heartily condoled the desponding lover,
telling him he had in vain employed all his intelligence about that
unfortunate beauty, in consequence of Melvil’s letter to him on that
subject; and then directed him to the house of the physician, who had
brought the fatal billet which had made him miserable.

No sooner did he receive this information than he took his leave
abruptly, with promise of returning next day, and hied him to the
lodgings of that gentleman, whom he was lucky enough to find at home.
Being favoured with a private audience, “When I tell you,” said he,
“that my name is Renaldo Count de Melvil, you will know me to be the
most unfortunate of men. By that letter, which you committed to the
charge of my worthy friend Joshua, the fatal veil was removed from my
eyes, which had been so long darkened by the artifices of incredible
deceit, and my own incurable misery fully presented to my view. If you
were acquainted with the unhappy fair, who hath fallen a victim to my
mistake, you will have some idea of the insufferable pangs which I now
feel in recollecting her fate. If you have compassion for these pangs,
you will not refuse to conduct me to the spot where the dear remains of
Monimia are deposited; there let me enjoy a full banquet of woe; there
let me feast that worm of sorrow that preys upon my heart. For such
entertainment have I revisited this (to me) ill-omened isle; for this
satisfaction I intrude upon your condescension at these unseasonable
hours; for to such a degree of impatience is my affliction whetted,
that no slumber shall assail mine eyelids, no peace reside within my
bosom, until I shall have adored that earthly shrine where my Monimia
lies! Yet would I know the circumstances of her fate. Did Heaven ordain
no angel to minister to her distress? were her last moments
comfortless? ha! was not she abandoned to indigence, to insults; left
in the power of that inhuman villain who betrayed us both? Sacred
Heaven! why did Providence wink at the triumph of such consummate
perfidy?”

The physician, having listened with complacency to this effusion,
replied, “It is my profession, it is my nature to sympathise with the
afflicted. I am a judge of your feelings, because I know the value of
your loss. I attended the incomparable Monimia in her last illness, and
am well enough acquainted with her story to conclude that she fell a
sacrifice to an unhappy misunderstanding, effected and fomented by that
traitor who abused your mutual confidence.”

He then proceeded to inform him of all the particulars which we have
already recorded, touching the destiny of the beauteous orphan, and
concluded with telling him he was ready to yield him any other
satisfaction which it was in his power to grant. The circumstances of
the tale had put Renaldo’s spirits into such commotion, that he could
utter nothing but interjections and unconnected words. When Fathom’s
behaviour was described, he trembled with fierce agitation, started
from his chair, pronouncing, “Monster! fiend! but we shall one day
meet.”

When he was made acquainted with the benevolence of the French lady, he
exclaimed, “O heaven-born charity and compassion! sure that must be
some spirit of grace sent hither to mitigate the tortures of life!
where shall I find her, to offer up my thanks and adoration?” Having
heard the conclusion of the detail, he embraced the relater, as the
kind benefactor of Monimia, shed a flood of tears in his bosom, and
pressed him to crown the obligation, by conducting him to the solitary
place where now she rested from all her cares.

The gentleman perceiving the transports of his grief were such as could
not be opposed, complied with his request, attended him in the vehicle,
and directed the coachman to drive to a sequestered field, at some
distance from the city, where stood the church, within whose awful
aisle this scene was to be acted. The sexton being summoned from his
bed, produced the keys, in consequence of a gratification, after the
physician had communed with him apart, and explained the intention of
Renaldo’s visit.

During this pause the soul of Melvil was wound up to the highest pitch
of enthusiastic sorrow. The uncommon darkness of the night, the solemn
silence, and lonely situation of the place, conspired with the occasion
of his coming, and the dismal images of his fancy, to produce a real
rapture of gloomy expectation, which the whole world would not have
persuaded him to disappoint. The clock struck twelve, the owl screeched
from the ruined battlement, the door was opened by the sexton, who, by
the light of a glimmering taper, conducted the despairing lover to a
dreary aisle, and stamped upon the ground with his foot, saying, “Here
the young lady lies interred.”

Melvil no sooner received this intimation, than falling on his knees,
and pressing his lips to the hallowed earth, “Peace,” cried he, “to the
gentle tenant of this silent habitation.” Then turning to the
bystanders, with a bloodshot eye, said, “Leave me to the full enjoyment
of this occasion; my grief is too delicate to admit the company even of
my friends. The rites to be performed require privacy; adieu, then,
here must I pass the night alone.”

The doctor, alarmed at this declaration, which he was afraid imported
some resolution fatal to his own life, began to repent of having been
accessory to the visit, attempted to dissuade him from his purpose, and
finding him obstinately determined, called in the assistance of the
sexton and coachman, and solicited the aid of Don Diego, to force
Renaldo from the execution of his design.

The Castilian knowing his friend was then very unfit for common
altercation, interposed in the dispute, saying, “You need not be afraid
that he will obey the dictates of despair; his religion, his honour
will baffle such temptations; he hath promised to reserve his life for
the occasions of his friend; and he shall not be disappointed in his
present aim.” In order to corroborate this peremptory address, which
was delivered in the French language, he unsheathed his sword, and the
others retreating at sight of his weapon, “Count,” said he, “enjoy your
grief in full transport; I will screen you from interruption, though at
the hazard of my life; and while you give a loose to sorrow, within the
ghastly vault, I will watch till morning in the porch, and meditate
upon the ruin of my own family and peace.”

He accordingly prevailed upon the physician to retire, after he had
satisfied the sexton, and ordered the coachman to return by break of
day.

Renaldo, thus left alone, prostrated himself upon the grave, and poured
forth such lamentations as would have drawn tears from the most savage
hearer. He called aloud upon Monimia’s name, “Are these the nuptial
joys to which our fate hath doomed us? Is this the fruit of those
endearing hopes, that intercourse divine, that raptured admiration, in
which so many hours insensibly elapsed? where now are those attractions
to which I yielded up my captive heart? quenched are those genial eyes
that gladdened each beholder, and shone the planets of my happiness and
peace! cold! cold and withered are those lips that swelled with love,
and far outblushed the damask rose! and ah! forever silenced is that
tongue, whose eloquence had power to lull the pangs of misery and care!
no more shall my attention be ravished with the music of that voice,
which used to thrill in soft vibrations to my soul! O sainted spirit! O
unspotted shade of her whom I adored; of her whose memory I shall still
revere with ever-bleeding sorrow and regret; of her whose image will be
the last idea that forsakes this hapless bosom! now art thou conscious
of my integrity and love; now dost thou behold the anguish that I feel.
If the pure essence of thy nature will permit, wilt thou, ah! wilt thou
indulge this wretched youth with some kind signal of thy notice, with
some token of thy approbation? wilt thou assume a medium of embodied
air, in semblance of that lovely form which now lies mouldering in this
dreary tomb, and speak the words of peace to my distempered soul!
Return, Monimia, appear, though but for one short moment, to my longing
eyes! vouchsafe one smile! Renaldo will be satisfied; Renaldo’s heart
will be at rest; his grief no more will overflow its banks, but glide
with equal current to his latest hour! Alas! these are the raving of my
delirious sorrow! Monimia hears not my complaints; her soul, sublimed
far, far above all sublunary cares, enjoys that felicity of which she
was debarred on earth. In vain I stretch these eyes, environed with
darkness undistinguishing and void. No object meets my view; no sound
salutes mine ear, except the noisy wind that whistles through these
vaulted caves of death.”

In this kind of exclamation did Renaldo pass the night, not without a
certain species of woful enjoyment, which the soul is often able to
conjure up from the depths of distress; insomuch that, when the morning
intruded on his privacy, he could scarce believe it was the light of
day, so fast had fleeted the minutes of his devotion.

His heart being thus disburdened, and his impatience gratified, he
became so calm and composed, that Don Diego was equally pleased and
astonished at the air of serenity with which he came forth, and
embraced him with warm acknowledgments of his goodness and attachment.
He frankly owned, that his mind was now more at ease than he had ever
found it, since he first received the fatal intimation of his loss;
that a few such feasts would entirely moderate the keen appetite of his
sorrow, which he would afterwards feed with less precipitation.

He also imparted to the Castilian the plan of a monument, which he had
designed for the incomparable Monimia; and Don Diego was so much struck
with the description, that he solicited his advice in projecting
another, of a different nature, to be erected to the memory of his own
ill-fated wife and daughter, should he ever be able to re-establish
himself in Spain.




CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE

HE RENEWS THE RITES OF SORROW, AND IS ENTRANCED.


While they amused themselves with this sort of conversation, the
physician returned with the coach, and accompanied them back to their
inn, where he left them to their repose, after having promised to call
again at noon, and conduct Renaldo to the house of Madam Clement, the
benefactress of Monimia, to whom he eagerly desired to be introduced.

The appointment was observed with all imaginable punctuality on both
sides. Melvil had arrayed himself in a suit of deep mourning, and he
found the good lady in the like habit, assumed upon the same occasion.
The goodness of her heart was manifest in her countenance; the
sensibility of the youth discovered itself in a flood of tears, which
he shed at her appearance. His sensations were too full for utterance;
nor was she, for some time, able to give him welcome. While she led him
by the hand to a seat, the drops of sympathy rushed into either eye;
and at length she broke silence, saying, “Count, we must acquiesce in
the dispensations of Providence; and quiet the transports of our grief,
with a full assurance that Monimia is happy.”

This name was the key that unlocked the faculty of his speech. “I must
strive,” said he, “to ease the anguish of my heart with that
consolation. But say, humane, benevolent lady, to whose compassion and
generosity that hapless orphan was indebted for the last peaceful
moment she enjoyed upon earth; say, in all your acquaintance with human
nature, in all your intercourse with the daughters of men, in all the
exercise of your charity and beneficence, did you ever observe such
sweetness, purity, and truth; such beauty, sense, and perfection, as
that which was the inheritance of her whose fate I shall for ever
deplore?”—“She was, indeed,” replied the lady, “the best and fairest of
our sex.”

This was the beginning of a conversation touching that lovely victim,
in the course of which he explained those wicked arts which Fathom
practised to alienate his affections from the adorable Monimia; and she
described the cunning hints and false insinuations by which that
traitor had aspersed the unsuspecting lover, and soiled his character
in the opinion of the virtuous orphan. The intelligence he obtained on
this occasion added indignation to his grief. The whole mystery of
Monimia’s behaviour, which he could not before explain, now stood
disclosed before him. He saw the gradual progress of that infernal plan
which had been laid for their mutual ruin; and his soul was inflamed
with such desire of vengeance, that he would have taken his leave
abruptly, in order to set on foot an immediate inquiry about the
perfidious author of his wrongs, that he might exterminate such a
monster of iniquity from the face of the earth. But he was restrained
by Madam Clement, who gave him to understand, that Fathom was already
overtaken by the vengeance of Heaven; for she had traced him in all the
course of his fortune, from his first appearance in the medical sphere
to his total eclipse. She represented the villain as a wretch
altogether unworthy of his attention. She said, he was so covered with
infamy, that no person could enter the lists against him, without
bearing away some stain of dishonour; that he was, at present,
peculiarly protected by the law, and sheltered from the resentment of
Renaldo, in the cavern of his disgrace.

Melvil, glowing with rage, replied, that he was a venomous serpent,
which it was incumbent on every foot to crush; that it was the duty of
every man to contribute his whole power in freeing society from such a
pernicious hypocrite; and that, if such instances of perfidy and
ingratitude were suffered to pass with impunity, virtue and
plain-dealing would soon be expelled from the habitations of men. “Over
and above these motives,” said he, “I own myself so vitiated with the
alloy of human passion and infirmity, that I desire—I eagerly pant for
an occasion of meeting him hand to hand, where I may upbraid him with
his treachery, and shower down vengeance and destruction on his
perfidious head.”

Then he recounted the anecdotes of our adventurer which he had learned
in Germany and Flanders, and concluded with declaring his unalterable
resolution of releasing him from jail, that he might have an
opportunity of sacrificing him, with his own hand, to the manes of
Monimia. The discreet lady, perceiving the perturbation of his mind,
would not further combat the impetuosity of his passion; contenting
herself with exacting a promise, that he would not execute his purpose,
until he should have deliberated three days upon the consequences by
which a step of that kind might be attended. Before the expiration of
that term, she thought measures might be taken to prevent the young
gentleman from exposing his life or reputation to unnecessary hazard.

Having complied with her request in this particular, he took his leave,
after he had, by repeated entreaties, prevailed upon her to accept a
jewel, in token of his veneration for the kind benefactress of the
deceased Monimia; nor could his generous heart be satisfied, until he
had forced a considerable present on the humane physician who had
attended her in her last moments, and now discovered a particular
sympathy and concern for her desponding lover. This gentleman attended
him to the house of the benevolent Joshua, where they dined, and where
Don Diego was recommended, in the most fervid terms of friendship, to
the good offices of their host. Not that this duty was performed in
presence of the stranger—Renaldo’s delicacy would not expose his friend
to such a situation. While the physician, before dinner, entertained
that stranger in one apartment, Melvil withdrew into another, with the
Jew, to whom he disclosed the affair of the Castilian, with certain
circumstances, which shall, in due time, be revealed.

Joshua’s curiosity being whetted by this information, he could not help
eyeing the Spaniard at table with such a particular stare, that Don
Diego perceived his attention, and took umbrage at the freedom of his
regard. Being unable to conceal his displeasure, he addressed himself
to the Hebrew, with great solemnity, in the Spanish tongue, saving,
“Signior, is there any singularity in my appearance? or, do you
recollect the features of Don Diego de Zelos?”

“Signior Don Diego,” replied the other in pure Castilian, “I crave your
pardon for the rudeness of my curiosity, which prompted me to survey a
nobleman, whose character I revere, and to whose misfortunes I am no
stranger. Indeed, were curiosity alone concerned, I should be without
excuse; but as I am heartily inclined to serve you, as far as my weak
abilities extend, I hope your generosity will not impute any little
involuntary trespass of punctilio to my want of cordiality or esteem.”

The Spaniard was not only appeased by this apology, but also affected
with the compliment, and the language in which it was conveyed. He
thanked the Jew for his kind declaration, entreated him to bear, with
the peevishness of a disposition sore with the galling hand of
affliction; and, turning up his eyes to Heaven, “Were it possible,”
cried he, “for fate to reconcile contradictions, and recall the
irremediable current of events, I would now believe that there was
happiness still in reserve for the forlorn Zelos, now that I tread the
land of freedom and humanity, now that I find myself befriended by the
most generous of men. Alas! I ask not happiness! If, by the kind
endeavours of the gallant Count de Melvil, to whom I am already
indebted for my life, and by the efforts of his friends, the honour of
my name shall be purified and cleared from the poisonous stains of
malice by which it is at present spotted, I shall then enjoy all that
satisfaction which destiny can bestow upon a wretch whose woes are
incurable.”

Renaldo comforted him with the assurance of his being on the eve of
triumphing over his adversaries; and Joshua confirmed the consolation,
by giving him to understand, that he had correspondents in Spain of
some influence in the state; that he had already written to them on the
subject of Don Diego, in consequence of a letter which he had received
from Melvil while he tarried at Mons, and that he, every post, expected
a favourable answer on that subject.

After dinner, the physician took his leave, though not before he had
promised to meet Renaldo at night, and accompany him in the repetition
of his midnight visit to Monimia’s tomb; for this pilgrimage the
unfortunate youth resolved nightly to perform during the whole time of
his residence in England. It was, indeed, a sort of pleasure, the
prospect of which enabled him to bear the toil of living through the
day, though his patience was almost quite exhausted before the hour of
assignation arrived.

When the doctor appeared with the coach, he leaped into it with great
eagerness, after he had, with much difficulty, prevailed with Don Diego
to stay at home, on account of his health, which was not yet perfectly
established. The Castilian, however, would not comply with his request,
until he had obtained the Count’s promise, that he should be permitted
to accompany him next night, and take that duty alternately with the
physician.

About midnight, they reached the place, where they found the sexton in
waiting, according to the orders he had received. The door was opened,
the mourner conducted to the tomb, and left, as before, to the gloom of
his own meditations. Again he laid himself on the cold ground; again he
renewed his lamentable strain; his imagination began to be heated into
an ecstasy of enthusiasm, during which he again fervently invoked the
spirit of his deceased Monimia.

In the midst of these invocations, his ear was suddenly invaded with
the sound of some few solemn notes issuing from the organ, which seemed
to feel the impulse of an invisible hand.

At this awful salutation, Melvil was roused to the keenest sense of
surprise and attention. Reason shrunk before the thronging ideas of his
fancy, which represented this music as the prelude to something strange
and supernatural; and, while he waited for the sequel, the place was
suddenly illuminated, and each surrounding object brought under the
cognisance of his eye.

What passed within his mind on this occasion is not easy to be
described. All his faculties were swallowed up by those of seeing and
hearing. He had mechanically raised himself upon one knee, with his
body advancing forwards; and in this attitude he gazed with a look
through which his soul seemed eager to escape. To his view, thus
strained upon vacant space, in a few minutes appeared the figure of a
woman arrayed in white, with a veil that covered her face, and flowed
down upon her back and shoulders. The phantom approached him with an
easy step, and, lifting up her veil, discovered (believe it, O reader!)
the individual countenance of Monimia.

At sight of these well-known features, seemingly improved with new
celestial graces, the youth became a statue, expressing amazement,
love, and awful adoration. He saw the apparition smile with meek
benevolence, divine compassion, warm and intendered by that fond pure
flame which death could not extinguish. He heard the voice of his
Monimia call Renaldo! Thrice he essayed to answer; as oft his tongue
denied its office. His hair stood upright, and a cold vapour seemed to
thrill through every nerve. This was not fear, but the infirmity of
human nature, oppressed by the presence of a superior being.

At length his agony was overcome. He recollected all his resolution,
and, in a strain of awestruck rapture, thus addressed the heavenly
visitant: “Hast thou then heard, pure spirit! the wailings of my grief?
hast thou descended from the realms of bliss, in pity to my woe? and
art thou come to speak the words of peace to my desponding soul? To bid
the wretched smile, to lift the load of misery and care from the
afflicted breast; to fill thy lover’s heart with joy and pleasing hope,
was still the darling task of my Monimia, ere yet refined to that
perfection which mortality can never attain. No wonder then, blessed
shade, that now, when reunited to thy native heaven, thou art still
kind, propitious, and beneficent to us, who groan in this inhospitable
vale of sorrow thou hast left. Tell me, ah! tell me, dost thou still
remember those fond hours we passed together? Doth that enlightened
bosom feel a pang of soft regret, when thou recallest our fatal
separation? Sure that meekened glance bespeaks thy sympathy! Ah! how
that tender look o’erpowers me! Sacred Heaven! the pearly drops of pity
trickle down thy cheeks! Such are the tears that angels shed o’er man’s
distress!—Turn not away—Thou beckonest me to follow. Yes, I will follow
thee, ethereal spirit, as far as these weak limbs, encumbered with
mortality, will bear my weight; and, would to Heaven! I could, with
ease, put off these vile corporeal shackles, and attend thy flight.”

So saying, he started from the ground, and, in a transport of eager
expectation, at awful distance, traced the footsteps of the apparition,
which, entering a detached apartment, sunk down upon a chair, and with
a sigh exclaimed, “Indeed, this is too much!” What was the disorder of
Renaldo’s mind, when he perceived this phenomenon! Before reflection
could perform its office, moved by a sudden impulse, he sprung
forwards, crying, “If it be death to touch thee, let me die!” and
caught in his arms, not the shadow, but the warm substance of the
all-accomplished Monimia. “Mysterious powers of Providence! this is no
phantom! this is no shade! this is the life! the panting bosom of her
whom I have so long, so bitterly deplored! I fold her in my arms! I
press her glowing breast to mine! I see her blush with virtuous
pleasure and ingenuous love! She smiles upon me with enchanting
tenderness! O let me gaze on that transcendent beauty, which, the more
I view it, ravishes the more! These charms are too intense; I sicken
while I gaze! Merciful Heaven! is not this a mere illusion of the
brain? Was she not fled for ever? Had not the cold hand of death
divorced her from my hope? This must be some flattering vision of my
distempered fancy! perhaps some soothing dream— If such it be, grant, O
ye heavenly powers! that I may never wake.”

“O gentle youth!” replied the beauteous orphan, still clasped in his
embrace, “what joy now fills the bosom of Monimia, at this triumph of
thy virtue and thy love? When I see these transports of thy affection,
when I find thee restored to that place in my esteem and admiration,
which thou hadst lost by the arts of calumny and malice—this is a
meeting which my most sanguine hopes durst not presage!”

So entirely were the faculties of Renaldo engrossed in the
contemplation of his restored Monimia, that he saw not the rest of the
company, who wept with transport over this affecting scene. He was
therefore amazed at the interposition of Madam Clement, who, while the
shower of sympathetic pleasure bedewed her cheeks, congratulated the
lovers upon this happy event, crying, “These are the joys which virtue
calls her own.” They also received the compliments of a reverend
clergyman, who told Monimia, she had reaped, at last, the fruits of
that pious resignation to the will of Heaven, which she had so devoutly
practised during the term of her affliction. And, lastly, they were
accosted by the physician, who was not quite so hackneyed in the ways
of death, or so callous to the finer sensations of the soul, but that
he blubbered plentifully, wile he petitioned Heaven in behalf of such
an accomplished and deserving pair.

Monimia taking Madam Clement by the hand, “Whatever joy,” said she,
“Renaldo derives from this occasion, is owing to the bounty, the
compassion, and maternal care of this incomparable lady, together with
the kind admonitions and humanity of those two worthy gentlemen.”

Melvil, whose passions were still in agitation, and whose mind could
not yet digest the incidents that occurred, embraced them all by turns;
but, like the faithful needle, which, though shaken for an instant from
its poise, immediately regains its true direction, and points
invariably to the pole, he soon returned to his Monimia; again he held
her in his arms, again he drank enchantment from her eyes, and thus
poured forth the effusions of his soul:—“Can I then trust the evidence
of sense? And art thou really to my wish restored? Never, O never did
thy beauty shine with such bewitching grace, as that which now
confounds and captivates my view! Sure there is something more than
mortal in thy looks!—Where hast thou lived?—where borrowed this
perfection?—whence art thou now descended?—Oh! I am all amazement, joy,
and fear!—Thou wilt not leave me!—No! we must not part again. By this
warm kiss! a thousand times more sweet than all the fragrance of the
East! we nevermore will part. O! this is rapture, ecstasy, and what no
language can explain!”

In the midst of these ejaculations, he ravished a banquet from her
glowing lips, that kindled in his heart a flame which rushed through
every vein, and glided to his marrow. This was a privilege he had never
claimed before, and now permitted as a recompense for all the penance
he had suffered. Nevertheless, the cheeks of Monimia, who was
altogether unaccustomed to such familiarities, underwent a total
suffusion; and Madam Clement discreetly relieved her from the anxiety
of her situation, by interfering in the discourse, and rallying the
Count upon his endeavours to monopolise such a branch of happiness.

“O my dear lady!” replied Renaldo, who by this time had, in some
measure, recovered his recollection, “forgive the wild transports of a
fond lover, who hath so unexpectedly retrieved the jewel of his soul!
Yet, far from wishing to hoard up his treasure, he means to communicate
and diffuse his happiness to all his friends. O my Monimia! how will
the pleasure of this hour be propagated! As yet thou knowest not all
the bliss that is reserved for thy enjoyment!—Meanwhile, I long to
learn by what contrivance this happy interview hath been effected.
Still am I ignorant how I was transported into this apartment, from the
lonely vault in which I mourned over my supposed misfortune!”




CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR

THE MYSTERY UNFOLDED—ANOTHER RECOGNITION, WHICH, IT IS TO BE HOPED, THE
READER COULD NOT FORESEE.


The French lady then explained the whole mystery of Monimia’s death, as
a stratagem she had concerted with the clergyman and doctor, in order
to defeat the pernicious designs of Fathom, who seemed determined to
support his false pretensions by dint of perjury and fraud, which they
would have found it very difficult to elude. She observed, that the
physician had actually despaired of Monimia’s life, and it was not till
after she herself was made acquainted with the prognostic, that she
wrote the letter to Renaldo, which she committed to the care of Madam
Clement, with an earnest entreaty, that it should not be sent till
after her decease. But that lady, believing the Count had been
certainly abused by his treacherous confidant, despatched the billet
without the knowledge of Monimia, whose health was restored by the
indefatigable care of the physician, and the sage exhortations of the
clergyman, by which she was reconciled to life. In a word, the villany
of Fathom had inspired her with some faint hope that Renaldo might
still be innocent; and that notion contributed not a little to her
cure.

The letter having so effectually answered their warmest hopes, in
bringing back Renaldo such a pattern of constancy and love, the
confederates, in consequence of his enthusiastic sorrow, had planned
this meeting, as the most interesting way of restoring two virtuous
lovers to the arms of each other; for which purpose the good clergyman
had pitched upon his own church, and indulged them with the use of the
vestry, in which they now were presented with a small but elegant
collation.

Melvil heard this succinct detail with equal joy and admiration. He
poured forth the dictates of his gratitude to the preservers of his
happiness.—“This church,” said he, “shall henceforth possess a double
share of my veneration; this holy man will, I hope, finish the
charitable work he has begun, by tying those bands of our happiness,
which nought but death shall have power to unbind.” Then turning to
that object which was the star of his regard, “Do I not overrate,” said
he, “my interest with the fair Monimia?” She made no verbal reply; but
answered by an emphatic glance, more eloquent than all the power of
rhetoric and speech. This language, which is universal in the world of
love, he perfectly well understood, and, in token of that faculty,
sealed the assent which she had smiled, with a kiss imprinted on her
polished forehead.

In order to dissipate these interesting ideas, which, by being too long
indulged, might have endangered his reason, Madam Clement entreated him
to entertain the company with a detail of what had happened to him in
his last journey to the empire, and Monimia expressed a desire of
knowing, in particular, the issue of his contest with Count Trebasi,
who, she knew, had usurped the succession of his father.

Thus solicited, he could not refuse to gratify their curiosity and
concern. He explained his obligations to the benevolent Jew; related
the steps he had taken at Vienna for the recovery of his inheritance;
informed them of his happy rencontre with his father-in-law; of his
sister’s deliverance, and marriage; of the danger into which his life
had been precipitated by the news of Monimia’s death; and, lastly, of
his adventure with the banditti, in favour of a gentleman, who, he
afterwards understood, had been robbed in the most base and barbarous
manner by Fathom. He likewise, to the astonishment of all present, and
of his mistress in particular, communicated some circumstances, which
shall appear in due season.

Monimia’s tender frame being quite fatigued with the scene she had
acted, and her mind overwhelmed with the prosperous tidings she had
heard, after having joined the congratulations of the company, on the
good fortune of her Renaldo, begged leave to retire, that she might by
repose recruit her exhausted spirits; and the night being pretty far
spent, she was conducted by her lover to Madam Clement’s coach, that
stood in waiting, in which also the rest of the company made shift to
embark, and were carried to the house of that good lady, where, after
they were invited to dine, and Melvil entreated to bring Don Diego and
the Jew along with them, they took leave of one another, and retired to
their respective lodgings in a transport of joy and satisfaction.

As for Renaldo, his rapture was still mixed with apprehension, that all
he had seen and heard was no more than an unsubstantial vision, raised
by some gay delirium of a disordered imagination. While his breast
underwent those violent, though blissful emotions of joy and
admiration, his friend the Castilian spent the night in ruminating over
his own calamities, and in a serious and severe review of his own
conduct. He compared his own behaviour with that of the young
Hungarian, and found himself so light in the scale, that he smote his
breast with violence, exclaiming in an agony of remorse:

“Count Melvil has reason to grieve; Don Diego to despair. His
misfortunes flow from the villany of mankind; mine are the fruit of my
own madness. He laments the loss of a mistress, who fell a sacrifice to
the perfidious arts of a crafty traitor. She was beautiful, virtuous,
accomplished, and affectionate; he was fraught with sensibility and
love. Doubtless his heart must have deeply suffered; his behaviour
denotes the keenness of his woe; his eyes are everflowing fountains of
tears; his bosom the habitation of sighs; five hundred leagues hath he
measured in a pilgrimage to her tomb; nightly he visits the dreary
vault where she now lies at rest; her solitary grave is his couch; he
converses with darkness and the dead, until each lonely aisle re-echoes
his distress. What would be his penance, had he my cause! were he
conscious of having murdered a beloved wife and darling daughter! Ah
wretch!—ah cruel homicide!—what had those dear victims done to merit
such a fate? Were they not ever gentle and obedient, ever aiming to
give thee satisfaction and delight? Say, that Serafina was enamoured of
a peasant; say, that she had degenerated from the honour of her race.
The inclinations are involuntary; perhaps that stranger was her equal
in pedigree and worth. Had they been fairly questioned, they might have
justified, at least excused, that conduct which appeared so criminal;
or had they owned the offence, and supplicated pardon—O barbarous
monster that I am! was all the husband—was all the father extinguished
in my heart? How shall my own errors be forgiven, if I refused to
pardon the frailties of my own blood—of those who are most dear to my
affection? Yet nature pleaded strongly in their behalf!—My heart was
bursting while I dismissed them to the shades of death. I was maddened
with revenge! I was guided by that savage principle which falsely we
call honour.

“Accursed phantom! that assumes the specious title, and misleads our
wretched nation! Is it then honourable to skulk like an assassin, and
plunge the secret dagger in the heart of some unhappy man, who hath
incurred my groundless jealousy or suspicion, without indulging him
with that opportunity which the worst criminal enjoys? Or is it
honourable to poison two defenceless women, a tender wife, an amiable
daughter, whom even a frown would almost have destroyed?—O! this is
cowardice, brutality, hell-born fury and revenge! Heaven hath not mercy
to forgive such execrable guilt. Who gave thee power, abandoned
ruffian! over the lives of those whom God hath stationed as thy fellows
of probation;—over those whom he had sent to comfort and assist thee;
to sweeten all thy cares, and smooth the rough uneven paths of life? O!
I am doomed to never-ceasing horror and remorse! If misery can atone
for such enormous guilt, I have felt it in the extreme. Like an undying
vulture it preys upon my heart;—to sorrow I am wedded; I hug that
teeming consort to my soul;—never, ah! never shall we part; for soon as
my fame shall shine unclouded by the charge of treason that now hangs
over it, I will devote myself to penitence and woe. A cold, damp
pavement shall be my bed; my raiment shall be sackcloth; the fields
shall furnish herbage for my food; the stream shall quench my thirst;
the minutes shall be numbered by my groans; the night be privy to my
strains of sorrow, till Heaven, in pity to my sufferings, release me
from the penance I endure. Perhaps the saints whom I have murdered will
intercede for my remission.”

Such was the exercise of grief, in which the hapless Castilian consumed
the night; he had not yet consigned himself to rest, when Renaldo
entering his chamber, displayed such a gleam of wildness and rapture on
his countenance, as overwhelmed him with amazement; for, till that
moment, he had never seen his visage unobscured with woe. “Pardon this
abrupt intrusion, my friend,” cried Melvil, “I could no longer withhold
from your participation, the great, the unexpected turn, which hath
this night dispelled all my sorrows, and restored me to the fruition of
ineffable joy. Monimia lives!—the fair, the tender, the virtuous
Monimia lives, and smiles upon my vows! This night I retrieved her from
the grave. I held her in these arms; I pressed her warm delicious lips
to mine! Oh, I am giddy with intolerable pleasure!”

Don Diego was confounded at this declaration, which he considered as
the effects of a disordered brain. He never doubted that Renaldo’s
grief had at length overpowered his reason, and that his words were the
effects of mere frenzy. While he mused on this melancholy subject, the
Count composed his features, and, in a succinct and well-connected
detail, explained the whole mystery of his happiness, to the
inexpressible astonishment of the Spaniard, who shed tears of
satisfaction, and straining the Hungarian to his breast, “O my son,”
said he, “you see what recompense Heaven hath in store for those who
pursue the paths of real virtue; those paths from which I myself have
been fatally misled by a faithless vapour, which hath seduced my steps,
and left me darkling in the abyss of wretchedness. Such as you describe
this happy fair, was once my Serafina, rich in every grace of mind and
body which nature could bestow. Had it pleased Heaven to bless her with
a lover like Renaldo! but no more, the irrevocable shaft is fled. I
will not taint your enjoyment with my unavailing sighs!”

Melvil assured this disconsolate father, that no pleasure, no avocation
should ever so entirely engross his mind, but that he should still find
an hour for sympathy and friendship. He communicated the invitation of
Madam Clement, and insisted upon his compliance, that he might have an
opportunity of seeing and approving the object of his passion. “I can
refuse nothing to the request of Count de Melvil,” replied the
Spaniard, “and it were ungrateful in me to decline the honour you
propose. I own myself inflamed with a desire of beholding a young lady,
whose perfections I have seen reflected in your sorrow; my curiosity
is, moreover, interested on account of that humane gentlewoman, whose
uncommon generosity sheltered such virtue in distress; but my
disposition is infectious, and will, I am afraid, hang like a damp upon
the general festivity of your friends.”

Melvil would take no denial, and having obtained his consent, repaired
to the house of Joshua, whose countenance seemed to unbend gradually
into a total expression of joy and surprise, as he learned the
circumstances of this amazing event. He faithfully promised to attend
the Count at the appointed hour, and, in the meantime, earnestly
exhorted him to take some repose, in order to quiet the agitation of
his spirits, which must have been violently hurried on this occasion.
The advice was salutary, and Renaldo resolved to follow it.

He returned to his lodgings, and laid himself down; but,
notwithstanding the fatigue he had undergone, sleep refused to visit
his eyelids, all his faculties being kept in motion by the ideas that
crowded so fast upon his imagination. Nevertheless, though his mind
continued in agitation, his body was refreshed, and he arose in the
forenoon with more serenity and vigour than he had enjoyed for many
months. Every moment his heart throbbed with new rapture, when he found
himself on the brink of possessing all that his soul held dear and
amiable; he put on his gayest looks and apparel; insisted upon the
Castilian’s doing the same honour to the occasion; and the alteration
of dress produced such an advantageous change in the appearance of Don
Diego, that when Joshua arrived at the appointed hour, he could scarce
recognise his features, and complimented him very politely on the
improvement of his looks.

True it is, the Spaniard was a personage of a very prepossessing mien
and noble deportment; and had not grief, by increasing his native
gravity, in some measure discomposed the symmetry of his countenance,
he would have passed for a man of a very amiable and engaging
physiognomy. They set out in the Jew’s coach for the house of Madam
Clement, and were ushered into an apartment, where they found the
clergyman and physician with that lady, to whom Don Diego and the
Hebrew were by Melvil introduced.

Before they had seated themselves, Renaldo inquired about the health of
Monimia, and was directed to the next room by Madam Clement, who
permitted him to go thither, and conduct her to the company. He was not
slow of availing himself of this permission. He disappeared in an
instant, and, during his short absence, Don Diego was strangely
disturbed The blood flushed and forsook his cheeks by turns; a cold
vapour seemed to shiver through his nerves; and at his breast he felt
uncommon palpitation. Madam Clement observed his discomposure, and
kindly inquired into the cause; when he replied, “I have such an
interest in what concerns the Count de Melvil, and my imagination is so
much prepossessed with the perfections of Monimia, that I am, as it
were, agonised with expectation; yet never did my curiosity before
raise such tumults as those that now agitate my bosom.”

He had scarce pronounced these words, when the door, reopening, Renaldo
led in this mirror of elegance and beauty, at sight of whom the
Israelite’s countenance was distorted into a stare of admiration. But
if such was the astonishment of Joshua, what were the emotions of the
Castilian, when, in the beauteous orphan, he beheld the individual
features of his long-lost Serafina!

His feelings are not to be described. The fond parent, whose affection
shoots even to a sense of pain, feels not half such transport, when he
unexpectedly retrieves a darling child from the engulfing billows or
devouring flame. The hope of Zelos had been totally extinguished. His
heart had been incessantly torn with anguish and remorse, upbraiding
him as the murderer of Serafina. His, therefore, were the additional
transports of a father disburdened of the guilt of such enormous
homicide. His nerves were too much overpowered by this sudden
recognition, to manifest the sensation of his soul by external signs.
He started not, nor did he lift an hand in token of surprise; he moved
not from the spot on which he stood; but, riveting his eyes to those of
the lovely phantom, remained without motion, until she, approaching
with her lover, fell at his feet, and clasping his knees, exclaimed,
“May I yet call you father?”

This powerful shock aroused his faculties; a cold sweat bedewed his
forehead; his knees began to totter; he dropped upon the floor, and
throwing his arms around her, cried, “O nature! O Serafina! Merciful
Providence! thy ways are past finding out.” So saying, he fell upon her
neck, and wept aloud. The tears of sympathetic joy trickled down her
snowy bosom, that heaved with rapture inexpressible. Renaldo’s eyes
poured forth the briny stream. The cheeks of Madam Clement were not dry
in this conjuncture; she kneeled by Serafina, kissed her with all the
eagerness of maternal affection, and with uplifted hands adored the
Power that preordained this blessed event. The clergyman and doctor
intimately shared the general transport; and as for Joshua, the drops
of true benevolence flowed from his eyes, like the oil on Aaron’s
beard, while he skipped about the room in an awkward ecstasy, and in a
voice resembling the hoarse notes of the long-eared tribe, cried, “O
father Abraham! such a moving scene hath not been acted since Joseph
disclosed himself unto his brethren in Egypt.”

Don Diego having found utterance to his passion, proceeded in this
strain: “O my dear child! to find thee thus again, after our last
unhappy parting, is wonderful! miraculous! Blessed be the all-good, my
conscience. I am not then the dire assassin, who sacrificed his wife
and daughter to an infernal motive, falsely titled honour? though I am
more and more involved in a mystery, which I long to hear explained.”

“That shall be my task,” cried Renaldo, “but first permit me to implore
your sanction to my passion for the incomparable Serafina. You already
know our mutual sentiments; and though I own the possession of such
inestimable worth and beauty would be a recompense that infinitely
transcends the merit I can plead, yet, as it hath been my good fortune
to inspire her with a mutual flame, I hope to reap from your indulgence
here, what I could not expect from my own desert; and we present
ourselves, in hope of your paternal assent and benediction.”

“Were she more fair and good and gentle than she is,” answered the
Castilian, “and to my partial observation nought e’er appeared on earth
more beauteous and engaging, I would approve your title to her heart,
and recommend you to her smiles, with all a father’s influence and
power. Yes, my daughter! my joy on this occasion is infinitely
augmented by the knowledge of those tender ties of love that bind thee
to this amiable youth; a youth to whose uncommon courage and generosity
I owe my life and my subsistence, together with the inexpressible
delight that now revels in my bosom. Enjoy, my children, the happy
fruits of your reciprocal attachment. May Heaven, which hath graciously
conducted you through a labyrinth of perplexity and woe, to this
transporting view of blissful days, indulge you with that uninterrupted
stream of pure felicity, which is the hope, and ought to be the boon of
virtue, such as yours!”

So saying, he joined their hands, and embraced them with the most
cordial love and satisfaction, which diffused itself to every
individual of the company, who fervently invoked the Almighty Power, in
behalf of this enraptured pair. The tumult of these emotions having a
little subsided, and the Castilian being seated betwixt Renaldo and his
beauteous bride, he politely bespoke the indulgence of Madam Clement,
begging she would permit him to demand the performance of the Count’s
promise, that he might be forthwith made acquainted with those
circumstances of his own fate which he was so impatient to learn.

The lady having assured him, that she and all the company would take
pleasure in hearing the recapitulation, the Spaniard, addressing
himself to Melvil, “In the name of Heaven!” said he, “how could you
supplant that rival, who fell a sacrifice to my resentment, after he
had bewitched the heart of Serafina? for, sure, the affection he had
kindled in her breast must have long survived his death,” “That rival,”
replied the Count, “who incurred your displeasure, was no other than
Renaldo.” With these words, he applied to one eye a patch of black silk
provided for the purpose, and turning his face towards Don Diego, that
gentleman started with astonishment, crying, “Good Heaven! the very
countenance of Orlando, whom I slew! this is still more amazing!”




CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE

A RETROSPECTIVE LINK, NECESSARY FOR THE CONCATENATION OF THESE MEMOIRS.


“Indulge me with a patient hearing,” proceeded the Hungarian, “and all
these riddles soon will be explained. Inflamed with the desire of
seeing foreign countries, I disobeyed the will of an indulgent father,
from whose house, withdrawing privately, I set out for Italy, in
disguise, by the way of Tyrol, visited Venice, Rome, Florence, and,
embarking at Naples, in an English ship, arrived at St. Lucar, from
whence I repaired to Seville; there, in a few days, was my curiosity
engaged by the fame of the fair Serafina, who was justly deemed the
most accomplished beauty in that part of Spain. Nay, blush not, gentle
creature! for by my hopes of heaven! thy charms were even injured by
the cold applause of that report. Nevertheless, I was warmly interested
by the uncommon character, and eagerly longed to see this pattern of
perfection. As Don Diego did not train her up in that restraint to
which the Spanish ladies are subjected, I soon found an opportunity of
seeing her at church; and no person here present will, I presume, doubt
but that I was instantly captivated by her beauty and deportment. Had I
thought that Don Diego’s favour was unengaged, perhaps I should have
followed the dictates of vanity and inexperience, and presented myself
in my own character, among the crowd of her professed admirers. I knew
her father had been an officer of distinguished rank and reputation,
and did not doubt that he would have regarded a young soldier of
unexceptionable pedigree, and, I will even add, of untainted fame. Nor
did I suppose my own father could have objected against such an
advantageous match; but, by dint of industrious inquiry, I learned,
that the divine Serafina was already betrothed to Don Manuel de
Mendoza, and this information overwhelmed me with despair.

“After having revolved a thousand projects for retarding and preventing
that detested union, I resolved to avail myself of my talent for
drawing, and professed myself a master of that science, in hope of
being employed by the father of Serafina, who, I knew, let slip no
opportunity of improving his daughter’s education. Accordingly I had
the good fortune to attract his notice, was invited to his house,
honoured with his approbation, and furnished with unrestricted
opportunities of conversing with the dear object of my love. The
passion which her beauty had kindled was by the perfections of her mind
inflamed to such a degree of transport, as could not be concealed from
her penetration. She chanced to relish my conversation; I gradually
acquired her friendship; pity was the next passion that she entertained
in my favour. I then ventured to disclose myself, and the dear charmer
did not disapprove of my presumption. She and her mother had been
perplexed with some religious scruples, concerning which they appealed
to my opinion; and I was happy enough to set their minds at ease.

“This sort of intercourse naturally created a mutual confidence among
us; and, in a word, I was blessed with the daughter’s love and mother’s
approbation. Don Diego will pardon these clandestine measures, which we
took, from a full persuasion that it was impossible to render him
propitious to the views in which our hearts and hands were so deeply
interested. I did not then know how little he was addicted to
superstition.

“Without entering into a detail of the schemes we projected to delay
the happiness of Mendoza, I shall only observe, that, knowing the fatal
day was at length unalterably fixed, we determined to elude the purpose
of Don Diego by flight; and everything was actually prepared for our
escape. When the hour of appointment arrived, I repaired to the place
at which I had proposed to enter the house, and stumbled, in the dark,
over the body of a man still warm, and bleeding. Alarmed at this
occurrence, I darted myself through the window, and rushing to the
apartment of the ladies, (immortal powers!) beheld the peerless
Serafina, and her virtuous mother, stretched on a couch, and, in all
appearance, deprived of life.

“The company will easily conceive what agonies I felt at such a
spectacle! I ran towards the spot in a transport of horror! I clasped
my lovely mistress in my arms, and, finding her still breathing,
endeavoured, but in vain, to wake her from the trance Antonia was
overwhelmed with the same lethargic power. My fancy was immediately
struck with the apprehension of their being poisoned. Regardless of my
own situation, I alarmed the family, called for assistance, and
requested the servants to summon Don Diego to the dismal scene. I was
informed that their master had rode forth in manifest confusion; and
while I pondered on this surprising excursion, an apothecary in the
neighbourhood entered the chamber, and having examined the pulses of
the ladies, declared that their lives were in no danger, and advised
that they should be undressed, and conveyed to bed. While their women
were busied in this employment, I went into the court-yard, attended by
some of the servants with lights, in order to view the body of the man
which I had found at my arrival. His apparel was mean, his countenance
ferocious; a long spado was buckled to his thigh, and, in his belt,
were stuck a brace of loaded pistols; so that we concluded he was some
thief, who had waited for an opportunity, and seeing the casement open,
intended to rob the house, but was prevented, and slain by Don Diego
himself, whose retreat, however, did not a little confound our
conjecture. For my own part, I remained all night in the house,
tortured with fear, vexation, and suspense.

“My hope was altogether disappointed by this unhappy accident; and I
shuddered at the prospect of losing Serafina for ever, either by this
mysterious malady, or by her marriage with Mendoza, which I now
despaired of being able to defeat. The major-domo having waited several
hours for his lord’s return, without seeing him appear, thought proper
to despatch a messenger to Don Manuel, with an account of what had
happened; and that nobleman arriving in the morning, took possession of
the house. About four o’clock in the afternoon, Serafina began to stir,
and, at five, she and her mother were perfectly awake.

“They no sooner recovered the use of reflection, than they gave signs
of equal sorrow and amazement, and earnestly called for Isabella, who
was privy to our design, and who, after a very minute inquiry, was
found in a lone and solitary chamber, where she had been confined. Such
was the confusion of the house, that no person ever dreamed of asking
how I entered, each domestic, in all probability, supposing I had been
introduced by his fellow; so that I tarried unquestioned, on pretence
of concern for the distress of a family in which I had been so
generously entertained, and, by Isabella, sent my respects and duty to
her ladies. She was, therefore, not a little surprised, when, after
every other servant had withdrawn, she heard the lovely Serafina
exclaim, with all the violence of grief, ‘Ah! Isabella, Orlando is no
more!’ But their astonishment was still greater, when she assured them
of my being alive, and in the house. They recounted to her the
adventure of last night, which she explained, by informing them of the
letters which Don Diego had intercepted. And they immediately
concluded, that he had, in the precipitation of his wrath, killed, by
mistake, the person who was found dead in the court-yard. This
conjecture alarmed them on my account; they, by the medium of Isabella,
conjured me to leave the house, lest Don Diego should return, and
accomplish his resentment; and I was persuaded to withdraw, after I had
settled the channel of a correspondence with the confidant.

“Being now obliged to alter our measures, because our former intention
was discovered by Don Diego, I secured a retreat for Serafina and her
mother, at the house of the English consul in Seville, who was my
particular friend; and, next day, understanding from Isabella that her
lord had not yet reappeared, and that Don Manuel was very urgent in his
addresses, we concerted an assignation in the garden, and that same
evening I was fortunate enough to convey my prize to the asylum I had
prepared for their reception. Inexpressible was the rage of Mendoza,
when he heard of their elopement. He raved like one deprived of
reason—swore he would put all the servants of the family to the
rack—and, in consequence of the intelligence he obtained by threats and
promises, set on foot a very strict inquiry, in order to apprehend the
fugitives and Orlando, who had by some means or other incurred his
suspicion.

“We eluded his search by the vigilance and caution of our kind host;
and, while we remained in concealment, were extremely astonished to
hear that the unfortunate Don Diego was proclaimed a traitor, and a
price set upon his head. This information overwhelmed us all with the
utmost affliction. Antonia lamented, without ceasing, the disgrace of
her beloved lord, from whom she never would have withdrawn herself, but
with the lively hope of a reconciliation, after the first transports of
his ire should have subsided, and the real character of Orlando should
have appeared. It was not long before we had reason to believe that
Mendoza was the accuser of Don Diego—

“Nay, start not, Signior; Manuel was actually that traitor! This was
the turn of his revenge! when he found himself disappointed in the hope
of possessing the incomparable Serafina, he took a base advantage of
your absence and retreat. He posted to Madrid, impeached you to the
secretary of state of having maintained a criminal correspondence with
the enemies of Spain, included me in his accusation, as a spy for the
house of Austria, and framed such a plausible tale, from the
circumstances of your distress, that Don Diego was outlawed, and
Mendoza gratified with a grant of his estate.

“These melancholy incidents made a deep impression upon the mind of the
virtuous Antonia, who waiving every other consideration, would have
personally appeared for the vindication of her husband’s honour, had
not we dissuaded her from such a rash undertaking, by demonstrating her
inability to contend with such a powerful antagonist; and representing
that her appearance would be infallibly attended with the ruin of
Serafina, who would certainly fall into the hands of the villain to
whom she had been contracted. We exhorted her to wait patiently for
some happy revolution of fortune, and encouraged her with the hope of
Don Diego’s exerting himself effectually in his own defence.

“Meanwhile our worthy landlord was suddenly cut off by death; and his
widow being resolved to retire into her own country, we secretly
embarked in the same ship, and arrived in England about eighteen months
ago. Antonia still continued to pine over the ruin of her house; as she
could hear no tidings of Don Diego, she concluded he was dead, and
mourned with unabating sorrow. In vain I assured her, that, soon as my
own affairs should be adjusted, I would exert my whole endeavours to
find and succour him. She could not imagine that a man of his spirit
and disposition would live so long in obscurity. And her affliction
derived new force from the death of the consul’s widow, with whom she
had lived in the most unbounded intimacy and friendship. From that day,
her health evidently declined. She foresaw her dissolution, and
comforted herself with the hope of seeing her husband and her friend in
a place where no treachery is felt, and no sorrow is known; confident
of my integrity, and the purity of my love, she, in the most pathetic
terms, recommended Serafina to my care.

“Ha! weepest thou, fair excellence, at the remembrance of that tender
scene, when the good Antonia, on the bed of death, joined thy soft hand
to mine, and said, ‘Renaldo, I bequeath this orphan to your love; it is
a sacred pledge, which, if you cherish with due honour and regard,
internal peace and happiness will ever smile within your bosom; but if
you treat it with indifference, dishonour, or neglect, just Heaven will
punish your breach of trust with everlasting disappointments and
disquiet.’

“Signior Don Diego, I see you are moved, and therefore will not dwell
on such distressful circumstances. The excellent Antonia exchanged this
life for a more happy state; and so exquisite was the sorrow of the
tender-hearted Serafina, as to torture me with the apprehension that
she would not long survive her pious mother. How I obeyed the
injunctions of that departing saint, Monimia (for that name she now
assumed) can testify, until that artful serpent Fathom glided into our
mutual confidence, abused our ears, poisoned our unsuspected faith, and
effected that fatal breach, productive of all the misery and vexation
which we have suffered, and which is now so happily expelled.”

“Heaven,” said the Castilian, “hath visited me for the sins and errors
of my youth; yet, such mercy hath been mingled with its chastisements,
I dare not murmur or repine. The tears of penitence and sorrow shall
water my Antonia’s grave; as for Mendoza, I rejoice at his treachery,
by which the obligation of my promise is cancelled, and my honour fully
acquitted. He shall not triumph in his guilt. My services, my
character, and innocence shall soon confront his perfidy, and, I hope,
defeat his interest. The King is just and gracious, nor is my family
and name unknown.”

Here the Jew interposing, presented to him a letter from a person of
consequence at Madrid, whom Joshua had interested in the cause of Don
Diego; that nobleman had already found means to represent the case of
Zelos to his Majesty, who had actually ordered Don Manuel to be
confined, until the injured person should appear to justify himself,
and prosecute his accuser according to the terms of law. At the same
time Don Diego was summoned to present himself before the King within a
limited time, to answer to the charge which Mendoza had brought against
him.

The Spaniard’s heart overflowed with gratitude and joy, when he read
this intimation; he embraced the Jew, who, before Zelos could give
utterance to his thoughts, told him that the Spanish Ambassador at
London, having been prepossessed in his favour, craved the honour of
seeing Don Diego; and that he, Joshua, was ready to conduct him to the
house.

“Then is my heart at rest!” cried the Castilian; “the house of Zelos
once more shall lift up its head. I shall again revisit my native
country with honour, and abase the villain who hath soiled my fame! O
my children! this day is replete with such joy and satisfaction, as I
did not think had been in the power of Heaven to grant, without the
interposition of a miracle! To you, Renaldo, to you illustrious lady,
and to these worthy gentlemen, am I indebted for the restoration of
that for which alone I wish to live; and when my heart ceases to retain
the obligation, may I forfeit the name of a Castilian, and scorn and
dishonour be my portion.”

Perhaps all Europe could not produce another company so happy as that
which now sat down to dinner in the house of Madam Clement, whose own
benevolent heart was peculiarly adapted for such enjoyment. The lovers
feasted their eyes more than their appetite, by a tender intercourse of
glances, which needed not the slow interpretation of speech; while the
Spaniard regarded them alternately with looks of wonder and paternal
joy, and every individual surveyed the all-deserving pair with
admiration and esteem.

Serafina taking the advantage of this general satisfaction, when the
heart, softened into complacency, deposits every violent thought: “I
must now,” said she, “try my interest with Renaldo. The good company
shall bear witness to my triumph or repulse. I do not ask you to
forgive, but to withhold your vengeance from the wretched Fathom. His
fraud, ingratitude, and villany are, I believe, unrivalled; yet his
base designs have been defeated; and Heaven perhaps hath made him the
involuntary instrument for bringing our constancy and virtue to the
test; besides, his perfidy is already punished with the last degree of
human misery and disgrace. The doctor, who has traced him in all his
conduct and vicissitudes of fortune, will draw a picture of his present
wretchedness, which, I doubt not, will move your compassion, as it hath
already excited mine.”

The generous hostess was ready to enforce this charitable proposal with
all her eloquence, when Melvil, with a look that well expressed his
magnanimity of love, replied, “Such a boon becomes the gentle Serafina!
O! every moment furnishes me with fresh matter to admire the virtues of
thy soul. If thou, whose tender heart hath been so rent with misery and
anguish, canst intercede for thy tormentor, who now suffers in his
turn, shall I refuse to pardon the miserable wretch! No, let me glory
in imitating the great example, and solicit Don Diego in behalf of the
same miscreant whose perfidious barbarity cost him such intolerable
woe.” “Enough,” cried the Castilian, “I have disclaimed the vindictive
principles of a Spaniard; and leave the miserable object to the sting
of his own conscience, which, soon or late, will not fail to avenge the
wrongs we have sustained from his deceit.”




CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX

THE HISTORY DRAWS NEAR A PERIOD.


Universal was the applause which they acquired by this noble sacrifice
of their resentment. The afternoon was spent in the utmost harmony and
good-humour; and at the earnest solicitation of Renaldo, whose fancy
still harboured the apprehensions of another separation, Don Diego
consented that the indissoluble knot should be tied between that young
gentleman and Serafina in two days, and the place appointed for the
ceremony was the very church where they had been restored to the arms
of each other.

The lovely bride, with a silent blush that set her lover’s heart on
fire, submitted to this determination, in consequence of which the
company was bespoke for that auspicious hour, and the evening being
pretty far advanced, they took leave of the ladies, and retired to
their respective homes; Don Diego and his future son-in-law being
reconducted to their lodgings, in the coach of the Jew, who, taking an
opportunity of being alone with Melvil, observed that it would be
necessary on this occasion to supply the Castilian with a sum of money,
in order to support his dignity and independence, in furnishing
Serafina with everything suitable to her rank and merit; and that he
would willingly accommodate him, provided he knew how to propose it so
as to give no offence to his punctilious disposition.

Renaldo, thanking him for this generous anticipation, advised him to
solicit the Spaniard’s correspondence in the way of business, and to
put the whole on the footing of his own interest; by which means Don
Diego’s delicacy could sustain no affront. Fraught with this
instruction, the Israelite desired a private audience of the Castilian,
in which, after an apology for the freedom of his demand, “Signior Don
Diego,” said he, “as your fortune hath been so long embezzled by your
adversary in Spain, and your correspondence with that country entirely
cut off, it is not to be supposed that your finances are at present in
such a condition as to maintain the splendour of your family. Count de
Melvil’s whole fortune is at your command; and had not he been afraid
of giving umbrage to the peculiar delicacy of your sentiments, he would
have pressed you to use it for your convenience. For my own part, over
and above the inclination I have to serve Don Diego, I consult my own
private advantage in desiring you to accept my service on this
occasion. Money is the chief commodity in which I deal, and, if you
honour me with your commands, I shall be a gainer by my obedience.”

Don Diego replied, with a smile that denoted how well he understood the
meaning of this address, “Surely, Signior, I am bound by the strongest
ties to exert my utmost endeavours for your advantage; and I pray God
this your proposal may have that issue. I am well acquainted with the
Count’s generosity and refined notions of honour; and too much obliged
by him already, to hesitate with punctilious reserve in accepting his
future assistance. Nevertheless, since you have contrived a scheme for
removing all scruples of that sort, I shall execute it with pleasure;
and, in the form of business, you shall have all the security I can
give for what shall be necessary to answer my present occasions.”

The preliminaries being thus settled, Joshua advanced for his use a
thousand pounds, for which he would take neither bond, note, nor
receipt, desiring only that the Castilian would mark it in his own
pocket-book, that the debt might appear, in case any accident should
befall the borrower. Although the Spaniard had been accustomed to the
uncommon generosity of Melvil, he could not help wondering at this
nobleness of behaviour, so little to be expected from any merchant,
much less from a Jewish broker.

While this affair was on the anvil, Renaldo, who could no longer
withhold the communication of his happiness from his sister and
relations in Germany, took up the pen, and, in a letter to his
brother-in-law, recounted all the circumstances of the surprising turn
of fate which he had experienced since his arrival in England. He
likewise related the story of Don Diego, informed them of the day
appointed for his nuptials, and entreated the Major to make a journey
to London with his wife; or, if that should be impracticable, to come
as far as Brussels, where they should be met by him and his Serafina.
There was now but one day between him and the accomplishment of his
dearest wish, and that was spent in procuring a licence, and adjusting
the preparations for the grand festival. Don Diego in the forenoon
visited Madam Clement, to whom he repeated his warm acknowledgments of
her bounty and maternal affection to his daughter, and presented to
Serafina bank notes to the amount of five hundred pounds, to defray the
necessary expense for her wedding ornaments.

All the previous steps being taken for the solemnisation of this
interesting event, and the hour of appointment arrived, the bridegroom,
accompanied by his father-in-law, hastened to the place of rendezvous,
which was the vestry-room of the church we have already described;
where they were received by the good clergyman in his canonicals; and
here they had not waited many minutes, when they were joined by Madam
Clement and the amiable bride, escorted by the friendly physician, who
had all along borne such a share in their concerns. Serafina was
dressed in a sack of white satin, and the ornaments of her head were
adjusted in the Spanish fashion, which gave a peculiar air to her
appearance, and an additional spirit to those attractions which engaged
the heart of each beholder. There was nothing remarkable in the habit
of Renaldo, who had copied the plainness and elegance of his mistress;
but, when she entered the place, his features were animated with a
double proportion of vivacity, and their eyes meeting, seemed to kindle
a blaze which diffused warmth and joy through the countenances of all
present.

After a short pause, her father led her to the altar, and gave her away
to the transported Renaldo, before the priest who performed the
ceremony, and bestowed the nuptial benediction on this enraptured pair.
The sanction of the church being thus obtained, they withdrew into the
vestry, where Melvil sealed his title on her rosy lips, and presented
his wife to the company, who embraced her in their turns, with fervent
wishes for their mutual happiness.

Though the scene of this transaction was remote from any inhabited
neighbourhood, the church was surrounded by a crowd of people, who,
with uncommon demonstration of surprise and admiration, petitioned
Heaven to bless so fair a couple. Such indeed was their eagerness to
see them, that some lives were endangered by the pressure of the crowd,
which attended them with loud acclamations to the coach, after the
bridegroom had deposited in the hands of the minister one hundred
pounds for the benefit of the poor of that parish, and thrown several
handfuls of money among the multitude. Serafina re-embarked in Madam
Clement’s convenience, with that good lady and Don Diego, while
Renaldo, with the clergyman and doctor, followed in Joshua’s coach, to
a pleasant country-house upon the Thames, at a distance of a few miles
from London. This the Jew had borrowed from the owner for a few days,
and there they were received by that honest Hebrew, who had provided a
very elegant entertainment for the occasion. He had also bespoke a
small but excellent band of music, which regaled their ears while they
sat at dinner; and the afternoon being calm and serene, he prevailed on
them to take the air on the river, in a barge which he had prepared for
the purpose.

But, notwithstanding this diversity of amusement, Renaldo would have
found it the longest day he had ever passed, had not his imagination
been diverted by an incident which employed his attention during the
remaining part of the evening. They had drunk tea, and engaged in a
party at whist, when they were surprised with a noise of contention
from a public-house, that fronted the windows of the apartment in which
they sat. Alarmed at this uproar, they forsook their cards, and,
throwing up the casement, beheld a hearse surrounded by four men on
horseback, who had stopped the carriage, and violently pulled the
driver from his seat. This uncommon arrest had engaged the curiosity of
the publican’s family, who stood at the door to observe the
consequence, when all of a sudden appeared a person in canonicals, well
mounted, who, riding up to those who maltreated the driver, bestowed
upon one of them such a blow with the butt-end of his whip, as laid him
sprawling on the ground; and, springing from his saddle upon the box,
took the reins into his own hand, swearing with great vehemence, that
he would murder every man who should attempt to obstruct the hearse.

The good priest who had married Renaldo was not a little scandalised at
this ferocious behaviour in a clergyman, and could not help saying
aloud, he was a disgrace to the cloth when the horseman looking up to
the window, replied, “Sir, may I be d—n’d, if any man in England has a
greater respect for the cloth than I have; but at present I am quite
distracted.” So saying, he whipped up the horses, and had actually
disentangled the hearse from those who surrounded it, when he was
opposed by another troop, one of whom alighted with great expedition,
and cut the harness so as that he could not possibly proceed. Finding
himself thus driven to bay, he leaped upon the ground, and exercised
his weapon with such amazing strength and agility, that several of his
antagonists were left motionless on the field, before he was
overpowered and disarmed by dint of numbers, who assailed him on all
sides.

The mad parson being thus taken prisoner, an elderly person, of a very
prepossessing appearance, went up to the hearse, and, unbolting the
door, a young lady sprung out, and shrieking, ran directly to the
public-house, to the infinite astonishment and affright of the whole
family, who believed it was the spirit of the deceased person, whose
body lay in the carriage. Renaldo, who was with difficulty restrained
from interposing in behalf of the clergyman against such odds, no
sooner perceived this apparition, than, supposing her to be some
distressed damsel, his Quixotism awoke, he descended in an instant, and
rushed into the house, among those that pursued the fair phantom. Don
Diego and the physician took the same road, while the real clergyman
and Joshua tarried with the ladies, who were, by this time, very much
interested in the event.

Melvil found the young lady in the hands of the old gentleman, who had
released her from the hearse, and who now bitterly upbraided her for
her folly and disobedience; while she protested with great vivacity,
that whatever she might suffer from his severity, she would never
submit to the hateful match he had proposed, nor break the promise she
had already made to the gentleman who now attempted to rescue her from
the tyranny of a cruel father. This declaration was followed by a
plentiful shower of tears, which the father could not behold with
unmoistened eyes, although he reviled her with marks of uncommon
displeasure; and turning to the Count, “I appeal to you, sir,” said he,
“whether I have not reason to curse the undutiful obstinacy of that
pert baggage, and renounce her for ever as an alien to my blood. She
has, for some months, been solicited in marriage by an honest citizen,
a thirty thousand pound man; and instead of listening to such an
advantageous proposal, she hath bestowed her heart upon a young fellow
not worth a groat. Ah! you degenerate hussy, this comes of your plays
and romances. If thy mother were not a woman of an unexceptionable life
and conversation, I should verily believe thou art no child of mine.
Run away with a beggar! for shame!”

“I suppose,” replied Renaldo, “the person to whom your daughter’s
affection inclines, is that clergyman who exerted himself so manfully
at the door?” “Clergyman!” cried the other, “adad! he has more of the
devil than the church about him. A ruffian! he has, for aught I know,
murdered the worthy gentleman whom I intended for my son-in-law; and
the rogue, if I had not kept out of his way, would, I suppose, have
served me with the same sauce. Me! who have been his master for many
years, and had resolved to make a man of him. Sir, he was my own clerk,
and this is the return I have met with from the serpent which I
cherished in my bosom.”

Here he was interrupted by the arrival of the citizen for whom he had
expressed such concern; that gentleman had received a contusion upon
one eye, by which the sight was altogether obstructed, so that he
concluded he should never retrieve the use of that organ, and with
great clamour took all the spectators to witness the injury he had
sustained; he entered the room with manifest perturbation, demanded
satisfaction of the father, and peremptorily declared it should not be
a lost eye to him if there was law in England. This unseasonable
demand, and the boisterous manner in which it was made, did not at all
suit the present humour of the old gentleman, who told him peevishly he
owed him no eye, and bade him go and ask reparation of the person who
had done him wrong.

The young lady snatching this favourable occasion, earnestly entreated
Melvil and his company to intercede with her father in behalf of her
lover, who, she assured them, was a young gentleman of a good family,
and uncommon merit; and in compliance with her request they invited him
and his daughter to the house in which they lodged, where they would be
disencumbered of the crowd which this dispute had gathered together,
and more at leisure to consult about the measures necessary to be
taken. The old gentleman thanked them for their courtesy, which he did
not think proper to refuse, and while he led, or rather hauled
Mademoiselle over the way, under the auspices of the Castilian, Renaldo
set the lover at liberty, made him a tender of his good offices, and
advised him to wait at the public-house for an happy issue of their
negotiation.

The pseudo-parson was very much affected by this generous proffer, for
which he made suitable acknowledgments, and protested before God he
would die a thousand deaths rather than part with his dear Charlotte.
Her father no sooner entered the apartment, than he was known by Joshua
to be a considerable trader in the city of London, and the merchant was
glad to find himself among his acquaintance. He was so full of the
story which had brought him thither, that he had scarce sat down when
he began to complain of his hard fate, in having an only child who was
so mean, stubborn, and contumacious; and every sentence was concluded
with an apostrophe of reproaches to the delinquent.

The Jew having allowed him to ring out his alarm, condoled his
misfortune, and gravely counselled the young lady to wean her
affections from such an unworthy object, for he supposed her favourite
was a man of no principle, or liberal endowments, otherwise her father
would not exclaim so bitterly against her conduct. Charlotte, who
wanted neither beauty nor understanding, assured him that her lover’s
character was, in all respects, unblemished, for the truth of which
assertion she appealed to her papa, who owned, with reluctance, that
the young man was a gentleman by birth, that he had served him with
remarkable diligence and integrity, and that his accomplishments were
far superior to his station in life. “But then,” said he, “the fellow
has not a shilling of his own, and would you have me give away my
daughter to a beggar?”

“God forbid!” cried the Jew, “I always understood you possessed an
ample fortune, and am sorry to find it otherwise.” “Otherwise!” cried
the citizen, with some acrimony, “take care what you say, sir; a
merchant’s credit is not to be tampered with.” “I beg your pardon,”
answered the Hebrew, “I concluded that your circumstances were bad,
because you objected to the poverty of the young man after you had
owned he was possessed of every other qualification to make your
daughter happy; for it is not to be imagined that you would thwart her
inclinations, or seek to render an only child miserable on account of
an obstacle which you yourself could easily remove. Let us suppose you
can afford to give with your daughter ten thousand pounds, which would
enable this young man to live with credit and reputation, and engage
advantageously in trade, for which you say he is well qualified, the
alternative then will be, whether you would rather see her in the arms
of a deserving youth whom she loves, enjoying all the comforts of life
with a moderate fortune, which it will always be in your own power to
improve, or tied for life to a monied man whom she detests, cursing her
hard fate, and despising that superfluity of wealth, in spite of which
she finds herself so truly wretched.”

The old gentleman seemed to be startled at this observation, which was
reinforced by Renaldo’s saying, that he would, moreover, enjoy the
unutterable pleasure of giving happiness to a worthy man, whose
gratitude would co-operate with his love, in approving himself a
dutiful son, as well as an affectionate husband. He then represented
the family disquiets and dismal tragedies produced from such mercenary
and compulsive matches, and, in conclusion related the story of Don
Diego and his daughter, which when the merchant heard, he started up
with marks of terror in his countenance, and, throwing up the casement,
called upon Valentine with great vociferation. This was the name of his
daughter’s admirer, who no sooner heard the summons than he flew to the
spot from whence it came, and the merchant, without any further
preamble, seizing his hand, joined it with that of Charlotte, saying,
with great trepidation, “Here, take her, in the name of God, and thank
this honourable company for your good fortune.”

The lovers were transported with exquisite joy at this sudden
determination in their favour. Valentine, having kissed the hand of his
mistress with all the eagerness of rapture, and acknowledged the
merchant’s generosity, paid his respects to the ladies with a very
polite address, and with demonstrations of uncommon gratitude and
sensibility, thanked the gentlemen, and the Count in particular, for
their good offices, to which he attributed the happiness he now
enjoyed. While Serafina and Madam Clement caressed the amiable
Charlotte, the rest of the company congratulated her admirer upon his
choice and success, though the clergyman could not help reprehending
him for profaning the sacerdotal habit.

Valentine heartily asked pardon for having given such cause of offence,
and hoped he should be forgiven, as it was a disguise which he thought
absolutely necessary for the execution of a scheme upon which his
happiness depended. He then, at the request of Renaldo, unfolded the
mystery of the hearse, by giving them to understand that Charlotte’s
father having got inkling of their mutual passion, had dismissed his
clerk, and conveyed his daughter to a country-house in the
neighbourhood of London, in order to cut off their correspondence;
notwithstanding these precautions they had found means to communicate
with each other by letters, which were managed by a third person; and
his rival being very importunate in his solicitations, they had
concerted the expedient of the hearse, which he provided and conducted
through a road contiguous to the end of the merchant’s garden, where
Charlotte, being apprised of the design, waited for its approach, and
embarked in it without hesitation. Valentine thought himself
sufficiently screened from discovery by his disguise, but he was
unfortunately met by a servant of the family, who recollected his
features, and immediately gave the alarm, upon which the father and his
friends took horse, and pursued them by two different roads, until they
were overtaken at this place.

He had scarce finished this short relation, when his rival, bluntly
entering the apartment, with an handkerchief tied round his eye,
committed Valentine to the charge of a constable, who attended him, by
a warrant from a justice of the peace in that neighbourhood, and
threatened to prosecute the merchant on an action of damages for the
loss of an eye, which he said he had sustained in his service. The
company endeavoured to appease this citizen, by representing that his
misfortune was no other than a common inflammation, nor was it owing to
malice aforethought, but entirely to the precipitate passion of an
incensed young man, who, by the bye, acted in his own defence. At the
same time the merchant promised to make any reasonable satisfaction,
upon which the other demanded an obligation, importing that he would,
in ten days from the date, bestow upon him his daughter in marriage,
with a portion of fifteen thousand pounds, or, in case of failure, pay
him double the sum.

The merchant, exasperated at this extravagant demand, told him flatly
he had already disposed of his daughter to Valentine, who, he believed,
was a much more deserving man, and that he was ready to wait upon the
magistrate who had granted the warrant, in order to give bail for his
future son-in-law. This was a mortifying declaration to the plaintiff,
though he condoled himself with the hope of being a gainer by the loss
of his eye, and now the pain was over would have been very sorry to
find his sight retrieved. The old gentleman, Joshua, and Renaldo
accompanied the prisoner to the house of the justice, where he was
immediately admitted to bail. Upon their return Valentine shifted his
dress, and they supped together with great cordiality and mirth,
maintained at the expense of the discarded lover.

After supper Don Diego walked a minuet with Madam Clement; for whom, by
this time, he had contracted an extraordinary degree of affection.
Valentine had the honour to dance with the incomparable Serafina, whose
beauty and attractions dazzled the eyes of the new-comers, and struck
her bashful partner with awe and confusion; and Melvil presented his
hand to the agreeable Charlotte, who performed so much to the
satisfaction of her father, that he could not help expressing his joy
and pride. He praised God for throwing him in the way of our company,
and engaged the clergyman to unite the young couple, after having
appointed a day for the ceremony, and invited all present to the
wedding. The evening having been insensibly consumed in these
avocations, and the night pretty far advanced, the ladies withdrew
without ceremony; and the retreat of Serafina filled Renaldo’s breast
with tumult and emotion; his blood began to flow in impetuous tides,
his heart to beat with redoubled vigour and velocity, while his eyes
seemed to flash with more than human splendour. Now his imagination
began to anticipate with the enthusiastic rage of an inspired sibyl; he
was instantaneously transported from the conversation, and every nerve
was braced to such a degree of impatience, that human nature could not
long endure the tension.

He, therefore, having withstood the impulse about a quarter of an hour,
at length gave way to his impetuosity, and, springing from his friends,
found himself in a dark passage, at the farther end of which he
perceived Madam Clement coming out of a chamber with a light, which, at
sight of him, she set down, and vanished in a moment. This was the star
that pointed to his paradise; he hailed the signal, entered the
apartment, and, like a lion, rushing on his prey, approached the
nuptial bed, where Serafina, surrounded by all the graces of beauty,
softness, sentiment, and truth, lay trembling as a victim at the altar,
and strove to hide her blushes from his view—the door was shut, the
light extinguished—he owned his lot was more than mortal man could
claim.

Here let me draw the decent veil that ought to shade the secret
mysteries of Hymen. Away, unhallowed scoffers, who profane, with idle
pleasantry or immodest hint, these holy rites; and leave those happy
lovers to enjoy, in one another’s arms, unutterable bliss, the
well-earned palm of virtue and of constancy, which had undergone the
most severe refinement. A more deserving pair night’s curtain shrouds
not in its dark extent.

The thoughts of Renaldo’s felicity threw a damp on the spirits of
Valentine, who saw the term of his probation protracted a few days
longer, and could not help wishing in his heart that he had achieved
the adventure which would have abridged his expectation, though at the
expense of the old gentleman’s displeasure. He filled a bumper to the
health of the bride and bridegroom, and throwing up his eyes with marks
of admiration, exclaimed, “How happy is the Count! alas! five days
longer must I rein my impatience!” “It is but reasonable, you rogue,
that your betters should have the start of you,” said the merchant, who
did him justice in the glass, and counselled him to drown his
impatience with good claret. The youth followed his advice, and it was
late before the company retired to rest.

These citizens, however, resolved to seize an opportunity of rallying
the new-married couple, according to custom, and with that view arose
early in the morning, on the supposition of finding them still asleep;
but they were not a little surprised, when they entered the
breakfasting room, to see Renaldo, and his amiable bed-fellow, already
dressed, and awaiting to do the honours of the house. The old gentleman
would fain have cracked a joke upon their extraordinary despatch, but
he was so much overawed by the dignity and tamed by the sweetness of
Serafina’s carriage, that he durst not give utterance to his
conception; and Valentine stood silent and abashed, as in the presence
of a superior being. After breakfast these gentlemen and Charlotte
again expressed their sense of the obligations they owed to this happy
family, repeated their invitation, and, taking leave, returned to
London in a coach that was provided overnight.

Our friends being thus left to themselves, Don Diego turned towards
Melvil: “Now,” said he, “that I have yielded to the impatience of your
love, as well as to the eagerness of my own desire to make you happy, I
must beg leave to interrupt, for a little while, the stream of your
mutual pleasure, and propose a melancholy excursion, which, however,
will not be wholly void of enjoyment. I have too long delayed the
performance of my duty at Antonia’s grave—let us spend the forenoon in
that pious pilgrimage—I will drop a few tears to the memory of that
excellent woman, and never afterwards shall my friends be troubled with
my grief.”

The proposal being universally approved, they set out for the place,
which had oft been visited by the gentle Serafina, who conducted her
father to a black marble stone, which Renaldo had ordered to be laid
over the grave; and, as he kneeled to kiss the monument, he perceived
this plain inscription in the Spanish tongue:—Antonia de Zelos primera
en todo lo que es ser bueno, y sin segundo en todo lo que fue ser
desdichado, quedad con Dios! that is, Antonia de Zelos, unmatched in
virtue, and unequalled in misfortune, adieu! “O faithful record!” cried
the Castilian, smiting his breast, while his tears distilled upon the
marble, “thy goodness was the gift of Heaven, but thy misfortunes were
derived from the guilt of Don Diego; yet his sorrow shall expiate his
offence, and his penitence find favour in the sight of Heaven! Rest,
rest, ill-fated virtue!—eternal peace shall guard thy tomb, and angels
minister to thy unspotted shade; nor shall thine ashes lie in dark
obscurity here will I raise a monument, more suited to thy excellence
and name.” Serafina melted with filial tenderness; nor were the rest
unmoved at this affecting scene, which Don Diego did not quit without
reluctance.




CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN

THE LONGEST AND THE LAST.


The nature of this visit had softened every heart, and saddened every
countenance; and they walked in solemn silence to the other side of the
church-yard, in order to regain their carriages; when, at the turning
of the stile, they saw a young woman, in wretched attire, running out
of a poor habitation, wringing her hands in all the agony of despair.
Notwithstanding the distraction in her countenance, and the meanness of
her apparel, she discovered a regularity of features, and a delicacy of
air, which did not at all correspond with the misery of her equipage.
These exhibitions of extreme distress soon attracted the notice and
compassion of our company, and Melvil’s beauteous help-mate, accosting
this forlorn damsel with a pity-breathing aspect, asked the cause of
her disorder.

“Alas! dear lady,” cried the other, with all the emphasis of woe, “an
unhappy gentleman now breathes his last within this inhospitable hovel,
amidst such excess of misery as would melt the most flinty bosom. What
then must I feel, who am connected with him by the strongest ties of
love and conjugal affection?” “Who is the unfortunate object?” said the
physician. “He was once well known in the gay world,” replied the young
woman; “his name is Fathom.” Every individual of the company started at
mention of that detested name. Serafina began to tremble with emotion;
and Renaldo, after a short pause, declared he would go in, not with a
view to exult over his misery, but in order to contemplate the
catastrophe of such a wicked life, that the moral might be the more
deeply engraved on his remembrance. The young Countess, whose tender
heart could not bear the shock of such a spectacle, retired to the
coach with Madam Clement and the Jew, while Renaldo, accompanied by the
rest, entered a dismal apartment, altogether void of furniture and
convenience, where they beheld the wretched hero of these memoirs
stretched almost naked upon straw, insensible, convulsed, and seemingly
in the grasp of death. He was worn to the bone either by famine or
distemper; his face was overshadowed with hair and filth; his eyes were
sunk, glazed, and distorted; his nostrils dilated; his lips covered
with a black slough; and his complexion faded into a pale clay-colour,
tending to a yellow hue. In a word, the extremity of indigence,
squalor, and distress could not be more feelingly represented.

While Melvil perused this melancholy lesson, and groaning, cried,
“Behold the fate of man!” he perceived a letter in the right hand of
the unfortunate Fathom, which lay fast clenched across his breast.
Curious to know the contents of this paper, which the young woman said
he had kept in that position for several days, he drew nearer the
wretched couch, and was not a little surprised to see it addressed to
the Right Honourable Renaldo Count de Melvil, to the care of Mr. Joshua
Manesseh, merchant in London. When he attempted to disengage this
billet from the author’s hand, the sorrowing female fell upon her
knees, entreating him to desist, and telling him, she had promised,
upon oath, to communicate the contents to no person upon earth, but to
carry the letter, upon her husband’s decease, to the gentleman to whose
care it was directed.

Renaldo assured her, upon his honour, that he was the very Renaldo
Count de Melvil, for whom it was intended; and the young creature was
so much confounded at this information, that, before she could
recollect herself, Melvil had opened the billet, and read these words:
“If this paper should fall into the hands of the noble Renaldo, he will
understand, that Fathom was the most execrable traitor that ever
imposed upon unsuspecting benevolence, or attempted to betray a
generous benefactor. His whole life was a series of fraud, perfidy, and
the most abominable ingratitude. But, of all the crimes that lay heavy
upon his soul, his being accessory to the death of the incomparable
Serafina, whose father he had also robbed, was that for which he
despaired of Heaven’s forgiveness, notwithstanding the dreadful
compunction and remorse which have long preyed upon his heart, together
with the incredible misery and deplorable death which by this time he
hath undergone. Though these sufferings and sorrows cannot atone for
his enormous guilt, perhaps they will excite the compassion of the
humane Count de Melvil; at least, this confession, which my conscience
dictates under all the terrors of death and futurity, may be a warning
for him to avoid henceforth a smiling villain, like the execrable
Fathom, upon whose miserable soul Almighty God have mercy.”

Renaldo was deeply affected with the contents of this scroll, which
denoted such horror and despair. He saw there could be no dissimulation
or sinister design in this profession of penitence. He beheld the
condition of the writer, which put all his humane passions in
commotion; so that he remembered nothing of Fathom but his present
distress. He could scarce maintain those indications which might have
been justly deemed the effect of weakness and infirmity; and having
desired the physician and clergyman to contribute their assistance for
the benefit of that wretch’s soul and body, he ran to the coach, and
communicated the letter to the ladies; at the same time drawing a
picture of the object he had seen, which brought tears into the eyes of
the gentle Serafina, who earnestly entreated her lord to use his
endeavours for the relief and recovery of the unhappy man, that he
might, if possible, live to enjoy the benefit of mature repentance, and
not die in that dreadful despair which he manifested in the letter.

Renaldo, returning to the house, found the pious clergyman reading
prayers with great fervency, while Don Diego stood with his right hand
upon his breast, looking steadfastly upon the agonising Fathom, and the
young woman kneeled, with her streaming eyes lifted up to heaven, in an
ecstasy of grief and devotion. The physician had run to an apothecary’s
shop in the neighbourhood, from whence he soon returned with an
assistant, who applied a large blister to the back of the miserable
patient, while the female, by the doctor’s direction, moistened his
mouth with a cordial which he had prescribed.

These charitable steps being taken, Count de Melvil entreated the
apothecary’s servant to procure a tent-bed for the accommodation of the
sick person with all imaginable despatch; and, in less than an hour,
one was actually pitched, and Fathom lifted into it, after he had been
shifted, and in some measure purified from the dregs of his indigence.
During this transaction the ladies were conducted to a tavern not far
off, where dinner was bespoke, that they might be at hand to see the
effect of their charity, which was not confined to what we have already
described, but extended so far, that, in a little time, the apartment
was comfortably furnished, and the young creature provided with change
of apparel, and money to procure the necessaries of subsistence.

Notwithstanding all their care, the wretched Fathom still remained
insensible, and the doctor pronounced a very unfavourable prognostic,
while he ordered a pair of additional vesicatories to be laid upon his
arms, and other proper medicines to be administered. After dinner, the
ladies ventured to visit the place, and when Serafina crossed the
threshold, the weeping female fell at her feet, and, kissing her robe,
exclaimed, “Sure you are an angel from heaven.”

The alteration in her dress had made a very agreeable change in her
appearance, so that the Countess could now look upon her without
shuddering at her distress. And, as Fathom was not in a condition to be
disturbed, she took this opportunity of inquiring by what steps that
unfortunate wretch was conveyed from the prison, in which she knew he
had been confined, to the place where he now lay in such extremity; and
by what occurrence he had found a wife in such an abyss of misfortune.
Here the other’s tears began to flow afresh. “I am ashamed,” said she,
“to reveal my own folly; yet I dare not refuse a satisfaction of this
kind to a person who has laid me under such signal obligations.”

She then proceeded to relate her story, by which it appeared, she was
no other than the fair and unhappy Elenor, whom the artful Fathom had
debauched upon his first arrival in town, in the manner already
described in these memoirs. “Heaven,” continued she, “was pleased to
restore the use of my reason, which I had lost when I found myself
abandoned by the Count; but, all my connexion with my own family being
entirely cut off, and every door shut against a poor creature who could
procure no recommendation, except the certificate signed by the
physician of Bedlam, which, instead of introducing me to service, was
an insurmountable objection to my character, I found myself destitute
of all means of subsisting, unless I would condescend to live the
infamous and wretched life of a courtezan, an expedient rendered
palatable by the terrors of want, cooperating with the reflection of
the irretrievable loss I had already sustained. I ask pardon for
offending your chaste ears with this impure confession of my guilt,
which, Heaven knows, I then did, and now do look upon with abhorrence
and detestation. I had already forfeited my innocence, and wanted
resolution to encounter misery and death. Nevertheless, before I could
determine to embrace the condition of a prostitute, I was one day
accosted in the Park by an elderly gentleman who sat down by me upon a
bench, and, taking notice of the despondence which was evident in my
countenance, pressed me to make him acquainted with the nature of my
misfortune. So much sympathy and good sense appeared in his deportment
and conversation, that I gratified his request, and he, in return for
my confidence, saved me from the most horrible part of my prospect, by
taking me into his protection, and reserving me for his own appetite.
In this situation I lived a whole year, until I was deprived of my
keeper by an apoplectic fit, and turned out of doors by his relations,
who did not, however, strip me of the clothes and moveables which I
owed to his bounty. Far from being as yet reconciled to a vicious life,
I resolved to renounce the paths of shame, and, converting my effects
into ready money, hired a small shop, and furnished it with
haberdashery ware, intending to earn an honest livelihood by the sale
of these commodities, together with the plain work in which I hoped to
be employed so soon as my talents should be known. But this scheme did
not answer my expectation. The goods spoiled upon my hands, and, as I
was a stranger in the neighbourhood, nobody would intrust me with any
other business. So that, notwithstanding the most parsimonious economy,
I ran in debt to my landlord, who seized my effects; and an hosier,
from whom I had received some parcels upon credit, took out a writ
against me, by virtue of which I was arrested and imprisoned in the
Marshalsea, where I found my first seducer. Good Heaven! what did I
feel at this unexpected meeting, overwhelmed as I was before with my
own distress! I with a loud scream fainted away, and, when I recovered,
found myself in the arms of Mr. Fathom, who wept over me with great
affliction. All his prospects of gaiety had now vanished, and his heart
was softened by his own misfortunes, to a feeling of another’s woe, as
well as to a due sense of his own guilt. He expressed the deepest
sorrow for having been the occasion of my ruin, endeavoured to comfort
me with a promise of assistance, and indeed, by practising medicine
among the prisoners, made shift to keep us both from starving. But
surely no sinner underwent such severe remorse as that which he
suffered during his imprisonment. From the day of our meeting, I never
once saw him smile; a melancholy cloud continually overhung his
countenance. He numbered the minutes by his groans, he used to start
with horror from his sleep, and, striking his breast, would exclaim, ‘O
Elenor! I am the worst of villains!’ Sometimes he seemed disordered in
his brain, and raved about Renaldo and Monimia. In a word, his mind was
in a dreadful situation, and all his agonies were communicated to me,
whom by this time he had married, in order to make some atonement for
my wrongs. Wretched as he then was, I remembered the accomplished youth
who had captivated my virgin heart, the old impressions still remained,
I saw his penitence, pitied his misfortune, and his wife being dead,
consented to join his fate, the ceremony having been performed by a
fellow-prisoner, who was in orders. Though his hard-hearted creditor
had no other chance of being paid, than that of setting him at liberty,
he lent a deaf ear to all our supplications; and this cruelty
conspiring with the anguish of my husband’s own reflection, affected
his health and spirits to such a degree, that he could no longer earn
the miserable pittance which had hitherto supported our lives. Then our
calamities began to multiply. Indigence and famine stared us in the
face; and it was with the utmost difficulty that we resisted their
attacks, by selling or pledging our wearing apparel, until we were left
almost quite naked, when we found ourselves discharged by an act passed
for the relief of insolvent debtors. This charitable law, which was
intended for a consolation to the wretched, proved to us the most
severe disaster; for we were turned out into the streets, utterly
destitute of food, raiment, and lodging, at a time when Mr. Fathom was
so weakened by his distemper, that he could not stand alone. I
supported him from door to door, imploring the compassion of charitable
Christians, and was at length permitted to shelter him in this
miserable place, where his disease gaining ground, he lay three days in
that deplorable condition, from which he hath now been rescued, though
I fear too late, by your humanity and benevolence.”

She shed a flood of tears at the conclusion of this mournful tale,
which did not fail to affect the whole audience, especially Serafina,
who assured her, that, whatever should happen to her husband, she might
depend upon finding favour and protection, provided her conduct should
correspond with her professions. While this grateful creature kissed
the hand of her kind benefactress, Fathom uttered a groan, began to
stir in the bed, and with a languid voice called upon Elenor, who,
instantly withdrawing the curtain, presented the whole company to his
view. He had now retrieved the use of his perception by the operation
of the blisters, which began to torture him severely; he looked around
him with amazement and affright, and distinguishing the three persons
against whom the chief arrows of his fraud and treachery had been
levelled, he concluded that he was now arrived at the land of departed
souls, and that the shades of those whom he had so grievously injured
were come to see him tormented according to his demerits.

Fraught with this notion, which was confirmed by the bodily pain which
he felt, and the appearance of the clergyman and Joshua, whom he
mistook for the ministers of vengeance, he cried in a tone replete with
horror, “Is there no mercy then for penitence? Is there no pity due to
the miseries I suffered upon earth? Save me, O bountiful Heaven! from
the terrors of everlasting woe; hide me from these dreadful
executioners, whose looks are torture. Forgive me, generous Castilian.
O Renaldo! thou hadst once a tender heart. I dare not lift my eyes to
Serafina! that pattern of human excellence, who fell a victim to my
atrocious guilt; yet her aspect is all mildness and compassion. Hah!
are not these the drops of pity? Yes, they are the tears of mercy. They
fall like refreshing showers upon my drooping soul! Ah, murdered
innocence! wilt thou not intercede for thy betrayer at the throne of
grace!”

Here he was interrupted by Melvil, who with a grave and solemn air
pronounced, “Great hath been thy guilt, unhappy Ferdinand, and great
have been thy sufferings. Yet we come not to insult, but to alleviate
thy distress. Providence hath kindly defeated thy dire intentions,
which we therefore now forgive and transmit to oblivion, whether it be
thy lot to yield up thy spirit immediately, or to survive the dangerous
malady with which thou art at present overwhelmed. Suffer not thyself
to despair; for the mercy of Heaven is infinite; and submit to the
directions of this worthy gentleman, who will employ his skill for thy
recovery, while we shall take care to furnish thee with necessary
attendance. As too much speaking may be prejudicial to thy health, I
dispense with thy reply, and exhort thee to compose thyself to rest.”
So saying, he drew the curtain, and the company retired, leaving Fathom
entranced with wonder.

The next step which Renaldo took for the benefit of this wretched
penitent, was to send for the apothecary, with whom he left a sum of
money to be expended for the convenience of Fathom and his wife; then
he laid injunctions upon the physician to repeat his visits; and that
gentleman, together with the clergyman and Joshua, taking leave of the
others till next day, the Count set out with the ladies and his
father-in-law to the house where they had lodged the preceding night.

The reader may well imagine the conversation of the evening turned
wholly upon the strange occurrence of the day, which seemed to have
been concerted by supernatural prescience, in order to satisfy the
vengeance, and afford matter of triumph to the generosity of those who
had been so grievously injured by the guilty Fathom. Though not one of
them would say that such a miscreant ought to live, yet all concurred
in approving the offices of humanity which had been performed, and even
endeavoured to find specious pretext for vindicating their compassion.
Don Diego said, it would ill become a transgressor like him to withhold
his forgiveness from a sinner who had wronged him. Madam Clement
appealed to the approbation of Heaven, which had undoubtedly directed
them that way, for the purpose they had fulfilled. Serafina observed,
that the crimes of the delinquent were obliterated by his sorrow,
misery, and repentance. Renaldo honestly owned, that, exclusive of
other reasons, he could not deny himself the luxurious enjoyment of
communicating happiness to his fellow-creatures in distress; and each
fervently prayed, that their charity might not be disappointed by the
death of the object.

While they amused themselves in these discussions, Fathom, after having
lain some hours silent, in consequence of Renaldo’s advice, could no
longer suppress the astonishment of his mind, but, addressing himself
to his wife, “O Elenor!” said he, “my delirium is now past; though I
still remember the phantasies of my distempered brain. Among other
reveries, my imagination was regaled with a vision so perfect and
distinct, as to emulate truth and reality. Methought Count de Melvil,
Don Diego de Zelos, and the divine Serafina, the very persons who are
now crying before the throne of Heaven for vengeance against the guilty
Fathom, stood by my bedside, with looks of pity and forgiveness; and
that Renaldo spoke peace to my despairing soul. I heard the words
distinctly. I retain them in my memory. I saw the tears trickle from
Serafina’s eyes. I heard her father utter a compassionate sigh; and
should actually believe that they were personally present, had not I
long ago seen with my own eyes the funeral procession of that young
lady, whose wrongs God pardon; and were I not convinced that such a
meeting could not be effected without the immediate and miraculous
interposition of Heaven. Yet everything I now see corresponds with the
words of Renaldo, which still sound in my ears. When my perception
forsook me, I lay in the most abject misery, among straw; and thou,
poor injured innocence, wast naked and forlorn. Now, I find myself
reposed in a warm, easy, comfortable bed. I see around me the marks of
human charity and care, and the favourable change in thy appearance
glads my poor dejected heart. Say, whence this happy alteration? Do I
really awake from that dream of misery in which we have continued so
long? or do I still utter the extravagant ravings of a distempered
brain?”

Elenor was afraid of imparting at once all the particulars of the happy
change he had undergone, lest they might leave a dangerous impression
upon his fancy, which was not yet duly composed. She contented herself,
therefore, with telling him, that he had been obliged to the humanity
of a gentleman and lady, who chanced to pass that way by accident, and
who, understanding his deplorable case, had furnished him with the
conveniences which he now enjoyed. She then presented to him what the
doctor had directed her to administer, and, admonishing him to commit
his head to the pillow, he was favoured with a breathing sweat, fell
fast asleep, and in a few hours waked again altogether cool and
undisturbed.

It was upon this occasion that his wife explained the circumstances of
that visit which had redeemed him from extremity of wretchedness and
the jaws of death; upon which he started up, and throwing himself upon
his knees, exclaimed, “All-gracious Power! this was the work of thy own
bounteous hand; the voice of my sorrow and repentance hath been heard.
Thou hast inspired my benefactors with more than mortal goodness in my
behalf; how shall I praise thy name! how shall I requite their
generosity! Oh, I am bankrupt to both! yet let me not perish until I
shall have convinced them of my reformation, and seen them enjoying
that felicity which ought to be reserved for such consummate virtue.”

Next day, in the forenoon, he was visited by the physician, whom he now
recollected to have seen at the house of Madam Clement; and, after
having thanked that gentleman for his humanity and care, he earnestly
begged to know by what means Serafina had been preserved. When he was
satisfied in this particular, and given to understand that she was now
happy in the arms of Renaldo, “Blessed be God!” he cried, “for having
defeated the villany of him who sought to part such lovers. Dear sir,
will you add one circumstance to your charity, and bear to that happy
couple, and the noble Don Diego, the respects and the remorse of a
sincere penitent, whom their compassion hath raised to life? I have
been such a traitor to them, that my words deserve no regard. I will
not therefore use professions. I dare not hope to be admitted into
their presence. I am indeed ashamed to see the light of the sun. How
then could I bear the looks of that injured family? ah, no! let me hide
myself in some obscure retreat, where I may work out my salvation with
fear and trembling, and pray incessantly to Heaven for their
prosperity.”

The physician promised to represent his contrition to the Count and his
lady, and accordingly proceeded to their habitation, where he repeated
these expressions, and pronounced his patient out of danger. So that
their thoughts were now employed in concerting a scheme for his future
subsistence, that he might not be exposed by indigence to a relapse in
point of morals. Renaldo being still averse to any personal intercourse
with such a wretch, until he should give some undoubted proofs of
amendment, and, as yet afraid of intrusting him with any office that
required integrity, resolved, with the approbation of all present, to
settle him in a cheap county in the north of England, where he and his
wife could live comfortably on an annuity of sixty pounds, until his
behaviour should entitle him to a better provision.

This resolution was just taken, when Joshua arrived with a gentleman
whom he introduced to Don Diego as the secretary of the Spanish
ambassador. After the first compliments, the stranger told the
Castilian, that he waited upon him at the desire of his Excellency, who
would have come in person, had he not been confined by the gout. Then
he put into his hand a letter from the court of Madrid, written by a
nobleman of Diego’s acquaintance, who informed him, that Don Manuel de
Mendoza having made away with himself by poison, in order to avoid the
disgrace of a legal conviction, his Catholic Majesty was now convinced
of Don Diego’s innocence, and granted him leave to return and take
possession of his honours and estate. This information was confirmed by
the secretary, who assured him that the ambassador had orders to make
him acquainted with this favourable decision of the King. The Castilian
having first acquitted himself in the most polite terms to the
secretary and the Jew, who, he said, had always been a messenger of
glad tidings, communicated his happiness to the company; and this
evening concluded the third day of their rejoicing.

Next morning Don Diego went to visit the ambassador, accompanied by
Joshua and the secretary; while the physician, repairing to the
habitation of Fathom, signified, by Renaldo’s direction, the resolution
which had been taken in his behalf; and the patient no sooner heard his
doom, than, lifting up his hands, he cried, “I am unworthy of such
tenderness and benevolence.” While Elenor shed a flood of tears in
silence, unable to give utterance to her grateful thought; Melvil’s
bounty having so far transcended her most sanguine hope.

The Spaniard having paid his devoirs to his Excellency, returned before
dinner; and, in the afternoon, desiring a private conference with
Serafina, they retired into another apartment, and he expressed himself
to this effect: “You have contracted, my dear child, an habit of
calling Madam Clement your mother, and doubtless, by her maternal
tenderness and regard, she hath acquired a just title to the
appellation. Yet I own I would fain strengthen it by a legal claim. I
no sooner retrieved my daughter than I gave her away to the most
deserving youth that ever sighed with love.—I rejoice in the gift which
secured your happiness. But I left myself in a solitary situation,
which even the return of my good fortune cannot render easy and
supportable. When I revisit the Castle of Zelos, every well-known
object will recall the memory of my Antonia, and I shall want a
companion to fill her place, and to sympathise with me in that sorrow
which will be derived from my remembrance. Who is there so worthy to
succeed your mother in the affection of Don Diego, as she who interests
her love for Serafina, and resembles her so strongly in every virtue of
the sex? Similar attractions will produce similar effects. My heart is
already attached to that good lady; and, provided Serafina shall
approve of my choice, I will lay myself and fortune at her feet.”

The fair Countess replied, with an enchanting smile, that, before this
declaration, she had with pleasure perceived the progress which Madam
Clement had made in his heart; and that she did not believe there was a
person upon earth better qualified to repair the loss he had sustained;
though she foresaw one obstacle to his happiness, which she was afraid
would not be easily surmounted. “You mean,” answered the Castilian,
“the difference of religion, which I am resolved to remove by adopting
the Protestant faith; though I am fully satisfied that real goodness is
of no particular persuasion, and that salvation cannot depend upon
belief, over which the will has no influence. I invest you, therefore,
with the charge of declaring my passion and proposal, and empower you
to satisfy her scruples with regard to the religion which I now
profess, and which I shall not openly relinquish, until I shall have
secured, in this country, effects sufficient to screen me from the ill
consequences of my King’s displeasure.”

Serafina undertook this office with pleasure, because she had reason to
think his addresses would not be disagreeable to Madam Clement; and
that same night made the Count acquainted with the nature of her
commission. Nor was her expectation disappointed. The French lady, with
that frankness which is peculiar to virtue and good breeding, confessed
that Don Diego was not indifferent to her choice, and did not hesitate
in receiving him upon the footing of a lover.—As we have already dwelt
circumstantially on the passion of love, so as perhaps even to have
tired our readers, we shall not repeat the dialogue that passed, when
the Spaniard was indulged with an opportunity to explain his
sentiments. Suffice it to observe, that the lady’s days of coquetry
were now over, and that she was too wise to trifle with the time, which
every moment became more and more precious. It was agreed then, that
Don Diego should settle his affairs in Spain, and return to England, in
order to espouse Madam Clement, with a view to fix his residence in
this island, where Renaldo likewise proposed to enjoy the sweets of his
fortune, provided he could draw hither his interests and connexions.

Meanwhile, having for some days enjoyed his bliss with all the fulness
of rapture amidst this small but agreeable society, he shifted the
scene, and conducted his dear partner to a ready-furnished house in
town, which, together with an occasional equipage, his friend Joshua
had hired for the accommodation of him and his father-in-law, who,
during his stay in England, failed not to cultivate the mistress of his
heart with the most punctual assiduity. Hitherto Serafina had been as a
precious jewel locked up in a casket, which the owner alone had an
opportunity to contemplate. But now the Count, who was proud of such a
prize, resolved to let her shine forth to the admiration of the whole
world. With this view he bespoke such ornaments as befitted her
quality, and, while the mantua-makers were employed in her service,
made a tour among his former acquaintance, and discharged the
obligations under which he lay to some who had assisted him in his
distress. He did not, however, introduce them to his charming Serafina;
because not one of them had formerly treated her with that delicacy of
regard which he thought her due; and some of them were much mortified
at their neglect, when they saw what a dazzling figure she made in the
beau monde.

She was visited by the Spanish and Imperial ambassadors, and divers
other foreigners of distinction, to whom Melvil had letters of
recommendation. But her first public appearance was in a box at the
opera, accompanied by Madam Clement, the Count, and Don Diego. The
entertainment was already begun, so that her entrance had the greater
effect upon the audience, whose attention was soon detached from the
performance, and riveted upon this amiable apparition, which seemed to
be some bright being of another world dropped from the clouds among
them. Then did the spirit of curiosity play its part. A thousand
whispers circulated; as many glasses were exalted to reconnoitre this
box of foreigners; for such they concluded them to be from their
appearance. Every male spectator acknowledged Serafina to be the
paragon of beauty; and every female confessed, that Melvil was the
model of a fine gentleman. The charms of the young Countess did not
escape the eye and approbation of royalty itself; and when her rank was
known, from the information of the ambassadors and other people of
condition who were seen saluting her at a distance, that same evening a
thousand bumpers were swallowed in honour of the Countess de Melvil.
The fame of her beauty was immediately extended over this immense
metropolis, and different schemes were concerted for bringing her into
life. These, however, she resisted with unwearied obstinacy. Her
happiness centred in Renaldo, and the cultivation of a few friends
within the shade of domestic quiet. She did not even forget the
concerns of the wretched Fathom and his faithful Elenor, who daily
enjoyed fresh instances of her humanity and care. When his fever
forsook him, he was supplied with nourishing food for the recovery of
his health; and as soon as he found himself in a condition to travel,
he gave notice to his benefactor, who desired Joshua to settle with him
the manner in which he was to receive his allowance, and to pay the
first half-year’s salary per advance.

This affair being adjusted, and the place of his retreat signified, the
Jew told Elenor, that she might wait upon the Countess before their
departure; and she did not fail to make use of this permission. After
they had made the necessary preparations for their journey, and taken
places in the York stage-coach, Mrs. Fathom, clothing herself in decent
apparel, went to the house of Count Melvil, and was immediately
admitted to the presence of Serafina, who received her with her usual
complacency, enriched her with salutary advice, comforted her with the
hope of better things, provided her conduct and that of her husband
should henceforth be found irreproachable; and, wishing her peace and
happiness, presented her with a box of linen, and twenty guineas in a
purse. Such excessive goodness overpowered this sensible young woman to
such a degree, that she stood before her in speechless awe and
veneration; and the Countess, in order to relieve her from the
confusion under which she suffered, quitted the room, leaving her to
the care of her woman. It was not long, however, before her gratitude
broke out in loud exclamations and a violent passion of tears, which
all her efforts could not, for a while, overcome. By this time the
coach was brought up to the gate for the reception of Serafina, who
took an airing every day at the same hour; when Renaldo, leading her to
the vehicle, beheld a man plainly dressed standing within the court,
with his head and body bent towards the earth, so that his countenance
could not be perceived.

Melvil, who supposed him to be some unfortunate man come to implore his
charity, turned towards him, and asked with a humane accent, if he
wanted to speak with any person in the house? To this interrogation the
stranger replied, without lifting up his head, “Overwhelmed as I am
with Count Melvil’s generosity, together with a consciousness of my own
unworthiness, it ill becomes a wretch like me to importune him for
further favour; yet I could not bear the thought of withdrawing,
perhaps for ever, from the presence of my benefactor, without
soliciting his permission to see his face in mercy, to acknowledge my
atrocious crimes, to hear my pardon confirmed by his voice, and that of
his accomplished Countess, whom I dare not even at a distance behold;
and to express my fervent wish for their prosperity.”

Melvil, whose heart was but too tender, could not hear this address
without emotion. He recognised the companion of his infancy and youth;
he remembered the happy scenes he had enjoyed with Fathom, whose voice
had always such an effect upon his ear, as to excite the ideas of
friendship and esteem; and he was disturbed by this unexpected meeting,
which also discomposed the beauteous Serafina. Renaldo having paused a
little, “It is with pain,” said he, “I recollect anything to the
prejudice of Fathom, whose future behaviour will, I hope, erase the
memory of his offences, and justify what other steps I may take in his
favour. Meanwhile, I heartily forgive what is past; and, in token of my
sincerity, present my hand;” which our adventurer bathed with his
tears. The Countess, whose mind was in unison with her husband,
repeated her assurances of pardon and protection; at which the penitent
rejoiced in silence, while he raised his head and took a parting view
of those charms which had formerly enslaved his heart.

Having thus obeyed the dictates of his duty and inclination, he next
morning embarked in the stage-coach, with his faithful Elenor, and in
six days arrived at the place of his retreat, which he found extremely
well adapted to the circumstances of his mind and fortune. For all his
vice and ambition was now quite mortified within him, and his whole
attention engrossed in atoning for his former crimes, by a sober and
penitent life, by which alone he could deserve the uncommon generosity
of his patrons.

While he thus accommodated himself to his new system, Renaldo received
letters of congratulation from his sister, who with the Major had come
to Brussels, in order to meet her brother and Serafina, according to
his proposal. This intimation being communicated to Don Diego, he
resolved to accompany them to Flanders, on his way to Spain.
Preparations were made for their departure; the clergyman and physician
were honoured with valuable marks of friendship and esteem from the
Countess, Renaldo, and the Castilian, who were convoyed to Deal by
Madam Clement, to whom, at parting, Don Diego presented a diamond ring,
as a pledge of his inviolable love.

Here the travellers hired a vessel for Ostend, which they reached in a
few hours; in two days more they arrived at Brussels, where Mrs. Farrel
and her husband were struck with admiration at the surprising beauty
and accomplishment of their sister-in-law, whom they caressed with
equal tenderness and joy.—In a word, all parties were as happy as good
fortune could make them; and Don Diego set out for Spain, after they
had agreed to reside in the Low Countries till his return.

THE END.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM — COMPLETE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Hello, this is Manh3
I'm Foxy
The weather today is nice and sunshine!
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Scarlet Letter
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Scarlet Letter

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Engraver: A. V. S. Anthony

Illustrator: Mary Hallock Foote
        Ludvig Sandöe Ipsen

Release date: May 5, 2008 [eBook #25344]
                Most recently updated: October 19, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Markus Brenner, Irma Spehar and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARLET LETTER ***




                          THE SCARLET LETTER.

                                  BY

                         NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

                             Illustrated.

                            [Illustration]

                                BOSTON:
                     JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY,
           LATE TICKNOR & FIELDS, AND FIELDS, OSGOOD, & CO.
                                 1878.

                       COPYRIGHT, 1850 AND 1877.
           BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE AND JAMES R. OSGOOD & CO.

                        _All rights reserved._
                           October 22, 1874.

                            [Illustration]




                            [Illustration]




                    PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


Much to the author’s surprise, and (if he may say so without
additional offence) considerably to his amusement, he finds that his
sketch of official life, introductory to THE SCARLET LETTER, has
created an unprecedented excitement in the respectable community
immediately around him. It could hardly have been more violent,
indeed, had he burned down the Custom-House, and quenched its last
smoking ember in the blood of a certain venerable personage, against
whom he is supposed to cherish a peculiar malevolence. As the public
disapprobation would weigh very heavily on him, were he conscious of
deserving it, the author begs leave to say, that he has carefully read
over the introductory pages, with a purpose to alter or expunge
whatever might be found amiss, and to make the best reparation in his
power for the atrocities of which he has been adjudged guilty. But it
appears to him, that the only remarkable features of the sketch are
its frank and genuine good-humor, and the general accuracy with which
he has conveyed his sincere impressions of the characters therein
described. As to enmity, or ill-feeling of any kind, personal or
political, he utterly disclaims such motives. The sketch might,
perhaps, have been wholly omitted, without loss to the public, or
detriment to the book; but, having undertaken to write it, he
conceives that it could not have been done in a better or a kindlier
spirit, nor, so far as his abilities availed, with a livelier effect
of truth.

The author is constrained, therefore, to republish his introductory
sketch without the change of a word.

    SALEM, March 30, 1850.

[Illustration]




                               CONTENTS.


                                                PAGE

THE CUSTOM HOUSE.—INTRODUCTORY                     1


                          THE SCARLET LETTER.

I. THE PRISON-DOOR                                51

II. THE MARKET-PLACE                              54

III. THE RECOGNITION                              68

IV. THE INTERVIEW                                 80

V. HESTER AT HER NEEDLE                           90

VI. PEARL                                        104

VII. THE GOVERNOR’S HALL                         118

VIII. THE ELF-CHILD AND THE MINISTER             129

IX. THE LEECH                                    142

X. THE LEECH AND HIS PATIENT                     155

XI. THE INTERIOR OF A HEART                      168

XII. THE MINISTER’S VIGIL                        177

XIII. ANOTHER VIEW OF HESTER                     193

XIV. HESTER AND THE PHYSICIAN                    204

XV. HESTER AND PEARL                             212

XVI. A FOREST WALK                               223

XVII. THE PASTOR AND HIS PARISHIONER             231

XVIII. A FLOOD OF SUNSHINE                       245

XIX. THE CHILD AT THE BROOK-SIDE                 253

XX. THE MINISTER IN A MAZE                       264

XXI. THE NEW ENGLAND HOLIDAY                     277

XXII. THE PROCESSION                             288

XXIII. THE REVELATION OF THE SCARLET LETTER      302

XXIV. CONCLUSION                                 315

[Illustration]




                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

_Drawn by_ MARY HALLOCK FOOTE _and Engraved by_ A. V. S. ANTHONY. _The
              ornamental head-pieces are by_ L. S. IPSEN.


                                                      PAGE

THE CUSTOM-HOUSE                                         1

THE PRISON DOOR                                         49

VIGNETTE,—WILD ROSE                                     51

THE GOSSIPS                                             57

“STANDING ON THE MISERABLE EMINENCE”                    65

“SHE WAS LED BACK TO PRISON”                            78

“THE EYES OF THE WRINKLED SCHOLAR GLOWED”               87

THE LONESOME DWELLING                                   93

LONELY FOOTSTEPS                                        99

VIGNETTE                                               104

A TOUCH OF PEARL’S BABY-HAND                           113

VIGNETTE                                               118

THE GOVERNOR’S BREASTPLATE                             125

“LOOK THOU TO IT! I WILL NOT LOSE THE CHILD!”          135

THE MINISTER AND LEECH                                 148

THE LEECH AND HIS PATIENT                              165

THE VIRGINS OF THE CHURCH                              172

“THEY STOOD IN THE NOON OF THAT STRANGE SPLENDOR”      185

HESTER IN THE HOUSE OF MOURNING                        195

MANDRAKE                                               211

“HE GATHERED HERBS HERE AND THERE”                     213

PEARL ON THE SEA-SHORE                                 217

“WILT THOU YET FORGIVE ME?”                            237

A GLEAM OF SUNSHINE                                    249

THE CHILD AT THE BROOK-SIDE                            257

CHILLINGWORTH,—“SMILE WITH A SINISTER MEANING”         287

NEW ENGLAND WORTHIES                                   289

“SHALL WE NOT MEET AGAIN?”                             311

HESTER’S RETURN                                        320




                           THE CUSTOM-HOUSE.

[Illustration: The Custom-House]




                           THE CUSTOM-HOUSE.

                 INTRODUCTORY TO “THE SCARLET LETTER.”


It is a little remarkable, that—though disinclined to talk overmuch
of myself and my affairs at the fireside, and to my personal
friends—an autobiographical impulse should twice in my life have
taken possession of me, in addressing the public. The first time was
three or four years since, when I favored the reader—inexcusably, and
for no earthly reason, that either the indulgent reader or the
intrusive author could imagine—with a description of my way of life
in the deep quietude of an Old Manse. And now—because, beyond my
deserts, I was happy enough to find a listener or two on the former
occasion—I again seize the public by the button, and talk of my three
years’ experience in a Custom-House. The example of the famous
“P. P., Clerk of this Parish,” was never more faithfully followed. The
truth seems to be, however, that, when he casts his leaves forth upon
the wind, the author addresses, not the many who will fling aside his
volume, or never take it up, but the few who will understand him,
better than most of his schoolmates or lifemates. Some authors,
indeed, do far more than this, and indulge themselves in such
confidential depths of revelation as could fittingly be addressed,
only and exclusively, to the one heart and mind of perfect sympathy;
as if the printed book, thrown at large on the wide world, were
certain to find out the divided segment of the writer’s own nature,
and complete his circle of existence by bringing him into communion
with it. It is scarcely decorous, however, to speak all, even where we
speak impersonally. But, as thoughts are frozen and utterance
benumbed, unless the speaker stand in some true relation with his
audience, it may be pardonable to imagine that a friend, a kind and
apprehensive, though not the closest friend, is listening to our talk;
and then, a native reserve being thawed by this genial consciousness,
we may prate of the circumstances that lie around us, and even of
ourself, but still keep the inmost Me behind its veil. To this extent,
and within these limits, an author, methinks, may be autobiographical,
without violating either the reader’s rights or his own.

It will be seen, likewise, that this Custom-House sketch has a certain
propriety, of a kind always recognized in literature, as explaining
how a large portion of the following pages came into my possession,
and as offering proofs of the authenticity of a narrative therein
contained. This, in fact,—a desire to put myself in my true position
as editor, or very little more, of the most prolix among the tales
that make up my volume,—this, and no other, is my true reason for
assuming a personal relation with the public. In accomplishing the
main purpose, it has appeared allowable, by a few extra touches, to
give a faint representation of a mode of life not heretofore
described, together with some of the characters that move in it, among
whom the author happened to make one.

       *       *       *       *       *

In my native town of Salem, at the head of what, half a century ago,
in the days of old King Derby, was a bustling wharf,—but which is now
burdened with decayed wooden warehouses, and exhibits few or no
symptoms of commercial life; except, perhaps, a bark or brig, half-way
down its melancholy length, discharging hides; or, nearer at hand, a
Nova Scotia schooner, pitching out her cargo of firewood,—at the
head, I say, of this dilapidated wharf, which the tide often
overflows, and along which, at the base and in the rear of the row of
buildings, the track of many languid years is seen in a border of
unthrifty grass,—here, with a view from its front windows adown this
not very enlivening prospect, and thence across the harbor, stands a
spacious edifice of brick. From the loftiest point of its roof, during
precisely three and a half hours of each forenoon, floats or droops,
in breeze or calm, the banner of the republic; but with the thirteen
stripes turned vertically, instead of horizontally, and thus
indicating that a civil, and not a military post of Uncle Sam’s
government is here established. Its front is ornamented with a portico
of half a dozen wooden pillars, supporting a balcony, beneath which a
flight of wide granite steps descends towards the street. Over the
entrance hovers an enormous specimen of the American eagle, with
outspread wings, a shield before her breast, and, if I recollect
aright, a bunch of intermingled thunderbolts and barbed arrows in each
claw. With the customary infirmity of temper that characterizes this
unhappy fowl, she appears, by the fierceness of her beak and eye, and
the general truculency of her attitude, to threaten mischief to the
inoffensive community; and especially to warn all citizens, careful of
their safety, against intruding on the premises which she overshadows
with her wings. Nevertheless, vixenly as she looks, many people are
seeking, at this very moment, to shelter themselves under the wing of
the federal eagle; imagining, I presume, that her bosom has all the
softness and snugness of an eider-down pillow. But she has no great
tenderness, even in her best of moods, and, sooner or later,—oftener
soon than late,—is apt to fling off her nestlings, with a scratch of
her claw, a dab of her beak, or a rankling wound from her barbed
arrows.

The pavement round about the above-described edifice—which we may as
well name at once as the Custom-House of the port—has grass enough
growing in its chinks to show that it has not, of late days, been worn
by any multitudinous resort of business. In some months of the year,
however, there often chances a forenoon when affairs move onward with
a livelier tread. Such occasions might remind the elderly citizen of
that period before the last war with England, when Salem was a port by
itself; not scorned, as she is now, by her own merchants and
ship-owners, who permit her wharves to crumble to ruin, while their
ventures go to swell, needlessly and imperceptibly, the mighty flood
of commerce at New York or Boston. On some such morning, when three or
four vessels happen to have arrived at once,—usually from Africa or
South America,—or to be on the verge of their departure thitherward,
there is a sound of frequent feet, passing briskly up and down the
granite steps. Here, before his own wife has greeted him, you may
greet the sea-flushed shipmaster, just in port, with his vessel’s
papers under his arm, in a tarnished tin box. Here, too, comes his
owner, cheerful or sombre, gracious or in the sulks, accordingly as
his scheme of the now accomplished voyage has been realized in
merchandise that will readily be turned to gold, or has buried him
under a bulk of incommodities, such as nobody will care to rid him of.
Here, likewise,—the germ of the wrinkle-browed, grizzly-bearded,
care-worn merchant,—we have the smart young clerk, who gets the taste
of traffic as a wolf-cub does of blood, and already sends adventures
in his master’s ships, when he had better be sailing mimic-boats upon
a mill-pond. Another figure in the scene is the outward-bound sailor
in quest of a protection; or the recently arrived one, pale and
feeble, seeking a passport to the hospital. Nor must we forget the
captains of the rusty little schooners that bring firewood from the
British provinces; a rough-looking set of tarpaulins, without the
alertness of the Yankee aspect, but contributing an item of no slight
importance to our decaying trade.

Cluster all these individuals together, as they sometimes were, with
other miscellaneous ones to diversify the group, and, for the time
being, it made the Custom-House a stirring scene. More frequently,
however, on ascending the steps, you would discern—in the entry, if
it were summer time, or in their appropriate rooms, if wintry or
inclement weather—a row of venerable figures, sitting in
old-fashioned chairs, which were tipped on their hind legs back
against the wall. Oftentimes they were asleep, but occasionally might
be heard talking together, in voices between speech and a snore, and
with that lack of energy that distinguishes the occupants of
almshouses, and all other human beings who depend for subsistence on
charity, on monopolized labor, or anything else, but their own
independent exertions. These old gentlemen—seated, like Matthew, at
the receipt of customs, but not very liable to be summoned thence,
like him, for apostolic errands—were Custom-House officers.

Furthermore, on the left hand as you enter the front door, is a
certain room or office, about fifteen feet square, and of a lofty
height; with two of its arched windows commanding a view of the
aforesaid dilapidated wharf, and the third looking across a narrow
lane, and along a portion of Derby Street. All three give glimpses of
the shops of grocers, block-makers, slop-sellers, and ship-chandlers;
around the doors of which are generally to be seen, laughing and
gossiping, clusters of old salts, and such other wharf-rats as haunt
the Wapping of a seaport. The room itself is cobwebbed, and dingy with
old paint; its floor is strewn with gray sand, in a fashion that has
elsewhere fallen into long disuse; and it is easy to conclude, from
the general slovenliness of the place, that this is a sanctuary into
which womankind, with her tools of magic, the broom and mop, has very
infrequent access. In the way of furniture, there is a stove with a
voluminous funnel; an old pine desk, with a three-legged stool beside
it; two or three wooden-bottom chairs, exceedingly decrepit and
infirm; and—not to forget the library—on some shelves, a score or
two of volumes of the Acts of Congress, and a bulky Digest of the
Revenue Laws. A tin pipe ascends through the ceiling, and forms a
medium of vocal communication with other parts of the edifice. And
here, some six months ago,—pacing from corner to corner, or lounging
on the long-legged stool, with his elbow on the desk, and his eyes
wandering up and down the columns of the morning newspaper,—you might
have recognized, honored reader, the same individual who welcomed you
into his cheery little study, where the sunshine glimmered so
pleasantly through the willow branches, on the western side of the Old
Manse. But now, should you go thither to seek him, you would inquire
in vain for the Locofoco Surveyor. The besom of reform has swept him
out of office; and a worthier successor wears his dignity, and pockets
his emoluments.

This old town of Salem—my native place, though I have dwelt much away
from it, both in boyhood and maturer years—possesses, or did possess,
a hold on my affections, the force of which I have never realized
during my seasons of actual residence here. Indeed, so far as its
physical aspect is concerned, with its flat, unvaried surface, covered
chiefly with wooden houses, few or none of which pretend to
architectural beauty,—its irregularity, which is neither picturesque
nor quaint, but only tame,—its long and lazy street, lounging
wearisomely through the whole extent of the peninsula, with Gallows
Hill and New Guinea at one end, and a view of the almshouse at the
other,—such being the features of my native town, it would be quite
as reasonable to form a sentimental attachment to a disarranged
checker-board. And yet, though invariably happiest elsewhere, there is
within me a feeling for old Salem, which, in lack of a better phrase,
I must be content to call affection. The sentiment is probably
assignable to the deep and aged roots which my family has struck into
the soil. It is now nearly two centuries and a quarter since the
original Briton, the earliest emigrant of my name, made his appearance
in the wild and forest-bordered settlement, which has since become a
city. And here his descendants have been born and died, and have
mingled their earthy substance with the soil; until no small portion
of it must necessarily be akin to the mortal frame wherewith, for a
little while, I walk the streets. In part, therefore, the attachment
which I speak of is the mere sensuous sympathy of dust for dust. Few
of my countrymen can know what it is; nor, as frequent transplantation
is perhaps better for the stock, need they consider it desirable to
know.

But the sentiment has likewise its moral quality. The figure of that
first ancestor, invested by family tradition with a dim and dusky
grandeur, was present to my boyish imagination, as far back as I can
remember. It still haunts me, and induces a sort of home-feeling with
the past, which I scarcely claim in reference to the present phase of
the town. I seem to have a stronger claim to a residence here on
account of this grave, bearded, sable-cloaked and steeple-crowned
progenitor,—who came so early, with his Bible and his sword, and
trode the unworn street with such a stately port, and made so large a
figure, as a man of war and peace,—a stronger claim than for myself,
whose name is seldom heard and my face hardly known. He was a soldier,
legislator, judge; he was a ruler in the Church; he had all the
Puritanic traits, both good and evil. He was likewise a bitter
persecutor, as witness the Quakers, who have remembered him in their
histories, and relate an incident of his hard severity towards a woman
of their sect, which will last longer, it is to be feared, than any
record of his better deeds, although these were many. His son, too,
inherited the persecuting spirit, and made himself so conspicuous in
the martyrdom of the witches, that their blood may fairly be said to
have left a stain upon him. So deep a stain, indeed, that his old dry
bones, in the Charter Street burial-ground, must still retain it, if
they have not crumbled utterly to dust! I know not whether these
ancestors of mine bethought themselves to repent, and ask pardon of
Heaven for their cruelties; or whether they are now groaning under the
heavy consequences of them, in another state of being. At all events,
I, the present writer, as their representative, hereby take shame upon
myself for their sakes, and pray that any curse incurred by them—as I
have heard, and as the dreary and unprosperous condition of the race,
for many a long year back, would argue to exist—may be now and
henceforth removed.

Doubtless, however, either of these stern and black-browed Puritans
would have thought it quite a sufficient retribution for his sins,
that, after so long a lapse of years, the old trunk of the family
tree, with so much venerable moss upon it, should have borne, as its
topmost bough, an idler like myself. No aim, that I have ever
cherished, would they recognize as laudable; no success of mine—if my
life, beyond its domestic scope, had ever been brightened by
success—would they deem otherwise than worthless, if not positively
disgraceful. “What is he?” murmurs one gray shadow of my forefathers
to the other. “A writer of story-books! What kind of a business in
life—what mode of glorifying God, or being serviceable to mankind in
his day and generation—may that be? Why, the degenerate fellow might
as well have been a fiddler!” Such are the compliments bandied between
my great-grandsires and myself, across the gulf of time! And yet, let
them scorn me as they will, strong traits of their nature have
intertwined themselves with mine.

Planted deep, in the town’s earliest infancy and childhood, by these
two earnest and energetic men, the race has ever since subsisted here;
always, too, in respectability; never, so far as I have known,
disgraced by a single unworthy member; but seldom or never, on the
other hand, after the first two generations, performing any memorable
deed, or so much as putting forward a claim to public notice.
Gradually, they have sunk almost out of sight; as old houses, here and
there about the streets, get covered half-way to the eaves by the
accumulation of new soil. From father to son, for above a hundred
years, they followed the sea; a gray-headed shipmaster, in each
generation, retiring from the quarter-deck to the homestead, while a
boy of fourteen took the hereditary place before the mast, confronting
the salt spray and the gale, which had blustered against his sire and
grandsire. The boy, also, in due time, passed from the forecastle to
the cabin, spent a tempestuous manhood, and returned from his
world-wanderings, to grow old, and die, and mingle his dust with the
natal earth. This long connection of a family with one spot, as its
place of birth and burial, creates a kindred between the human being
and the locality, quite independent of any charm in the scenery or
moral circumstances that surround him. It is not love, but instinct.
The new inhabitant—who came himself from a foreign land, or whose
father or grandfather came—has little claim to be called a Salemite;
he has no conception of the oyster-like tenacity with which an old
settler, over whom his third century is creeping, clings to the spot
where his successive generations have been imbedded. It is no matter
that the place is joyless for him; that he is weary of the old wooden
houses, the mud and dust, the dead level of site and sentiment, the
chill east wind, and the chillest of social atmospheres;—all these,
and whatever faults besides he may see or imagine, are nothing to the
purpose. The spell survives, and just as powerfully as if the natal
spot were an earthly paradise. So has it been in my case. I felt it
almost as a destiny to make Salem my home; so that the mould of
features and cast of character which had all along been familiar
here,—ever, as one representative of the race lay down in his grave,
another assuming, as it were, his sentry-march along the main
street,—might still in my little day be seen and recognized in the
old town. Nevertheless, this very sentiment is an evidence that the
connection, which has become an unhealthy one, should at last be
severed. Human nature will not flourish, any more than a potato, if it
be planted and replanted, for too long a series of generations, in the
same worn-out soil. My children have had other birthplaces, and, so
far as their fortunes may be within my control, shall strike their
roots into unaccustomed earth.

On emerging from the Old Manse, it was chiefly this strange, indolent,
unjoyous attachment for my native town, that brought me to fill a
place in Uncle Sam’s brick edifice, when I might as well, or better,
have gone somewhere else. My doom was on me. It was not the first
time, nor the second, that I had gone away,—as it seemed,
permanently,—but yet returned, like the bad half-penny; or as if
Salem were for me the inevitable centre of the universe. So, one fine
morning, I ascended the flight of granite steps, with the President’s
commission in my pocket, and was introduced to the corps of gentlemen
who were to aid me in my weighty responsibility, as chief executive
officer of the Custom-House.

I doubt greatly—or, rather, I do not doubt at all—whether any public
functionary of the United States, either in the civil or military
line, has ever had such a patriarchal body of veterans under his
orders as myself. The whereabouts of the Oldest Inhabitant was at once
settled, when I looked at them. For upwards of twenty years before
this epoch, the independent position of the Collector had kept the
Salem Custom-House out of the whirlpool of political vicissitude,
which makes the tenure of office generally so fragile. A soldier,—New
England’s most distinguished soldier,—he stood firmly on the pedestal
of his gallant services; and, himself secure in the wise liberality of
the successive administrations through which he had held office, he
had been the safety of his subordinates in many an hour of danger and
heart-quake. General Miller was radically conservative; a man over
whose kindly nature habit had no slight influence; attaching himself
strongly to familiar faces, and with difficulty moved to change, even
when change might have brought unquestionable improvement. Thus, on
taking charge of my department, I found few but aged men. They were
ancient sea-captains, for the most part, who, after being tost on
every sea, and standing up sturdily against life’s tempestuous blasts,
had finally drifted into this quiet nook; where, with little to
disturb them, except the periodical terrors of a Presidential
election, they one and all acquired a new lease of existence. Though
by no means less liable than their fellow-men to age and infirmity,
they had evidently some talisman or other that kept death at bay. Two
or three of their number, as I was assured, being gouty and rheumatic,
or perhaps bedridden, never dreamed of making their appearance at the
Custom-House, during a large part of the year; but, after a torpid
winter, would creep out into the warm sunshine of May or June, go
lazily about what they termed duty, and, at their own leisure and
convenience, betake themselves to bed again. I must plead guilty to
the charge of abbreviating the official breath of more than one of
these venerable servants of the republic. They were allowed, on my
representation, to rest from their arduous labors, and soon
afterwards—as if their sole principle of life had been zeal for their
country’s service, as I verily believe it was—withdrew to a better
world. It is a pious consolation to me, that, through my interference,
a sufficient space was allowed them for repentance of the evil and
corrupt practices into which, as a matter of course, every
Custom-House officer must be supposed to fall. Neither the front nor
the back entrance of the Custom-House opens on the road to Paradise.

The greater part of my officers were Whigs. It was well for their
venerable brotherhood that the new Surveyor was not a politician, and
though a faithful Democrat in principle, neither received nor held his
office with any reference to political services. Had it been
otherwise,—had an active politician been put into this influential
post, to assume the easy task of making head against a Whig Collector,
whose infirmities withheld him from the personal administration of his
office,—hardly a man of the old corps would have drawn the breath of
official life, within a month after the exterminating angel had come
up the Custom-House steps. According to the received code in such
matters, it would have been nothing short of duty, in a politician, to
bring every one of those white heads under the axe of the guillotine.
It was plain enough to discern, that the old fellows dreaded some such
discourtesy at my hands. It pained, and at the same time amused me, to
behold the terrors that attended my advent; to see a furrowed cheek,
weather-beaten by half a century of storm, turn ashy pale at the
glance of so harmless an individual as myself; to detect, as one or
another addressed me, the tremor of a voice, which, in long-past days,
had been wont to bellow through a speaking-trumpet, hoarsely enough to
frighten Boreas himself to silence. They knew, these excellent old
persons, that, by all established rule,—and, as regarded some of
them, weighed by their own lack of efficiency for business,—they
ought to have given place to younger men, more orthodox in politics,
and altogether fitter than themselves to serve our common Uncle. I
knew it too, but could never quite find in my heart to act upon the
knowledge. Much and deservedly to my own discredit, therefore, and
considerably to the detriment of my official conscience, they
continued, during my incumbency, to creep about the wharves, and
loiter up and down the Custom-House steps. They spent a good deal of
time, also, asleep in their accustomed corners, with their chairs
tilted back against the wall; awaking, however, once or twice in a
forenoon, to bore one another with the several thousandth repetition
of old sea-stories, and mouldy jokes, that had grown to be passwords
and countersigns among them.

The discovery was soon made, I imagine, that the new Surveyor had no
great harm in him. So, with lightsome hearts, and the happy
consciousness of being usefully employed,—in their own behalf, at
least, if not for our beloved country,—these good old gentlemen went
through the various formalities of office. Sagaciously, under their
spectacles, did they peep into the holds of vessels! Mighty was their
fuss about little matters, and marvellous, sometimes, the obtuseness
that allowed greater ones to slip between their fingers! Whenever such
a mischance occurred,—when a wagon-load of valuable merchandise had
been smuggled ashore, at noonday, perhaps, and directly beneath their
unsuspicious noses,—nothing could exceed the vigilance and alacrity
with which they proceeded to lock, and double-lock, and secure with
tape and sealing-wax, all the avenues of the delinquent vessel.
Instead of a reprimand for their previous negligence, the case seemed
rather to require an eulogium on their praiseworthy caution, after the
mischief had happened; a grateful recognition of the promptitude of
their zeal, the moment that there was no longer any remedy.

Unless people are more than commonly disagreeable, it is my foolish
habit to contract a kindness for them. The better part of my
companion’s character, if it have a better part, is that which usually
comes uppermost in my regard, and forms the type whereby I recognize
the man. As most of these old Custom-House officers had good traits,
and as my position in reference to them, being paternal and
protective, was favorable to the growth of friendly sentiments, I soon
grew to like them all. It was pleasant, in the summer forenoons,—when
the fervent heat, that almost liquefied the rest of the human family,
merely communicated a genial warmth to their half-torpid systems,—it
was pleasant to hear them chatting in the back entry, a row of them
all tipped against the wall, as usual; while the frozen witticisms of
past generations were thawed out, and came bubbling with laughter from
their lips. Externally, the jollity of aged men has much in common
with the mirth of children; the intellect, any more than a deep sense
of humor, has little to do with the matter; it is, with both, a gleam
that plays upon the surface, and imparts a sunny and cheery aspect
alike to the green branch, and gray, mouldering trunk. In one case,
however, it is real sunshine; in the other, it more resembles the
phosphorescent glow of decaying wood.

It would be sad injustice, the reader must understand, to represent
all my excellent old friends as in their dotage. In the first place,
my coadjutors were not invariably old; there were men among them in
their strength and prime, of marked ability and energy, and altogether
superior to the sluggish and dependent mode of life on which their
evil stars had cast them. Then, moreover, the white locks of age were
sometimes found to be the thatch of an intellectual tenement in good
repair. But, as respects the majority of my corps of veterans, there
will be no wrong done, if I characterize them generally as a set of
wearisome old souls, who had gathered nothing worth preservation from
their varied experience of life. They seemed to have flung away all
the golden grain of practical wisdom, which they had enjoyed so many
opportunities of harvesting, and most carefully to have stored their
memories with the husks. They spoke with far more interest and unction
of their morning’s breakfast, or yesterday’s, to-day’s, or to-morrow’s
dinner, than of the shipwreck of forty or fifty years ago, and all the
world’s wonders which they had witnessed with their youthful eyes.

The father of the Custom-House—the patriarch, not only of this little
squad of officials, but, I am bold to say, of the respectable body of
tide-waiters all over the United States—was a certain permanent
Inspector. He might truly be termed a legitimate son of the revenue
system, dyed in the wool, or, rather, born in the purple; since his
sire, a Revolutionary colonel, and formerly collector of the port, had
created an office for him, and appointed him to fill it, at a period
of the early ages which few living men can now remember. This
Inspector, when I first knew him, was a man of fourscore years, or
thereabouts, and certainly one of the most wonderful specimens of
winter-green that you would be likely to discover in a lifetime’s
search. With his florid cheek, his compact figure, smartly arrayed in
a bright-buttoned blue coat, his brisk and vigorous step, and his hale
and hearty aspect, altogether he seemed—not young, indeed—but a kind
of new contrivance of Mother Nature in the shape of man, whom age and
infirmity had no business to touch. His voice and laugh, which
perpetually re-echoed through the Custom-House, had nothing of the
tremulous quaver and cackle of an old man’s utterance; they came
strutting out of his lungs, like the crow of a cock, or the blast of a
clarion. Looking at him merely as an animal,—and there was very
little else to look at,—he was a most satisfactory object, from the
thorough healthfulness and wholesomeness of his system, and his
capacity, at that extreme age, to enjoy all, or nearly all, the
delights which he had ever aimed at, or conceived of. The careless
security of his life in the Custom-House, on a regular income, and
with but slight and infrequent apprehensions of removal, had no doubt
contributed to make time pass lightly over him. The original and more
potent causes, however, lay in the rare perfection of his animal
nature, the moderate proportion of intellect, and the very trifling
admixture of moral and spiritual ingredients; these latter qualities,
indeed, being in barely enough measure to keep the old gentleman from
walking on all-fours. He possessed no power of thought, no depth of
feeling, no troublesome sensibilities; nothing, in short, but a few
commonplace instincts, which, aided by the cheerful temper that grew
inevitably out of his physical well-being, did duty very respectably,
and to general acceptance, in lieu of a heart. He had been the husband
of three wives, all long since dead; the father of twenty children,
most of whom, at every age of childhood or maturity, had likewise
returned to dust. Here, one would suppose, might have been sorrow
enough to imbue the sunniest disposition, through and through, with a
sable tinge. Not so with our old Inspector! One brief sigh sufficed to
carry off the entire burden of these dismal reminiscences. The next
moment, he was as ready for sport as any unbreeched infant; far
readier than the Collector’s junior clerk, who, at nineteen years, was
much the elder and graver man of the two.

I used to watch and study this patriarchal personage with, I think,
livelier curiosity, than any other form of humanity there presented to
my notice. He was, in truth, a rare phenomenon; so perfect, in one
point of view; so shallow, so delusive, so impalpable, such an
absolute nonentity, in every other. My conclusion was that he had no
soul, no heart, no mind; nothing, as I have already said, but
instincts: and yet, withal, so cunningly had the few materials of his
character been put together, that there was no painful perception of
deficiency, but, on my part, an entire contentment with what I found
in him. It might be difficult—and it was so—to conceive how he
should exist hereafter, so earthly and sensuous did he seem; but
surely his existence here, admitting that it was to terminate with his
last breath, had been not unkindly given; with no higher moral
responsibilities than the beasts of the field, but with a larger scope
of enjoyment than theirs, and with all their blessed immunity from the
dreariness and duskiness of age.

One point, in which he had vastly the advantage over his four-footed
brethren, was his ability to recollect the good dinners which it had
made no small portion of the happiness of his life to eat. His
gourmandism was a highly agreeable trait; and to hear him talk of
roast-meat was as appetizing as a pickle or an oyster. As he
possessed no higher attribute, and neither sacrificed nor vitiated any
spiritual endowment by devoting all his energies and ingenuities to
subserve the delight and profit of his maw, it always pleased and
satisfied me to hear him expatiate on fish, poultry, and butcher’s
meat, and the most eligible methods of preparing them for the table.
His reminiscences of good cheer, however ancient the date of the
actual banquet, seemed to bring the savor of pig or turkey under one’s
very nostrils. There were flavors on his palate that had lingered
there not less than sixty or seventy years, and were still apparently
as fresh as that of the mutton-chop which he had just devoured for his
breakfast. I have heard him smack his lips over dinners, every guest
at which, except himself, had long been food for worms. It was
marvellous to observe how the ghosts of bygone meals were continually
rising up before him; not in anger or retribution, but as if grateful
for his former appreciation and seeking to resuscitate an endless
series of enjoyment, at once shadowy and sensual. A tender-loin of
beef, a hind-quarter of veal, a spare-rib of pork, a particular
chicken, or a remarkably praiseworthy turkey, which had perhaps
adorned his board in the days of the elder Adams, would be remembered;
while all the subsequent experience of our race, and all the events
that brightened or darkened his individual career, had gone over him
with as little permanent effect as the passing breeze. The chief
tragic event of the old man’s life, so far as I could judge, was his
mishap with a certain goose which lived and died some twenty or forty
years ago; a goose of most promising figure, but which, at table,
proved so inveterately tough that the carving-knife would make no
impression on its carcass, and it could only be divided with an axe
and handsaw.

But it is time to quit this sketch; on which, however, I should be
glad to dwell at considerably more length because, of all men whom I
have ever known, this individual was fittest to be a Custom-House
officer. Most persons, owing to causes which I may not have space to
hint at, suffer moral detriment from this peculiar mode of life. The
old Inspector was incapable of it, and, were he to continue in office
to the end of time, would be just as good as he was then, and sit down
to dinner with just as good an appetite.

There is one likeness, without which my gallery of Custom-House
portraits would be strangely incomplete; but which my comparatively
few opportunities for observation enable me to sketch only in the
merest outline. It is that of the Collector, our gallant old General,
who, after his brilliant military service, subsequently to which he
had ruled over a wild Western territory, had come hither, twenty years
before, to spend the decline of his varied and honorable life. The
brave soldier had already numbered, nearly or quite, his threescore
years and ten, and was pursuing the remainder of his earthly march,
burdened with infirmities which even the martial music of his own
spirit-stirring recollections could do little towards lightening. The
step was palsied now that had been foremost in the charge. It was only
with the assistance of a servant, and by leaning his hand heavily on
the iron balustrade, that he could slowly and painfully ascend the
Custom-House steps, and, with a toilsome progress across the floor,
attain his customary chair beside the fireplace. There he used to sit,
gazing with a somewhat dim serenity of aspect at the figures that came
and went; amid the rustle of papers, the administering of oaths, the
discussion of business, and the casual talk of the office; all which
sounds and circumstances seemed but indistinctly to impress his
senses, and hardly to make their way into his inner sphere of
contemplation. His countenance, in this repose, was mild and kindly.
If his notice was sought, an expression of courtesy and interest
gleamed out upon his features; proving that there was light within
him, and that it was only the outward medium of the intellectual lamp
that obstructed the rays in their passage. The closer you penetrated
to the substance of his mind, the sounder it appeared. When no longer
called upon to speak, or listen, either of which operations cost him
an evident effort, his face would briefly subside into its former not
uncheerful quietude. It was not painful to behold this look; for,
though dim, it had not the imbecility of decaying age. The framework
of his nature, originally strong and massive, was not yet crumbled
into ruin.

To observe and define his character, however, under such
disadvantages, was as difficult a task as to trace out and build up
anew, in imagination, an old fortress, like Ticonderoga, from a view
of its gray and broken ruins. Here and there, perchance, the walls may
remain almost complete, but elsewhere may be only a shapeless mound,
cumbrous with its very strength, and overgrown, through long years of
peace and neglect, with grass and alien weeds.

Nevertheless, looking at the old warrior with affection,—for, slight
as was the communication between us, my feeling towards him, like that
of all bipeds and quadrupeds who knew him, might not improperly be
termed so,—I could discern the main points of his portrait. It was
marked with the noble and heroic qualities which showed it to be not
by a mere accident, but of good right, that he had won a distinguished
name. His spirit could never, I conceive, have been characterized by
an uneasy activity; it must, at any period of his life, have required
an impulse to set him in motion; but, once stirred up, with obstacles
to overcome, and an adequate object to be attained, it was not in the
man to give out or fail. The heat that had formerly pervaded his
nature, and which was not yet extinct, was never of the kind that
flashes and flickers in a blaze; but, rather, a deep, red glow, as of
iron in a furnace. Weight, solidity, firmness; this was the expression
of his repose, even in such decay as had crept untimely over him, at
the period of which I speak. But I could imagine, even then, that, under
some excitement which should go deeply into his consciousness,—roused
by a trumpet-peal, loud enough to awaken all his energies that were
not dead, but only slumbering,—he was yet capable of flinging off his
infirmities like a sick man’s gown, dropping the staff of age to seize
a battle-sword, and starting up once more a warrior. And, in so
intense a moment, his demeanor would have still been calm. Such an
exhibition, however, was but to be pictured in fancy; not to be
anticipated, nor desired. What I saw in him—as evidently as the
indestructible ramparts of Old Ticonderoga already cited as the most
appropriate simile—were the features of stubborn and ponderous
endurance, which might well have amounted to obstinacy in his earlier
days; of integrity, that, like most of his other endowments, lay in a
somewhat heavy mass, and was just as unmalleable and unmanageable as a
ton of iron ore; and of benevolence, which, fiercely as he led the
bayonets on at Chippewa or Fort Erie, I take to be of quite as genuine
a stamp as what actuates any or all the polemical philanthropists of
the age. He had slain men with his own hand, for aught I
know,—certainly, they had fallen, like blades of grass at the sweep
of the scythe, before the charge to which his spirit imparted its
triumphant energy;—but, be that as it might, there was never in his
heart so much cruelty as would have brushed the down off a butterfly’s
wing. I have not known the man to whose innate kindliness I would more
confidently make an appeal.

Many characteristics—and those, too, which contribute not the least
forcibly to impart resemblance in a sketch—must have vanished, or
been obscured, before I met the General. All merely graceful
attributes are usually the most evanescent; nor does Nature adorn the
human ruin with blossoms of new beauty, that have their roots and
proper nutriment only in the chinks and crevices of decay, as she sows
wall-flowers over the ruined fortress of Ticonderoga. Still, even in
respect of grace and beauty, there were points well worth noting. A
ray of humor, now and then, would make its way through the veil of dim
obstruction, and glimmer pleasantly upon our faces. A trait of native
elegance, seldom seen in the masculine character after childhood or
early youth, was shown in the General’s fondness for the sight and
fragrance of flowers. An old soldier might be supposed to prize only
the bloody laurel on his brow; but here was one who seemed to have a
young girl’s appreciation of the floral tribe.

There, beside the fireplace, the brave old General used to sit; while
the Surveyor—though seldom, when it could be avoided, taking upon
himself the difficult task of engaging him in conversation—was fond
of standing at a distance, and watching his quiet and almost
slumberous countenance. He seemed away from us, although we saw him
but a few yards off; remote, though we passed close beside his chair;
unattainable, though we might have stretched forth our hands and
touched his own. It might be that he lived a more real life within
his thoughts, than amid the unappropriate environment of the
Collector’s office. The evolutions of the parade; the tumult of the
battle; the flourish of old, heroic music, heard thirty years
before;—such scenes and sounds, perhaps, were all alive before his
intellectual sense. Meanwhile, the merchants and shipmasters, the
spruce clerks and uncouth sailors, entered and departed; the bustle of
this commercial and custom-house life kept up its little murmur round
about him; and neither with the men nor their affairs did the General
appear to sustain the most distant relation. He was as much out of
place as an old sword—now rusty, but which had flashed once in the
battle’s front, and showed still a bright gleam along its blade—would
have been, among the inkstands, paper-folders, and mahogany rulers, on
the Deputy Collector’s desk.

There was one thing that much aided me in renewing and re-creating the
stalwart soldier of the Niagara frontier,—the man of true and simple
energy. It was the recollection of those memorable words of
his,—“I’ll try, Sir!”—spoken on the very verge of a desperate and
heroic enterprise, and breathing the soul and spirit of New England
hardihood, comprehending all perils, and encountering all. If, in our
country, valor were rewarded by heraldic honor, this phrase—which it
seems so easy to speak, but which only he, with such a task of danger
and glory before him, has ever spoken—would be the best and fittest
of all mottoes for the General’s shield of arms.

It contributes greatly towards a man’s moral and intellectual health,
to be brought into habits of companionship with individuals unlike
himself, who care little for his pursuits, and whose sphere and
abilities he must go out of himself to appreciate. The accidents of
my life have often afforded me this advantage, but never with more
fulness and variety than during my continuance in office. There was
one man, especially, the observation of whose character gave me a new
idea of talent. His gifts were emphatically those of a man of
business; prompt, acute, clear-minded; with an eye that saw through
all perplexities, and a faculty of arrangement that made them vanish,
as by the waving of an enchanter’s wand. Bred up from boyhood in the
Custom-House, it was his proper field of activity; and the many
intricacies of business, so harassing to the interloper, presented
themselves before him with the regularity of a perfectly comprehended
system. In my contemplation, he stood as the ideal of his class. He
was, indeed, the Custom-House in himself; or, at all events, the
main-spring that kept its variously revolving wheels in motion; for,
in an institution like this, where its officers are appointed to
subserve their own profit and convenience, and seldom with a leading
reference to their fitness for the duty to be performed, they must
perforce seek elsewhere the dexterity which is not in them. Thus, by
an inevitable necessity, as a magnet attracts steel-filings, so did
our man of business draw to himself the difficulties which everybody
met with. With an easy condescension, and kind forbearance towards our
stupidity,—which, to his order of mind, must have seemed little short
of crime,—would he forthwith, by the merest touch of his finger, make
the incomprehensible as clear as daylight. The merchants valued him
not less than we, his esoteric friends. His integrity was perfect: it
was a law of nature with him, rather than a choice or a principle; nor
can it be otherwise than the main condition of an intellect so
remarkably clear and accurate as his, to be honest and regular in the
administration of affairs. A stain on his conscience, as to anything
that came within the range of his vocation, would trouble such a man
very much in the same way, though to a far greater degree, that an
error in the balance of an account or an ink-blot on the fair page of
a book of record. Here, in a word,—and it is a rare instance in my
life,—I had met with a person thoroughly adapted to the situation
which he held.

Such were some of the people with whom I now found myself connected. I
took it in good part, at the hands of Providence, that I was thrown
into a position so little akin to my past habits, and set myself
seriously to gather from it whatever profit was to be had. After my
fellowship of toil and impracticable schemes with the dreamy brethren
of Brook Farm; after living for three years within the subtile
influence of an intellect like Emerson’s; after those wild, free days
on the Assabeth, indulging fantastic speculations, beside our fire of
fallen boughs, with Ellery Channing; after talking with Thoreau about
pine-trees and Indian relics, in his hermitage at Walden; after
growing fastidious by sympathy with the classic refinement of
Hillard’s culture; after becoming imbued with poetic sentiment at
Longfellow’s hearthstone;—it was time, at length, that I should
exercise other faculties of my nature, and nourish myself with food
for which I had hitherto had little appetite. Even the old Inspector
was desirable, as a change of diet, to a man who had known Alcott. I
look upon it as an evidence, in some measure, of a system naturally
well balanced, and lacking no essential part of a thorough
organization, that, with such associates to remember, I could mingle
at once with men of altogether different qualities, and never murmur
at the change.

Literature, its exertions and objects, were now of little moment in
my regard. I cared not, at this period, for books; they were apart
from me. Nature,—except it were human nature,—the nature that is
developed in earth and sky, was, in one sense, hidden from me; and all
the imaginative delight, wherewith it had been spiritualized, passed
away out of my mind. A gift, a faculty if it had not departed, was
suspended and inanimate within me. There would have been something
sad, unutterably dreary, in all this, had I not been conscious that it
lay at my own option to recall whatever was valuable in the past. It
might be true, indeed, that this was a life which could not with
impunity be lived too long; else, it might have made me permanently
other than I had been without transforming me into any shape which it
would be worth my while to take. But I never considered it as other
than a transitory life. There was always a prophetic instinct, a low
whisper in my ear, that, within no long period, and whenever a new
change of custom should be essential to my good, a change would come.

Meanwhile, there I was, a Surveyor of the Revenue, and, so far as I
have been able to understand, as good a Surveyor as need be. A man of
thought, fancy, and sensibility (had he ten times the Surveyor’s
proportion of those qualities) may, at any time, be a man of affairs,
if he will only choose to give himself the trouble. My fellow-officers,
and the merchants and sea-captains with whom my official duties
brought me into any manner of connection, viewed me in no other light,
and probably knew me in no other character. None of them, I presume,
had ever read a page of my inditing, or would have cared a fig the
more for me, if they had read them all; nor would it have mended the
matter, in the least, had those same unprofitable pages been written
with a pen like that of Burns or of Chaucer, each of whom was a
custom-house officer in his day, as well as I. It is a good
lesson—though it may often be a hard one—for a man who has dreamed of
literary fame, and of making for himself a rank among the world’s
dignitaries by such means, to step aside out of the narrow circle in
which his claims are recognized, and to find how utterly devoid of
significance, beyond that circle, is all that he achieves, and all he
aims at. I know not that I especially needed the lesson, either in the
way of warning or rebuke; but, at any rate, I learned it thoroughly:
nor, it gives me pleasure to reflect, did the truth, as it came home
to my perception, ever cost me a pang, or require to be thrown off in
a sigh. In the way of literary talk, it is true, the Naval Officer—an
excellent fellow, who came into office with me and went out only a
little later—would often engage me in a discussion about one or the
other of his favorite topics, Napoleon or Shakespeare. The Collector’s
junior clerk, too—a young gentleman who, it was whispered,
occasionally covered a sheet of Uncle Sam’s letter-paper with what (at
the distance of a few yards) looked very much like poetry—used now and
then to speak to me of books, as matters with which I might possibly
be conversant. This was my all of lettered intercourse; and it was
quite sufficient for my necessities.

No longer seeking nor caring that my name should be blazoned abroad on
title-pages, I smiled to think that it had now another kind of vogue.
The Custom-House marker imprinted it, with a stencil and black paint,
on pepper-bags, and baskets of anatto, and cigar-boxes, and bales of
all kinds of dutiable merchandise, in testimony that these commodities
had paid the impost, and gone regularly through the office. Borne on
such queer vehicle of fame, a knowledge of my existence, so far as a
name conveys it, was carried where it had never been before, and, I
hope, will never go again.

But the past was not dead. Once in a great while the thoughts that had
seemed so vital and so active, yet had been put to rest so quietly,
revived again. One of the most remarkable occasions, when the habit of
bygone days awoke in me, was that which brings it within the law of
literary propriety to offer the public the sketch which I am now
writing.

In the second story of the Custom-House there is a large room, in
which the brick-work and naked rafters have never been covered with
panelling and plaster. The edifice—originally projected on a scale
adapted to the old commercial enterprise of the port, and with an idea
of subsequent prosperity destined never to be realized—contains far
more space than its occupants know what to do with. This airy hall,
therefore, over the Collector’s apartments, remains unfinished to this
day, and, in spite of the aged cobwebs that festoon its dusky beams,
appears still to await the labor of the carpenter and mason. At one
end of the room, in a recess, were a number of barrels, piled one upon
another, containing bundles of official documents. Large quantities of
similar rubbish lay lumbering the floor. It was sorrowful to think how
many days and weeks and months and years of toil had been wasted on
these musty papers, which were now only an encumbrance on earth, and
were hidden away in this forgotten corner, never more to be glanced at
by human eyes. But, then, what reams of other manuscripts—filled not
with the dulness of official formalities, but with the thought of
inventive brains and the rich effusion of deep hearts—had gone
equally to oblivion; and that, moreover, without serving a purpose in
their day, as these heaped-up papers had, and—saddest of
all—without purchasing for their writers the comfortable livelihood
which the clerks of the Custom-House had gained by these worthless
scratchings of the pen! Yet not altogether worthless, perhaps, as
materials of local history. Here, no doubt, statistics of the former
commerce of Salem might be discovered, and memorials of her princely
merchants,—old King Derby, old Billy Gray, old Simon Forrester, and
many another magnate in his day; whose powdered head, however, was
scarcely in the tomb, before his mountain pile of wealth began to
dwindle. The founders of the greater part of the families which now
compose the aristocracy of Salem might here be traced, from the petty
and obscure beginnings of their traffic, at periods generally much
posterior to the Revolution, upward to what their children look upon
as long-established rank.

Prior to the Revolution there is a dearth of records; the earlier
documents and archives of the Custom-House having, probably, been
carried off to Halifax, when all the King’s officials accompanied the
British army in its flight from Boston. It has often been a matter of
regret with me; for, going back, perhaps, to the days of the
Protectorate, those papers must have contained many references to
forgotten or remembered men, and to antique customs, which would have
affected me with the same pleasure as when I used to pick up Indian
arrow-heads in the field near the Old Manse.

But, one idle and rainy day, it was my fortune to make a discovery of
some little interest. Poking and burrowing into the heaped-up rubbish
in the corner; unfolding one and another document, and reading the
names of vessels that had long ago foundered at sea or rotted at the
wharves, and those of merchants, never heard of now on ’Change, nor
very readily decipherable on their mossy tombstones; glancing at such
matters with the saddened, weary, half-reluctant interest which we
bestow on the corpse of dead activity,—and exerting my fancy,
sluggish with little use, to raise up from these dry bones an image of
the old town’s brighter aspect, when India was a new region, and only
Salem knew the way thither,—I chanced to lay my hand on a small
package, carefully done up in a piece of ancient yellow parchment.
This envelope had the air of an official record of some period long
past, when clerks engrossed their stiff and formal chirography on more
substantial materials than at present. There was something about it
that quickened an instinctive curiosity, and made me undo the faded
red tape, that tied up the package, with the sense that a treasure
would here be brought to light. Unbending the rigid folds of the
parchment cover, I found it to be a commission, under the hand and
seal of Governor Shirley, in favor of one Jonathan Pue, as Surveyor of
his Majesty’s Customs for the port of Salem, in the Province of
Massachusetts Bay. I remember to have read (probably in Felt’s Annals)
a notice of the decease of Mr. Surveyor Pue, about fourscore years
ago; and likewise, in a newspaper of recent times, an account of the
digging up of his remains in the little graveyard of St. Peter’s
Church, during the renewal of that edifice. Nothing, if I rightly call
to mind, was left of my respected predecessor, save an imperfect
skeleton, and some fragments of apparel, and a wig of majestic
frizzle; which, unlike the head that it once adorned, was in very
satisfactory preservation. But, on examining the papers which the
parchment commission served to envelop, I found more traces of Mr.
Pue’s mental part, and the internal operations of his head, than the
frizzled wig had contained of the venerable skull itself.

They were documents, in short, not official, but of a private nature,
or at least written in his private capacity, and apparently with his
own hand. I could account for their being included in the heap of
Custom-House lumber only by the fact that Mr. Pue’s death had happened
suddenly; and that these papers, which he probably kept in his
official desk, had never come to the knowledge of his heirs, or were
supposed to relate to the business of the revenue. On the transfer of
the archives to Halifax, this package, proving to be of no public
concern, was left behind, and had remained ever since unopened.

The ancient Surveyor—being little molested, I suppose, at that early
day, with business pertaining to his office—seems to have devoted
some of his many leisure hours to researches as a local antiquarian,
and other inquisitions of a similar nature. These supplied material
for petty activity to a mind that would otherwise have been eaten up
with rust. A portion of his facts, by the by, did me good service in
the preparation of the article entitled “MAIN STREET,” included in the
present volume. The remainder may perhaps be applied to purposes
equally valuable, hereafter; or not impossibly may be worked up, so
far as they go, into a regular history of Salem, should my veneration
for the natal soil ever impel me to so pious a task. Meanwhile, they
shall be at the command of any gentleman, inclined, and competent, to
take the unprofitable labor off my hands. As a final disposition, I
contemplate depositing them with the Essex Historical Society.

But the object that most drew my attention, in the mysterious package,
was a certain affair of fine red cloth, much worn and faded. There
were traces about it of gold embroidery, which, however, was greatly
frayed and defaced; so that none, or very little, of the glitter was
left. It had been wrought, as was easy to perceive, with wonderful
skill of needlework; and the stitch (as I am assured by ladies
conversant with such mysteries) gives evidence of a now forgotten art,
not to be recovered even by the process of picking out the threads.
This rag of scarlet cloth,—for time and wear and a sacrilegious moth
had reduced it to little other than a rag,—on careful examination,
assumed the shape of a letter. It was the capital letter A. By an
accurate measurement, each limb proved to be precisely three inches
and a quarter in length. It had been intended, there could be no
doubt, as an ornamental article of dress; but how it was to be worn,
or what rank, honor, and dignity, in by-past times, were signified by
it, was a riddle which (so evanescent are the fashions of the world in
these particulars) I saw little hope of solving. And yet it strangely
interested me. My eyes fastened themselves upon the old scarlet
letter, and would not be turned aside. Certainly, there was some deep
meaning in it, most worthy of interpretation, and which, as it were,
streamed forth from the mystic symbol, subtly communicating itself to
my sensibilities, but evading the analysis of my mind.

While thus perplexed,—and cogitating, among other hypotheses, whether
the letter might not have been one of those decorations which the
white men used to contrive, in order to take the eyes of Indians,—I
happened to place it on my breast. It seemed to me,—the reader may
smile, but must not doubt my word,—it seemed to me, then, that I
experienced a sensation not altogether physical, yet almost so, of
burning heat; and as if the letter were not of red cloth, but red-hot
iron. I shuddered, and involuntarily let it fall upon the floor.

In the absorbing contemplation of the scarlet letter, I had hitherto
neglected to examine a small roll of dingy paper, around which it had
been twisted. This I now opened, and had the satisfaction to find,
recorded by the old Surveyor’s pen, a reasonably complete explanation
of the whole affair. There were several foolscap sheets containing
many particulars respecting the life and conversation of one Hester
Prynne, who appeared to have been rather a noteworthy personage in the
view of our ancestors. She had flourished during the period between
the early days of Massachusetts and the close of the seventeenth
century. Aged persons, alive in the time of Mr. Surveyor Pue, and from
whose oral testimony he had made up his narrative, remembered her, in
their youth, as a very old, but not decrepit woman, of a stately and
solemn aspect. It had been her habit, from an almost immemorial date,
to go about the country as a kind of voluntary nurse, and doing
whatever miscellaneous good she might; taking upon herself, likewise,
to give advice in all matters, especially those of the heart; by which
means, as a person of such propensities inevitably must, she gained
from many people the reverence due to an angel, but, I should imagine,
was looked upon by others as an intruder and a nuisance. Prying
further into the manuscript, I found the record of other doings and
sufferings of this singular woman, for most of which the reader is
referred to the story entitled “THE SCARLET LETTER”; and it should be
borne carefully in mind, that the main facts of that story are
authorized and authenticated by the document of Mr. Surveyor Pue. The
original papers, together with the scarlet letter itself,—a most
curious relic,—are still in my possession, and shall be freely
exhibited to whomsoever, induced by the great interest of the
narrative, may desire a sight of them. I must not be understood as
affirming, that, in the dressing up of the tale, and imagining the
motives and modes of passion that influenced the characters who figure
in it, I have invariably confined myself within the limits of the old
Surveyor’s half a dozen sheets of foolscap. On the contrary, I have
allowed myself, as to such points, nearly or altogether as much
license as if the facts had been entirely of my own invention. What I
contend for is the authenticity of the outline.

This incident recalled my mind, in some degree, to its old track.
There seemed to be here the groundwork of a tale. It impressed me as
if the ancient Surveyor, in his garb of a hundred years gone by, and
wearing his immortal wig,—which was buried with him, but did not
perish in the grave,—had met me in the deserted chamber of the
Custom-House. In his port was the dignity of one who had borne his
Majesty’s commission, and who was therefore illuminated by a ray of
the splendor that shone so dazzlingly about the throne. How unlike,
alas! the hang-dog look of a republican official, who, as the servant
of the people, feels himself less than the least, and below the
lowest, of his masters. With his own ghostly hand, the obscurely seen
but majestic figure had imparted to me the scarlet symbol, and the
little roll of explanatory manuscript. With his own ghostly voice, he
had exhorted me, on the sacred consideration of my filial duty and
reverence towards him,—who might reasonably regard himself as my
official ancestor,—to bring his mouldy and moth-eaten lucubrations
before the public. “Do this,” said the ghost of Mr. Surveyor Pue,
emphatically nodding the head that looked so imposing within its
memorable wig,—“do this, and the profit shall be all your own! You
will shortly need it; for it is not in your days as it was in mine,
when a man’s office was a life-lease, and oftentimes an heirloom.
But, I charge you, in this matter of old Mistress Prynne, give to your
predecessor’s memory the credit which will be rightfully due!” And I
said to the ghost of Mr. Surveyor Pue, “I will!”

On Hester Prynne’s story, therefore, I bestowed much thought. It was
the subject of my meditations for many an hour, while pacing to and
fro across my room, or traversing, with a hundred-fold repetition, the
long extent from the front-door of the Custom-House to the
side-entrance, and back again. Great were the weariness and annoyance
of the old Inspector and the Weighers and Gaugers, whose slumbers were
disturbed by the unmercifully lengthened tramp of my passing and
returning footsteps. Remembering their own former habits, they used to
say that the Surveyor was walking the quarter-deck. They probably
fancied that my sole object—and, indeed, the sole object for which a
sane man could ever put himself into voluntary motion—was, to get an
appetite for dinner. And to say the truth, an appetite, sharpened by
the east wind that generally blew along the passage, was the only
valuable result of so much indefatigable exercise. So little adapted
is the atmosphere of a custom-house to the delicate harvest of fancy
and sensibility, that, had I remained there through ten Presidencies
yet to come, I doubt whether the tale of “The Scarlet Letter” would
ever have been brought before the public eye. My imagination was a
tarnished mirror. It would not reflect, or only with miserable
dimness, the figures with which I did my best to people it. The
characters of the narrative would not be warmed and rendered malleable
by any heat that I could kindle at my intellectual forge. They would
take neither the glow of passion nor the tenderness of sentiment, but
retained all the rigidity of dead corpses, and stared me in the face
with a fixed and ghastly grin of contemptuous defiance. “What have you
to do with us?” that expression seemed to say. “The little power you
might once have possessed over the tribe of unrealities is gone! You
have bartered it for a pittance of the public gold. Go, then, and earn
your wages!” In short, the almost torpid creatures of my own fancy
twitted me with imbecility, and not without fair occasion.

It was not merely during the three hours and a half which Uncle Sam
claimed as his share of my daily life, that this wretched numbness
held possession of me. It went with me on my sea-shore walks, and
rambles into the country, whenever—which was seldom and
reluctantly—I bestirred myself to seek that invigorating charm of
Nature, which used to give me such freshness and activity of thought
the moment that I stepped across the threshold of the Old Manse. The
same torpor, as regarded the capacity for intellectual effort,
accompanied me home, and weighed upon me in the chamber which I most
absurdly termed my study. Nor did it quit me, when, late at night, I
sat in the deserted parlor, lighted only by the glimmering coal-fire
and the moon, striving to picture forth imaginary scenes, which, the
next day, might flow out on the brightening page in many-hued
description.

If the imaginative faculty refused to act at such an hour, it might
well be deemed a hopeless case. Moonlight, in a familiar room, falling
so white upon the carpet, and showing all its figures so
distinctly,—making every object so minutely visible, yet so unlike a
morning or noontide visibility,—is a medium the most suitable for a
romance-writer to get acquainted with his illusive guests. There is
the little domestic scenery of the well-known apartment; the chairs,
with each its separate individuality; the centre-table, sustaining a
work-basket, a volume or two, and an extinguished lamp; the sofa; the
bookcase; the picture on the wall;—all these details, so completely
seen, are so spiritualized by the unusual light, that they seem to
lose their actual substance, and become things of intellect. Nothing
is too small or too trifling to undergo this change, and acquire
dignity thereby. A child’s shoe; the doll, seated in her little wicker
carriage; the hobby-horse;—whatever, in a word, has been used or
played with, during the day, is now invested with a quality of
strangeness and remoteness, though still almost as vividly present as
by daylight. Thus, therefore, the floor of our familiar room has
become a neutral territory, somewhere between the real world and
fairy-land, where the Actual and the Imaginary may meet, and each
imbue itself with the nature of the other. Ghosts might enter here,
without affrighting us. It would be too much in keeping with the scene
to excite surprise, were we to look about us and discover a form
beloved, but gone hence, now sitting quietly in a streak of this magic
moonshine, with an aspect that would make us doubt whether it had
returned from afar, or had never once stirred from our fireside.

The somewhat dim coal-fire has an essential influence in producing the
effect which I would describe. It throws its unobtrusive tinge
throughout the room, with a faint ruddiness upon the walls and
ceiling, and a reflected gleam from the polish of the furniture. This
warmer light mingles itself with the cold spirituality of the
moonbeams, and communicates, as it were, a heart and sensibilities of
human tenderness to the forms which fancy summons up. It converts them
from snow-images into men and women. Glancing at the looking-glass, we
behold—deep within its haunted verge—the smouldering glow of the
half-extinguished anthracite, the white moonbeams on the floor, and a
repetition of all the gleam and shadow of the picture, with one remove
further from the actual, and nearer to the imaginative. Then, at such
an hour, and with this scene before him, if a man, sitting all alone,
cannot dream strange things, and make them look like truth, he need
never try to write romances.

But, for myself, during the whole of my Custom-House experience,
moonlight and sunshine, and the glow of firelight, were just alike in
my regard; and neither of them was of one whit more avail than the
twinkle of a tallow-candle. An entire class of susceptibilities, and a
gift connected with them,—of no great richness or value, but the best
I had,—was gone from me.

It is my belief, however, that, had I attempted a different order of
composition, my faculties would not have been found so pointless and
inefficacious. I might, for instance, have contented myself with
writing out the narratives of a veteran shipmaster, one of the
Inspectors, whom I should be most ungrateful not to mention, since
scarcely a day passed that he did not stir me to laughter and
admiration by his marvellous gifts as a story-teller. Could I have
preserved the picturesque force of his style, and the humorous
coloring which nature taught him how to throw over his descriptions,
the result, I honestly believe, would have been something new in
literature. Or I might readily have found a more serious task. It was
a folly, with the materiality of this daily life pressing so
intrusively upon me, to attempt to fling myself back into another age;
or to insist on creating the semblance of a world out of airy matter,
when, at every moment, the impalpable beauty of my soap-bubble was
broken by the rude contact of some actual circumstance. The wiser
effort would have been, to diffuse thought and imagination through
the opaque substance of to-day, and thus to make it a bright
transparency; to spiritualize the burden that began to weigh so
heavily; to seek, resolutely, the true and indestructible value that
lay hidden in the petty and wearisome incidents, and ordinary
characters, with which I was now conversant. The fault was mine. The
page of life that was spread out before me seemed dull and
commonplace, only because I had not fathomed its deeper import. A
better book than I shall ever write was there; leaf after leaf
presenting itself to me, just as it was written out by the reality of
the flitting hour, and vanishing as fast as written, only because my
brain wanted the insight and my hand the cunning to transcribe it. At
some future day, it may be, I shall remember a few scattered fragments
and broken paragraphs, and write them down, and find the letters turn
to gold upon the page.

These perceptions have come too late. At the instant, I was only
conscious that what would have been a pleasure once was now a hopeless
toil. There was no occasion to make much moan about this state of
affairs. I had ceased to be a writer of tolerably poor tales and
essays, and had become a tolerably good Surveyor of the Customs. That
was all. But, nevertheless, it is anything but agreeable to be haunted
by a suspicion that one’s intellect is dwindling away; or exhaling,
without your consciousness, like ether out of a phial; so that, at
every glance, you find a smaller and less volatile residuum. Of the
fact there could be no doubt; and, examining myself and others, I was
led to conclusions, in reference to the effect of public office on the
character, not very favorable to the mode of life in question. In some
other form, perhaps, I may hereafter develop these effects. Suffice it
here to say, that a Custom-House officer, of long continuance, can
hardly be a very praiseworthy or respectable personage, for many
reasons; one of them, the tenure by which he holds his situation, and
another, the very nature of his business, which—though, I trust, an
honest one—is of such a sort that he does not share in the united
effort of mankind.

An effect—which I believe to be observable, more or less, in every
individual who has occupied the position—is, that, while he leans on
the mighty arm of the Republic, his own proper strength departs from
him. He loses, in an extent proportioned to the weakness or force of
his original nature, the capability of self-support. If he possess an
unusual share of native energy, or the enervating magic of place do
not operate too long upon him, his forfeited powers may be redeemable.
The ejected officer—fortunate in the unkindly shove that sends him
forth betimes, to struggle amid a struggling world—may return to
himself, and become all that he has ever been. But this seldom
happens. He usually keeps his ground just long enough for his own
ruin, and is then thrust out, with sinews all unstrung, to totter
along the difficult footpath of life as he best may. Conscious of his
own infirmity,—that his tempered steel and elasticity are lost,—he
forever afterwards looks wistfully about him in quest of support
external to himself. His pervading and continual hope—a hallucination
which, in the face of all discouragement, and making light of
impossibilities, haunts him while he lives, and, I fancy, like the
convulsive throes of the cholera, torments him for a brief space after
death—is, that finally, and in no long time, by some happy
coincidence of circumstances, he shall be restored to office. This
faith, more than anything else, steals the pith and availability out
of whatever enterprise he may dream of undertaking. Why should he toil
and moil, and be at so much trouble to pick himself up out of the
mud, when, in a little while hence, the strong arm of his Uncle will
raise and support him? Why should he work for his living here, or go
to dig gold in California, when he is so soon to be made happy, at
monthly intervals, with a little pile of glittering coin out of his
Uncle’s pocket? It is sadly curious to observe how slight a taste of
office suffices to infect a poor fellow with this singular disease.
Uncle Sam’s gold—meaning no disrespect to the worthy old
gentleman—has, in this respect, a quality of enchantment like that of
the Devil’s wages. Whoever touches it should look well to himself, or
he may find the bargain to go hard against him, involving, if not his
soul, yet many of its better attributes; its sturdy force, its courage
and constancy, its truth, its self-reliance, and all that gives the
emphasis to manly character.

Here was a fine prospect in the distance! Not that the Surveyor
brought the lesson home to himself, or admitted that he could be so
utterly undone, either by continuance in office, or ejectment. Yet my
reflections were not the most comfortable. I began to grow melancholy
and restless; continually prying into my mind, to discover which of
its poor properties were gone, and what degree of detriment had
already accrued to the remainder. I endeavored to calculate how much
longer I could stay in the Custom-House, and yet go forth a man. To
confess the truth, it was my greatest apprehension,—as it would never
be a measure of policy to turn out so quiet an individual as myself,
and it being hardly in the nature of a public officer to resign,—it
was my chief trouble, therefore, that I was likely to grow gray and
decrepit in the Surveyorship, and become much such another animal as
the old Inspector. Might it not, in the tedious lapse of official
life that lay before me, finally be with me as it was with this
venerable friend,—to make the dinner-hour the nucleus of the day, and
to spend the rest of it, as an old dog spends it, asleep in the
sunshine or in the shade? A dreary look-forward this, for a man who
felt it to be the best definition of happiness to live throughout the
whole range of his faculties and sensibilities! But, all this while, I
was giving myself very unnecessary alarm. Providence had meditated
better things for me than I could possibly imagine for myself.

A remarkable event of the third year of my Surveyorship—to adopt the
tone of “P. P.”—was the election of General Taylor to the Presidency.
It is essential, in order to form a complete estimate of the advantages of
official life, to view the incumbent at the incoming of a hostile
administration. His position is then one of the most singularly
irksome, and, in every contingency, disagreeable, that a wretched
mortal can possibly occupy; with seldom an alternative of good, on
either hand, although what presents itself to him as the worst event
may very probably be the best. But it is a strange experience, to a
man of pride and sensibility, to know that his interests are within
the control of individuals who neither love nor understand him, and by
whom, since one or the other must needs happen, he would rather be
injured than obliged. Strange, too, for one who has kept his calmness
throughout the contest, to observe the blood-thirstiness that is
developed in the hour of triumph, and to be conscious that he is
himself among its objects! There are few uglier traits of human nature
than this tendency—which I now witnessed in men no worse than their
neighbors—to grow cruel, merely because they possessed the power of
inflicting harm. If the guillotine, as applied to office-holders,
were a literal fact instead of one of the most apt of metaphors, it is
my sincere belief that the active members of the victorious party were
sufficiently excited to have chopped off all our heads, and have
thanked Heaven for the opportunity! It appears to me—who have been a
calm and curious observer, as well in victory as defeat—that this
fierce and bitter spirit of malice and revenge has never distinguished
the many triumphs of my own party as it now did that of the Whigs. The
Democrats take the offices, as a general rule, because they need them,
and because the practice of many years has made it the law of
political warfare, which, unless a different system be proclaimed, it
were weakness and cowardice to murmur at. But the long habit of
victory has made them generous. They know how to spare, when they see
occasion; and when they strike, the axe may be sharp, indeed, but its
edge is seldom poisoned with ill-will; nor is it their custom
ignominiously to kick the head which they have just struck off.

In short, unpleasant as was my predicament, at best, I saw much reason
to congratulate myself that I was on the losing side, rather than the
triumphant one. If, heretofore, I had been none of the warmest of
partisans, I began now, at this season of peril and adversity, to be
pretty acutely sensible with which party my predilections lay; nor was
it without something like regret and shame, that, according to a
reasonable calculation of chances, I saw my own prospect of retaining
office to be better than those of my Democratic brethren. But who can
see an inch into futurity, beyond his nose? My own head was the first
that fell!

The moment when a man’s head drops off is seldom or never, I am
inclined to think, precisely the most agreeable of his life.
Nevertheless, like the greater part of our misfortunes, even so
serious a contingency brings its remedy and consolation with it, if
the sufferer will but make the best, rather than the worst, of the
accident which has befallen him. In my particular case, the
consolatory topics were close at hand, and, indeed, had suggested
themselves to my meditations a considerable time before it was
requisite to use them. In view of my previous weariness of office, and
vague thoughts of resignation, my fortune somewhat resembled that of a
person who should entertain an idea of committing suicide, and,
although beyond his hopes, meet with the good hap to be murdered. In
the Custom-House, as before in the Old Manse, I had spent three years;
a term long enough to rest a weary brain; long enough to break off old
intellectual habits, and make room for new ones; long enough, and too
long, to have lived in an unnatural state, doing what was really of no
advantage nor delight to any human being, and withholding myself from
toil that would, at least, have stilled an unquiet impulse in me.
Then, moreover, as regarded his unceremonious ejectment, the late
Surveyor was not altogether ill-pleased to be recognized by the Whigs
as an enemy; since his inactivity in political affairs—his tendency
to roam, at will, in that broad and quiet field where all mankind may
meet, rather than confine himself to those narrow paths where brethren
of the same household must diverge from one another—had sometimes
made it questionable with his brother Democrats whether he was a
friend. Now, after he had won the crown of martyrdom (though with no
longer a head to wear it on), the point might be looked upon as
settled. Finally, little heroic as he was, it seemed more decorous to
be overthrown in the downfall of the party with which he had been
content to stand, than to remain a forlorn survivor, when so many
worthier men were falling; and, at last, after subsisting for four
years on the mercy of a hostile administration, to be compelled then
to define his position anew, and claim the yet more humiliating mercy
of a friendly one.

Meanwhile the press had taken up my affair, and kept me, for a week or
two, careering through the public prints, in my decapitated state,
like Irving’s Headless Horseman; ghastly and grim, and longing to be
buried, as a politically dead man ought. So much for my figurative
self. The real human being, all this time, with his head safely on his
shoulders, had brought himself to the comfortable conclusion that
everything was for the best; and, making an investment in ink, paper,
and steel-pens, had opened his long-disused writing-desk, and was
again a literary man.

Now it was that the lucubrations of my ancient predecessor, Mr.
Surveyor Pue, came into play. Rusty through long idleness, some little
space was requisite before my intellectual machinery could be brought
to work upon the tale, with an effect in any degree satisfactory. Even
yet, though my thoughts were ultimately much absorbed in the task, it
wears, to my eye, a stern and sombre aspect; too much ungladdened by
genial sunshine; too little relieved by the tender and familiar
influences which soften almost every scene of nature and real life,
and, undoubtedly, should soften every picture of them. This
uncaptivating effect is perhaps due to the period of hardly
accomplished revolution, and still seething turmoil, in which the
story shaped itself. It is no indication, however, of a lack of
cheerfulness in the writer’s mind; for he was happier, while straying
through the gloom of these sunless fantasies, than at any time since
he had quitted the Old Manse. Some of the briefer articles, which
contribute to make up the volume, have likewise been written since my
involuntary withdrawal from the toils and honors of public life, and
the remainder are gleaned from annuals and magazines of such antique
date that they have gone round the circle, and come back to novelty
again.[1] Keeping up the metaphor of the political guillotine, the
whole may be considered as the POSTHUMOUS PAPERS OF A DECAPITATED
SURVEYOR; and the sketch which I am now bringing to a close, if too
autobiographical for a modest person to publish in his lifetime, will
readily be excused in a gentleman who writes from beyond the grave.
Peace be with all the world! My blessing on my friends! My forgiveness
to my enemies! For I am in the realm of quiet!

    [Footnote 1: At the time of writing this article the author
    intended to publish, along with “The Scarlet Letter,” several
    shorter tales and sketches. These it has been thought
    advisable to defer.]

The life of the Custom-House lies like a dream behind me. The old
Inspector,—who, by the by, I regret to say, was overthrown and killed
by a horse, some time ago; else he would certainly have lived
forever,—he, and all those other venerable personages who sat with
him at the receipt of custom, are but shadows in my view; white-headed
and wrinkled images, which my fancy used to sport with, and has now
flung aside forever. The merchants,—Pingree, Phillips, Shepard,
Upton, Kimball, Bertram, Hunt,—these, and many other names, which had
such a classic familiarity for my ear six months ago,—these men of
traffic, who seemed to occupy so important a position in the
world,—how little time has it required to disconnect me from them
all, not merely in act, but recollection! It is with an effort that I
recall the figures and appellations of these few. Soon, likewise, my
old native town will loom upon me through the haze of memory, a mist
brooding over and around it; as if it were no portion of the real
earth, but an overgrown village in cloud-land, with only imaginary
inhabitants to people its wooden houses, and walk its homely lanes,
and the unpicturesque prolixity of its main street. Henceforth it
ceases to be a reality of my life. I am a citizen of somewhere else.
My good towns-people will not much regret me; for—though it has been
as dear an object as any, in my literary efforts, to be of some
importance in their eyes, and to win myself a pleasant memory in this
abode and burial-place of so many of my forefathers—_there_ has never
been, for me, the genial atmosphere which a literary man requires, in
order to ripen the best harvest of his mind. I shall do better amongst
other faces; and these familiar ones, it need hardly be said, will do
just as well without me.

It may be, however,—O, transporting and triumphant thought!—that the
great-grandchildren of the present race may sometimes think kindly of
the scribbler of bygone days, when the antiquary of days to come,
among the sites memorable in the town’s history, shall point out the
locality of THE TOWN PUMP!

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Prison Door]




[Illustration: Vignette,—Wild Rose]

                          THE SCARLET LETTER.




                                  I.

                           THE PRISON-DOOR.


[Illustration]

A throng of bearded men, in sad-colored garments, and gray,
steeple-crowned hats, intermixed with women, some wearing hoods and
others bareheaded, was assembled in front of a wooden edifice, the
door of which was heavily timbered with oak, and studded with iron
spikes.

The founders of a new colony, whatever Utopia of human virtue and
happiness they might originally project, have invariably recognized it
among their earliest practical necessities to allot a portion of the
virgin soil as a cemetery, and another portion as the site of a
prison. In accordance with this rule, it may safely be assumed that
the forefathers of Boston had built the first prison-house somewhere
in the vicinity of Cornhill, almost as seasonably as they marked out
the first burial-ground, on Isaac Johnson’s lot, and round about his
grave, which subsequently became the nucleus of all the congregated
sepulchres in the old churchyard of King’s Chapel. Certain it is,
that, some fifteen or twenty years after the settlement of the town,
the wooden jail was already marked with weather-stains and other
indications of age, which gave a yet darker aspect to its
beetle-browed and gloomy front. The rust on the ponderous iron-work of
its oaken door looked more antique than anything else in the New
World. Like all that pertains to crime, it seemed never to have known
a youthful era. Before this ugly edifice, and between it and the
wheel-track of the street, was a grass-plot, much overgrown with
burdock, pigweed, apple-peru, and such unsightly vegetation, which
evidently found something congenial in the soil that had so early
borne the black flower of civilized society, a prison. But on one side
of the portal, and rooted almost at the threshold, was a wild
rose-bush, covered, in this month of June, with its delicate gems,
which might be imagined to offer their fragrance and fragile beauty to
the prisoner as he went in, and to the condemned criminal as he came
forth to his doom, in token that the deep heart of Nature could pity
and be kind to him.

This rose-bush, by a strange chance, has been kept alive in history;
but whether it had merely survived out of the stern old wilderness, so
long after the fall of the gigantic pines and oaks that originally
overshadowed it,—or whether, as there is fair authority for
believing, it had sprung up under the footsteps of the sainted Ann
Hutchinson, as she entered the prison-door,—we shall not take upon us
to determine. Finding it so directly on the threshold of our
narrative, which is now about to issue from that inauspicious portal,
we could hardly do otherwise than pluck one of its flowers, and
present it to the reader. It may serve, let us hope, to symbolize some
sweet moral blossom, that may be found along the track, or relieve the
darkening close of a tale of human frailty and sorrow.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  II.

                           THE MARKET-PLACE.


The grass-plot before the jail, in Prison Lane, on a certain summer
morning, not less than two centuries ago, was occupied by a pretty
large number of the inhabitants of Boston; all with their eyes
intently fastened on the iron-clamped oaken door. Amongst any other
population, or at a later period in the history of New England, the
grim rigidity that petrified the bearded physiognomies of these good
people would have augured some awful business in hand. It could have
betokened nothing short of the anticipated execution of some noted
culprit, on whom the sentence of a legal tribunal had but confirmed
the verdict of public sentiment. But, in that early severity of the
Puritan character, an inference of this kind could not so indubitably
be drawn. It might be that a sluggish bond-servant, or an undutiful
child, whom his parents had given over to the civil authority, was to
be corrected at the whipping-post. It might be, that an Antinomian, a
Quaker, or other heterodox religionist was to be scourged out of the
town, or an idle and vagrant Indian, whom the white man’s fire-water
had made riotous about the streets, was to be driven with stripes into
the shadow of the forest. It might be, too, that a witch, like old
Mistress Hibbins, the bitter-tempered widow of the magistrate, was to
die upon the gallows. In either case, there was very much the same
solemnity of demeanor on the part of the spectators; as befitted a
people amongst whom religion and law were almost identical, and in
whose character both were so thoroughly interfused, that the mildest
and the severest acts of public discipline were alike made venerable
and awful. Meagre, indeed, and cold was the sympathy that a
transgressor might look for, from such bystanders, at the scaffold. On
the other hand, a penalty, which, in our days, would infer a degree of
mocking infamy and ridicule, might then be invested with almost as
stern a dignity as the punishment of death itself.

It was a circumstance to be noted, on the summer morning when our
story begins its course, that the women, of whom there were several in
the crowd, appeared to take a peculiar interest in whatever penal
infliction might be expected to ensue. The age had not so much
refinement, that any sense of impropriety restrained the wearers of
petticoat and farthingale from stepping forth into the public ways,
and wedging their not unsubstantial persons, if occasion were, into
the throng nearest to the scaffold at an execution. Morally, as well
as materially, there was a coarser fibre in those wives and maidens of
old English birth and breeding, than in their fair descendants,
separated from them by a series of six or seven generations; for,
throughout that chain of ancestry, every successive mother has
transmitted to her child a fainter bloom, a more delicate and briefer
beauty, and a slighter physical frame, if not a character of less
force and solidity, than her own. The women who were now standing
about the prison-door stood within less than half a century of the
period when the man-like Elizabeth had been the not altogether
unsuitable representative of the sex. They were her countrywomen; and
the beef and ale of their native land, with a moral diet not a whit
more refined, entered largely into their composition. The bright
morning sun, therefore, shone on broad shoulders and well-developed
busts, and on round and ruddy cheeks, that had ripened in the far-off
island, and had hardly yet grown paler or thinner in the atmosphere of
New England. There was, moreover, a boldness and rotundity of speech
among these matrons, as most of them seemed to be, that would startle
us at the present day, whether in respect to its purport or its volume
of tone.

“Goodwives,” said a hard-featured dame of fifty, “I’ll tell ye a piece
of my mind. It would be greatly for the public behoof, if we women,
being of mature age and church-members in good repute, should have the
handling of such malefactresses as this Hester Prynne. What think ye,
gossips? If the hussy stood up for judgment before us five, that are
now here in a knot together, would she come off with such a sentence
as the worshipful magistrates have awarded? Marry, I trow not!”

“People say,” said another, “that the Reverend Master Dimmesdale, her
godly pastor, takes it very grievously to heart that such a scandal
should have come upon his congregation.”

“The magistrates are God-fearing gentlemen, but merciful
overmuch,—that is a truth,” added a third autumnal matron. “At the
very least, they should have put the brand of a hot iron on Hester
Prynne’s forehead. Madam Hester would have winced at that, I warrant
me. But she,—the naughty baggage,—little will she care what they
put upon the bodice of her gown! Why, look you, she may cover it with
a brooch, or such like heathenish adornment, and so walk the streets
as brave as ever!”

“Ah, but,” interposed, more softly, a young wife, holding a child by
the hand, “let her cover the mark as she will, the pang of it will be
always in her heart.”

[Illustration: The Gossips]

“What do we talk of marks and brands, whether on the bodice of her
gown, or the flesh of her forehead?” cried another female, the ugliest
as well as the most pitiless of these self-constituted judges. “This
woman has brought shame upon us all, and ought to die. Is there not
law for it? Truly, there is, both in the Scripture and the
statute-book. Then let the magistrates, who have made it of no effect,
thank themselves if their own wives and daughters go astray!”

“Mercy on us, goodwife,” exclaimed a man in the crowd, “is there no
virtue in woman, save what springs from a wholesome fear of the
gallows? That is the hardest word yet! Hush, now, gossips! for the
lock is turning in the prison-door, and here comes Mistress Prynne
herself.”

The door of the jail being flung open from within, there appeared, in
the first place, like a black shadow emerging into sunshine, the grim
and grisly presence of the town-beadle, with a sword by his side, and
his staff of office in his hand. This personage prefigured and
represented in his aspect the whole dismal severity of the Puritanic
code of law, which it was his business to administer in its final and
closest application to the offender. Stretching forth the official
staff in his left hand, he laid his right upon the shoulder of a young
woman, whom he thus drew forward; until, on the threshold of the
prison-door, she repelled him, by an action marked with natural
dignity and force of character, and stepped into the open air, as if
by her own free will. She bore in her arms a child, a baby of some
three months old, who winked and turned aside its little face from the
too vivid light of day; because its existence, heretofore, had brought
it acquainted only with the gray twilight of a dungeon, or other
darksome apartment of the prison.

When the young woman—the mother of this child—stood fully revealed
before the crowd, it seemed to be her first impulse to clasp the
infant closely to her bosom; not so much by an impulse of motherly
affection, as that she might thereby conceal a certain token, which
was wrought or fastened into her dress. In a moment, however, wisely
judging that one token of her shame would but poorly serve to hide
another, she took the baby on her arm, and, with a burning blush, and
yet a haughty smile, and a glance that would not be abashed, looked
around at her towns-people and neighbors. On the breast of her gown,
in fine red cloth, surrounded with an elaborate embroidery and
fantastic flourishes of gold-thread, appeared the letter A. It was so
artistically done, and with so much fertility and gorgeous luxuriance
of fancy, that it had all the effect of a last and fitting decoration
to the apparel which she wore; and which was of a splendor in
accordance with the taste of the age, but greatly beyond what was
allowed by the sumptuary regulations of the colony.

The young woman was tall, with a figure of perfect elegance on a large
scale. She had dark and abundant hair, so glossy that it threw off the
sunshine with a gleam, and a face which, besides being beautiful from
regularity of feature and richness of complexion, had the
impressiveness belonging to a marked brow and deep black eyes. She was
lady-like, too, after the manner of the feminine gentility of those
days; characterized by a certain state and dignity, rather than by the
delicate, evanescent, and indescribable grace, which is now recognized
as its indication. And never had Hester Prynne appeared more
lady-like, in the antique interpretation of the term, than as she
issued from the prison. Those who had before known her, and had
expected to behold her dimmed and obscured by a disastrous cloud, were
astonished, and even startled, to perceive how her beauty shone out,
and made a halo of the misfortune and ignominy in which she was
enveloped. It may be true, that, to a sensitive observer, there was
something exquisitely painful in it. Her attire, which, indeed, she
had wrought for the occasion, in prison, and had modelled much after
her own fancy, seemed to express the attitude of her spirit, the
desperate recklessness of her mood, by its wild and picturesque
peculiarity. But the point which drew all eyes, and, as it were,
transfigured the wearer,—so that both men and women, who had been
familiarly acquainted with Hester Prynne, were now impressed as if
they beheld her for the first time,—was that SCARLET LETTER, so
fantastically embroidered and illuminated upon her bosom. It had the
effect of a spell, taking her out of the ordinary relations with
humanity, and enclosing her in a sphere by herself.

“She hath good skill at her needle, that’s certain,” remarked one of
her female spectators; “but did ever a woman, before this brazen
hussy, contrive such a way of showing it! Why, gossips, what is it but
to laugh in the faces of our godly magistrates, and make a pride out
of what they, worthy gentlemen, meant for a punishment?”

“It were well,” muttered the most iron-visaged of the old dames, “if
we stripped Madam Hester’s rich gown off her dainty shoulders; and as
for the red letter, which she hath stitched so curiously, I’ll bestow
a rag of mine own rheumatic flannel, to make a fitter one!”

“O, peace, neighbors, peace!” whispered their youngest companion; “do
not let her hear you! Not a stitch in that embroidered letter but she
has felt it in her heart.”

The grim beadle now made a gesture with his staff.

“Make way, good people, make way, in the King’s name!” cried he. “Open
a passage; and, I promise ye, Mistress Prynne shall be set where man,
woman, and child may have a fair sight of her brave apparel, from this
time till an hour past meridian. A blessing on the righteous Colony of
the Massachusetts, where iniquity is dragged out into the sunshine!
Come along, Madam Hester, and show your scarlet letter in the
market-place!”

A lane was forthwith opened through the crowd of spectators. Preceded
by the beadle, and attended by an irregular procession of
stern-browed men and unkindly visaged women, Hester Prynne set forth
towards the place appointed for her punishment. A crowd of eager and
curious school-boys, understanding little of the matter in hand,
except that it gave them a half-holiday, ran before her progress,
turning their heads continually to stare into her face, and at the
winking baby in her arms, and at the ignominious letter on her breast.
It was no great distance, in those days, from the prison-door to the
market-place. Measured by the prisoner’s experience, however, it might
be reckoned a journey of some length; for, haughty as her demeanor
was, she perchance underwent an agony from every footstep of those
that thronged to see her, as if her heart had been flung into the
street for them all to spurn and trample upon. In our nature, however,
there is a provision, alike marvellous and merciful, that the sufferer
should never know the intensity of what he endures by its present
torture, but chiefly by the pang that rankles after it. With almost a
serene deportment, therefore, Hester Prynne passed through this
portion of her ordeal, and came to a sort of scaffold, at the western
extremity of the market-place. It stood nearly beneath the eaves of
Boston’s earliest church, and appeared to be a fixture there.

In fact, this scaffold constituted a portion of a penal machine, which
now, for two or three generations past, has been merely historical and
traditionary among us, but was held, in the old time, to be as
effectual an agent, in the promotion of good citizenship, as ever was
the guillotine among the terrorists of France. It was, in short, the
platform of the pillory; and above it rose the framework of that
instrument of discipline, so fashioned as to confine the human head in
its tight grasp, and thus hold it up to the public gaze. The very
ideal of ignominy was embodied and made manifest in this contrivance
of wood and iron. There can be no outrage, methinks, against our
common nature,—whatever be the delinquencies of the individual,—no
outrage more flagrant than to forbid the culprit to hide his face for
shame; as it was the essence of this punishment to do. In Hester
Prynne’s instance, however, as not unfrequently in other cases, her
sentence bore, that she should stand a certain time upon the platform,
but without undergoing that gripe about the neck and confinement of
the head, the proneness to which was the most devilish characteristic
of this ugly engine. Knowing well her part, she ascended a flight of
wooden steps, and was thus displayed to the surrounding multitude, at
about the height of a man’s shoulders above the street.

Had there been a Papist among the crowd of Puritans, he might have
seen in this beautiful woman, so picturesque in her attire and mien,
and with the infant at her bosom, an object to remind him of the image
of Divine Maternity, which so many illustrious painters have vied with
one another to represent; something which should remind him, indeed,
but only by contrast, of that sacred image of sinless motherhood,
whose infant was to redeem the world. Here, there was the taint of
deepest sin in the most sacred quality of human life, working such
effect, that the world was only the darker for this woman’s beauty,
and the more lost for the infant that she had borne.

The scene was not without a mixture of awe, such as must always invest
the spectacle of guilt and shame in a fellow-creature, before society
shall have grown corrupt enough to smile, instead of shuddering, at
it. The witnesses of Hester Prynne’s disgrace had not yet passed
beyond their simplicity. They were stern enough to look upon her
death, had that been the sentence, without a murmur at its severity,
but had none of the heartlessness of another social state, which would
find only a theme for jest in an exhibition like the present. Even had
there been a disposition to turn the matter into ridicule, it must
have been repressed and overpowered by the solemn presence of men no
less dignified than the Governor, and several of his counsellors, a
judge, a general, and the ministers of the town; all of whom sat or
stood in a balcony of the meeting-house, looking down upon the
platform. When such personages could constitute a part of the
spectacle, without risking the majesty or reverence of rank and
office, it was safely to be inferred that the infliction of a legal
sentence would have an earnest and effectual meaning. Accordingly, the
crowd was sombre and grave. The unhappy culprit sustained herself as
best a woman might, under the heavy weight of a thousand unrelenting
eyes, all fastened upon her, and concentrated at her bosom. It was
almost intolerable to be borne. Of an impulsive and passionate nature,
she had fortified herself to encounter the stings and venomous stabs
of public contumely, wreaking itself in every variety of insult; but
there was a quality so much more terrible in the solemn mood of the
popular mind, that she longed rather to behold all those rigid
countenances contorted with scornful merriment, and herself the
object. Had a roar of laughter burst from the multitude,—each man,
each woman, each little shrill-voiced child, contributing their
individual parts,—Hester Prynne might have repaid them all with a
bitter and disdainful smile. But, under the leaden infliction which it
was her doom to endure, she felt, at moments, as if she must needs
shriek out with the full power of her lungs, and cast herself from the
scaffold down upon the ground, or else go mad at once.

Yet there were intervals when the whole scene, in which she was the
most conspicuous object, seemed to vanish from her eyes, or, at least,
glimmered indistinctly before them, like a mass of imperfectly shaped
and spectral images. Her mind, and especially her memory, was
preternaturally active, and kept bringing up other scenes than this
roughly hewn street of a little town, on the edge of the Western
wilderness; other faces than were lowering upon her from beneath the
brims of those steeple-crowned hats. Reminiscences the most trifling
and immaterial, passages of infancy and school-days, sports, childish
quarrels, and the little domestic traits of her maiden years, came
swarming back upon her, intermingled with recollections of whatever
was gravest in her subsequent life; one picture precisely as vivid as
another; as if all were of similar importance, or all alike a play.
Possibly, it was an instinctive device of her spirit, to relieve
itself, by the exhibition of these phantasmagoric forms, from the
cruel weight and hardness of the reality.

Be that as it might, the scaffold of the pillory was a point of view
that revealed to Hester Prynne the entire track along which she had
been treading, since her happy infancy. Standing on that miserable
eminence, she saw again her native village, in Old England, and her
paternal home; a decayed house of gray stone, with a poverty-stricken
aspect, but retaining a half-obliterated shield of arms over the
portal, in token of antique gentility. She saw her father’s face, with
its bald brow, and reverend white beard, that flowed over the
old-fashioned Elizabethan ruff; her mother’s, too, with the look of
heedful and anxious love which it always wore in her remembrance, and
which, even since her death, had so often laid the impediment of a
gentle remonstrance in her daughter’s pathway. She saw her own
face, glowing with girlish beauty, and illuminating all the interior
of the dusky mirror in which she had been wont to gaze at it. There
she beheld another countenance, of a man well stricken in years, a
pale, thin, scholar-like visage, with eyes dim and bleared by the
lamplight that had served them to pore over many ponderous books. Yet
those same bleared optics had a strange, penetrating power, when it
was their owner’s purpose to read the human soul. This figure of the
study and the cloister, as Hester Prynne’s womanly fancy failed not to
recall, was slightly deformed, with the left shoulder a trifle higher
than the right. Next rose before her, in memory’s picture-gallery, the
intricate and narrow thoroughfares, the tall, gray houses, the huge
cathedrals, and the public edifices, ancient in date and quaint in
architecture, of a Continental city; where a new life had awaited her,
still in connection with the misshapen scholar; a new life, but
feeding itself on time-worn materials, like a tuft of green moss on a
crumbling wall. Lastly, in lieu of these shifting scenes, came back
the rude market-place of the Puritan settlement, with all the
towns-people assembled and levelling their stern regards at Hester
Prynne,—yes, at herself,—who stood on the scaffold of the pillory,
an infant on her arm, and the letter A, in scarlet, fantastically
embroidered with gold-thread, upon her bosom!

[Illustration: “Standing on the Miserable Eminence”]

Could it be true? She clutched the child so fiercely to her breast,
that it sent forth a cry; she turned her eyes downward at the scarlet
letter, and even touched it with her finger, to assure herself that
the infant and the shame were real. Yes!—these were her
realities,—all else had vanished!




                            [Illustration]

                                 III.

                           THE RECOGNITION.


From this intense consciousness of being the object of severe and
universal observation, the wearer of the scarlet letter was at length
relieved, by discerning, on the outskirts of the crowd, a figure which
irresistibly took possession of her thoughts. An Indian, in his native
garb, was standing there; but the red men were not so infrequent
visitors of the English settlements, that one of them would have
attracted any notice from Hester Prynne, at such a time; much less
would he have excluded all other objects and ideas from her mind. By
the Indian’s side, and evidently sustaining a companionship with him,
stood a white man, clad in a strange disarray of civilized and savage
costume.

He was small in stature, with a furrowed visage, which, as yet, could
hardly be termed aged. There was a remarkable intelligence in his
features, as of a person who had so cultivated his mental part that it
could not fail to mould the physical to itself, and become manifest by
unmistakable tokens. Although, by a seemingly careless arrangement of
his heterogeneous garb, he had endeavored to conceal or abate the
peculiarity, it was sufficiently evident to Hester Prynne, that one of
this man’s shoulders rose higher than the other. Again, at the first
instant of perceiving that thin visage, and the slight deformity of
the figure, she pressed her infant to her bosom with so convulsive a
force that the poor babe uttered another cry of pain. But the mother
did not seem to hear it.

At his arrival in the market-place, and some time before she saw him,
the stranger had bent his eyes on Hester Prynne. It was carelessly, at
first, like a man chiefly accustomed to look inward, and to whom
external matters are of little value and import, unless they bear
relation to something within his mind. Very soon, however, his look
became keen and penetrative. A writhing horror twisted itself across
his features, like a snake gliding swiftly over them, and making one
little pause, with all its wreathed intervolutions in open sight. His
face darkened with some powerful emotion, which, nevertheless, he so
instantaneously controlled by an effort of his will, that, save at a
single moment, its expression might have passed for calmness. After a
brief space, the convulsion grew almost imperceptible, and finally
subsided into the depths of his nature. When he found the eyes of
Hester Prynne fastened on his own, and saw that she appeared to
recognize him, he slowly and calmly raised his finger, made a gesture
with it in the air, and laid it on his lips.

Then, touching the shoulder of a townsman who stood next to him, he
addressed him, in a formal and courteous manner.

“I pray you, good Sir,” said he, “who is this woman?—and wherefore is
she here set up to public shame?”

“You must needs be a stranger in this region, friend,” answered the
townsman, looking curiously at the questioner and his savage
companion, “else you would surely have heard of Mistress Hester
Prynne, and her evil doings. She hath raised a great scandal, I
promise you, in godly Master Dimmesdale’s church.”

“You say truly,” replied the other. “I am a stranger, and have been a
wanderer, sorely against my will. I have met with grievous mishaps by
sea and land, and have been long held in bonds among the heathen-folk,
to the southward; and am now brought hither by this Indian, to be
redeemed out of my captivity. Will it please you, therefore, to tell
me of Hester Prynne’s,—have I her name rightly?—of this woman’s
offences, and what has brought her to yonder scaffold?”

“Truly, friend; and methinks it must gladden your heart, after your
troubles and sojourn in the wilderness,” said the townsman, “to find
yourself, at length, in a land where iniquity is searched out, and
punished in the sight of rulers and people; as here in our godly New
England. Yonder woman, Sir, you must know, was the wife of a certain
learned man, English by birth, but who had long dwelt in Amsterdam,
whence, some good time agone, he was minded to cross over and cast in
his lot with us of the Massachusetts. To this purpose, he sent his
wife before him, remaining himself to look after some necessary
affairs. Marry, good Sir, in some two years, or less, that the woman
has been a dweller here in Boston, no tidings have come of this
learned gentleman, Master Prynne; and his young wife, look you, being
left to her own misguidance—”

“Ah!—aha!—I conceive you,” said the stranger, with a bitter smile.
“So learned a man as you speak of should have learned this too in his
books. And who, by your favor, Sir, may be the father of yonder
babe—it is some three or four months old, I should judge—which
Mistress Prynne is holding in her arms?”

“Of a truth, friend, that matter remaineth a riddle; and the Daniel
who shall expound it is yet a-wanting,” answered the townsman. “Madam
Hester absolutely refuseth to speak, and the magistrates have laid
their heads together in vain. Peradventure the guilty one stands
looking on at this sad spectacle, unknown of man, and forgetting that
God sees him.”

“The learned man,” observed the stranger, with another smile, “should
come himself, to look into the mystery.”

“It behooves him well, if he be still in life,” responded the
townsman. “Now, good Sir, our Massachusetts magistracy, bethinking
themselves that this woman is youthful and fair, and doubtless was
strongly tempted to her fall,—and that, moreover, as is most likely,
her husband may be at the bottom of the sea,—they have not been bold
to put in force the extremity of our righteous law against her. The
penalty thereof is death. But in their great mercy and tenderness of
heart, they have doomed Mistress Prynne to stand only a space of three
hours on the platform of the pillory, and then and thereafter, for the
remainder of her natural life, to wear a mark of shame upon her
bosom.”

“A wise sentence!” remarked the stranger, gravely bowing his head.
“Thus she will be a living sermon against sin, until the ignominious
letter be engraved upon her tombstone. It irks me, nevertheless, that
the partner of her iniquity should not, at least, stand on the
scaffold by her side. But he will be known!—he will be known!—he
will be known!”

He bowed courteously to the communicative townsman, and, whispering a
few words to his Indian attendant, they both made their way through
the crowd.

While this passed, Hester Prynne had been standing on her pedestal,
still with a fixed gaze towards the stranger; so fixed a gaze, that,
at moments of intense absorption, all other objects in the visible
world seemed to vanish, leaving only him and her. Such an interview,
perhaps, would have been more terrible than even to meet him as she
now did, with the hot, mid-day sun burning down upon her face, and
lighting up its shame; with the scarlet token of infamy on her breast;
with the sin-born infant in her arms; with a whole people, drawn forth
as to a festival, staring at the features that should have been seen
only in the quiet gleam of the fireside, in the happy shadow of a
home, or beneath a matronly veil, at church. Dreadful as it was, she
was conscious of a shelter in the presence of these thousand
witnesses. It was better to stand thus, with so many betwixt him and
her, than to greet him, face to face, they two alone. She fled for
refuge, as it were, to the public exposure, and dreaded the moment
when its protection should be withdrawn from her. Involved in these
thoughts, she scarcely heard a voice behind her, until it had repeated
her name more than once, in a loud and solemn tone, audible to the
whole multitude.

“Hearken unto me, Hester Prynne!” said the voice.

It has already been noticed, that directly over the platform on which
Hester Prynne stood was a kind of balcony, or open gallery, appended
to the meeting-house. It was the place whence proclamations were wont
to be made, amidst an assemblage of the magistracy, with all the
ceremonial that attended such public observances in those days. Here,
to witness the scene which we are describing, sat Governor Bellingham
himself, with four sergeants about his chair, bearing halberds, as a
guard of honor. He wore a dark feather in his hat, a border of
embroidery on his cloak, and a black velvet tunic beneath; a
gentleman advanced in years, with a hard experience written in his
wrinkles. He was not ill fitted to be the head and representative of a
community, which owed its origin and progress, and its present state
of development, not to the impulses of youth, but to the stern and
tempered energies of manhood, and the sombre sagacity of age;
accomplishing so much, precisely because it imagined and hoped so
little. The other eminent characters, by whom the chief ruler was
surrounded, were distinguished by a dignity of mien, belonging to a
period when the forms of authority were felt to possess the sacredness
of Divine institutions. They were, doubtless, good men, just and sage.
But, out of the whole human family, it would not have been easy to
select the same number of wise and virtuous persons, who should be
less capable of sitting in judgment on an erring woman’s heart, and
disentangling its mesh of good and evil, than the sages of rigid
aspect towards whom Hester Prynne now turned her face. She seemed
conscious, indeed, that whatever sympathy she might expect lay in the
larger and warmer heart of the multitude; for, as she lifted her eyes
towards the balcony, the unhappy woman grew pale and trembled.

The voice which had called her attention was that of the reverend and
famous John Wilson, the eldest clergyman of Boston, a great scholar,
like most of his contemporaries in the profession, and withal a man of
kind and genial spirit. This last attribute, however, had been less
carefully developed than his intellectual gifts, and was, in truth,
rather a matter of shame than self-congratulation with him. There he
stood, with a border of grizzled locks beneath his skull-cap; while
his gray eyes, accustomed to the shaded light of his study, were
winking, like those of Hester’s infant, in the unadulterated
sunshine. He looked like the darkly engraved portraits which we see
prefixed to old volumes of sermons; and had no more right than one of
those portraits would have, to step forth, as he now did, and meddle
with a question of human guilt, passion, and anguish.

“Hester Prynne,” said the clergyman, “I have striven with my young
brother here, under whose preaching of the word you have been
privileged to sit,”—here Mr. Wilson laid his hand on the shoulder of
a pale young man beside him,—“I have sought, I say, to persuade this
godly youth, that he should deal with you, here in the face of Heaven,
and before these wise and upright rulers, and in hearing of all the
people, as touching the vileness and blackness of your sin. Knowing
your natural temper better than I, he could the better judge what
arguments to use, whether of tenderness or terror, such as might
prevail over your hardness and obstinacy; insomuch that you should no
longer hide the name of him who tempted you to this grievous fall. But
he opposes to me (with a young man’s over-softness, albeit wise beyond
his years), that it were wronging the very nature of woman to force
her to lay open her heart’s secrets in such broad daylight, and in
presence of so great a multitude. Truly, as I sought to convince him,
the shame lay in the commission of the sin, and not in the showing of
it forth. What say you to it, once again, Brother Dimmesdale? Must it
be thou, or I, that shall deal with this poor sinner’s soul?”

There was a murmur among the dignified and reverend occupants of the
balcony; and Governor Bellingham gave expression to its purport,
speaking in an authoritative voice, although tempered with respect
towards the youthful clergyman whom he addressed.

“Good Master Dimmesdale,” said he, “the responsibility of this woman’s
soul lies greatly with you. It behooves you, therefore, to exhort her
to repentance, and to confession, as a proof and consequence thereof.”

The directness of this appeal drew the eyes of the whole crowd upon
the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale; a young clergyman, who had come from one
of the great English universities, bringing all the learning of the
age into our wild forest-land. His eloquence and religious fervor had
already given the earnest of high eminence in his profession. He was a
person of very striking aspect, with a white, lofty, and impending
brow, large brown, melancholy eyes, and a mouth which, unless when he
forcibly compressed it, was apt to be tremulous, expressing both
nervous sensibility and a vast power of self-restraint.
Notwithstanding his high native gifts and scholar-like attainments,
there was an air about this young minister,—an apprehensive, a
startled, a half-frightened look,—as of a being who felt himself
quite astray and at a loss in the pathway of human existence, and
could only be at ease in some seclusion of his own. Therefore, so far
as his duties would permit, he trod in the shadowy by-paths, and thus
kept himself simple and childlike; coming forth, when occasion was,
with a freshness, and fragrance, and dewy purity of thought, which, as
many people said, affected them like the speech of an angel.

Such was the young man whom the Reverend Mr. Wilson and the Governor
had introduced so openly to the public notice, bidding him speak, in
the hearing of all men, to that mystery of a woman’s soul, so sacred
even in its pollution. The trying nature of his position drove the
blood from his cheek, and made his lips tremulous.

“Speak to the woman, my brother,” said Mr. Wilson. “It is of moment to
her soul, and therefore, as the worshipful Governor says, momentous to
thine own, in whose charge hers is. Exhort her to confess the truth!”

The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale bent his head, in silent prayer, as it
seemed, and then came forward.

“Hester Prynne,” said he, leaning over the balcony and looking down
steadfastly into her eyes, “thou hearest what this good man says, and
seest the accountability under which I labor. If thou feelest it to be
for thy soul’s peace, and that thy earthly punishment will thereby be
made more effectual to salvation, I charge thee to speak out the name
of thy fellow-sinner and fellow-sufferer! Be not silent from any
mistaken pity and tenderness for him; for, believe me, Hester, though
he were to step down from a high place, and stand there beside thee,
on thy pedestal of shame, yet better were it so than to hide a guilty
heart through life. What can thy silence do for him, except it tempt
him—yea, compel him, as it were—to add hypocrisy to sin? Heaven hath
granted thee an open ignominy, that thereby thou mayest work out an
open triumph over the evil within thee, and the sorrow without. Take
heed how thou deniest to him—who, perchance, hath not the courage to
grasp it for himself—the bitter, but wholesome, cup that is now
presented to thy lips!”

The young pastor’s voice was tremulously sweet, rich, deep, and
broken. The feeling that it so evidently manifested, rather than the
direct purport of the words, caused it to vibrate within all hearts,
and brought the listeners into one accord of sympathy. Even the poor
baby, at Hester’s bosom, was affected by the same influence; for it
directed its hitherto vacant gaze towards Mr. Dimmesdale, and held up
its little arms, with a half-pleased, half-plaintive murmur. So
powerful seemed the minister’s appeal, that the people could not
believe but that Hester Prynne would speak out the guilty name; or
else that the guilty one himself, in whatever high or lowly place he
stood, would be drawn forth by an inward and inevitable necessity, and
compelled to ascend to the scaffold.

Hester shook her head.

“Woman, transgress not beyond the limits of Heaven’s mercy!” cried the
Reverend Mr. Wilson, more harshly than before. “That little babe hath
been gifted with a voice, to second and confirm the counsel which thou
hast heard. Speak out the name! That, and thy repentance, may avail to
take the scarlet letter off thy breast.”

“Never!” replied Hester Prynne, looking, not at Mr. Wilson, but into
the deep and troubled eyes of the younger clergyman. “It is too deeply
branded. Ye cannot take it off. And would that I might endure his
agony, as well as mine!”

“Speak, woman!” said another voice, coldly and sternly, proceeding
from the crowd about the scaffold. “Speak; and give your child a
father!”

“I will not speak!” answered Hester, turning pale as death, but
responding to this voice, which she too surely recognized. “And my
child must seek a heavenly Father; she shall never know an earthly
one!”

“She will not speak!” murmured Mr. Dimmesdale, who, leaning over the
balcony, with his hand upon his heart, had awaited the result of his
appeal. He now drew back, with a long respiration. “Wondrous strength
and generosity of a woman’s heart! She will not speak!”

[Illustration: “She was led back to Prison”]

Discerning the impracticable state of the poor culprit’s mind, the
elder clergyman, who had carefully prepared himself for the occasion,
addressed to the multitude a discourse on sin, in all its branches,
but with continual reference to the ignominious letter. So forcibly
did he dwell upon this symbol, for the hour or more during which his
periods were rolling over the people’s heads, that it assumed new
terrors in their imagination, and seemed to derive its scarlet hue
from the flames of the infernal pit. Hester Prynne, meanwhile, kept
her place upon the pedestal of shame, with glazed eyes, and an air of
weary indifference. She had borne, that morning, all that nature could
endure; and as her temperament was not of the order that escapes from
too intense suffering by a swoon, her spirit could only shelter itself
beneath a stony crust of insensibility, while the faculties of animal
life remained entire. In this state, the voice of the preacher
thundered remorselessly, but unavailingly, upon her ears. The infant,
during the latter portion of her ordeal, pierced the air with its
wailings and screams; she strove to hush it, mechanically, but seemed
scarcely to sympathize with its trouble. With the same hard demeanor,
she was led back to prison, and vanished from the public gaze within
its iron-clamped portal. It was whispered, by those who peered after
her, that the scarlet letter threw a lurid gleam along the dark
passage-way of the interior.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  IV.

                            THE INTERVIEW.


After her return to the prison, Hester Prynne was found to be in a
state of nervous excitement that demanded constant watchfulness, lest
she should perpetrate violence on herself, or do some half-frenzied
mischief to the poor babe. As night approached, it proving impossible
to quell her insubordination by rebuke or threats of punishment,
Master Brackett, the jailer, thought fit to introduce a physician. He
described him as a man of skill in all Christian modes of physical
science, and likewise familiar with whatever the savage people could
teach, in respect to medicinal herbs and roots that grew in the
forest. To say the truth, there was much need of professional
assistance, not merely for Hester herself, but still more urgently for
the child; who, drawing its sustenance from the maternal bosom, seemed
to have drank in with it all the turmoil, the anguish and despair,
which pervaded the mother’s system. It now writhed in convulsions of
pain, and was a forcible type, in its little frame, of the moral agony
which Hester Prynne had borne throughout the day.

Closely following the jailer into the dismal apartment appeared that
individual, of singular aspect, whose presence in the crowd had been
of such deep interest to the wearer of the scarlet letter. He was
lodged in the prison, not as suspected of any offence, but as the most
convenient and suitable mode of disposing of him, until the
magistrates should have conferred with the Indian sagamores respecting
his ransom. His name was announced as Roger Chillingworth. The jailer,
after ushering him into the room, remained a moment, marvelling at the
comparative quiet that followed his entrance; for Hester Prynne had
immediately become as still as death, although the child continued to
moan.

“Prithee, friend, leave me alone with my patient,” said the
practitioner. “Trust me, good jailer, you shall briefly have peace in
your house; and, I promise you, Mistress Prynne shall hereafter be
more amenable to just authority than you may have found her
heretofore.”

“Nay, if your worship can accomplish that,” answered Master Brackett,
“I shall own you for a man of skill indeed! Verily, the woman hath
been like a possessed one; and there lacks little, that I should take
in hand to drive Satan out of her with stripes.”

The stranger had entered the room with the characteristic quietude of
the profession to which he announced himself as belonging. Nor did his
demeanor change, when the withdrawal of the prison-keeper left him
face to face with the woman, whose absorbed notice of him, in the
crowd, had intimated so close a relation between himself and her. His
first care was given to the child; whose cries, indeed, as she lay
writhing on the trundle-bed, made it of peremptory necessity to
postpone all other business to the task of soothing her. He examined
the infant carefully, and then proceeded to unclasp a leathern case,
which he took from beneath his dress. It appeared to contain medical
preparations, one of which he mingled with a cup of water.

“My old studies in alchemy,” observed he, “and my sojourn, for above a
year past, among a people well versed in the kindly properties of
simples, have made a better physician of me than many that claim the
medical degree. Here, woman! The child is yours,—she is none of
mine,—neither will she recognize my voice or aspect as a father’s.
Administer this draught, therefore, with thine own hand.”

Hester repelled the offered medicine, at the same time gazing with
strongly marked apprehension into his face.

“Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the innocent babe?” whispered she.

“Foolish woman!” responded the physician, half coldly, half
soothingly. “What should ail me, to harm this misbegotten and
miserable babe? The medicine is potent for good; and were it my
child,—yea, mine own, as well as thine!—I could do no better for
it.”

As she still hesitated, being, in fact, in no reasonable state of
mind, he took the infant in his arms, and himself administered the
draught. It soon proved its efficacy, and redeemed the leech’s pledge.
The moans of the little patient subsided; its convulsive tossings
gradually ceased; and, in a few moments, as is the custom of young
children after relief from pain, it sank into a profound and dewy
slumber. The physician, as he had a fair right to be termed, next
bestowed his attention on the mother. With calm and intent scrutiny he
felt her pulse, looked into her eyes,—a gaze that made her heart
shrink and shudder, because so familiar, and yet so strange and
cold,—and, finally, satisfied with his investigation, proceeded to
mingle another draught.

“I know not Lethe nor Nepenthe,” remarked he; “but I have learned many
new secrets in the wilderness, and here is one of them,—a recipe that
an Indian taught me, in requital of some lessons of my own, that were
as old as Paracelsus. Drink it! It may be less soothing than a sinless
conscience. That I cannot give thee. But it will calm the swell and
heaving of thy passion, like oil thrown on the waves of a tempestuous
sea.”

He presented the cup to Hester, who received it with a slow, earnest
look into his face; not precisely a look of fear, yet full of doubt
and questioning, as to what his purposes might be. She looked also at
her slumbering child.

“I have thought of death,” said she,—“have wished for it,—would even
have prayed for it, were it fit that such as I should pray for
anything. Yet if death be in this cup, I bid thee think again, ere
thou beholdest me quaff it. See! It is even now at my lips.”

“Drink, then,” replied he, still with the same cold composure. “Dost
thou know me so little, Hester Prynne? Are my purposes wont to be so
shallow? Even if I imagine a scheme of vengeance, what could I do
better for my object than to let thee live,—than to give thee
medicines against all harm and peril of life,—so that this burning
shame may still blaze upon thy bosom?” As he spoke, he laid his long
forefinger on the scarlet letter, which forthwith seemed to scorch
into Hester’s breast, as if it had been red-hot. He noticed her
involuntary gesture, and smiled. “Live, therefore, and bear about thy
doom with thee, in the eyes of men and women,—in the eyes of him whom
thou didst call thy husband,—in the eyes of yonder child! And, that
thou mayest live, take off this draught.”

Without further expostulation or delay, Hester Prynne drained the
cup, and, at the motion of the man of skill, seated herself on the bed
where the child was sleeping; while he drew the only chair which the
room afforded, and took his own seat beside her. She could not but
tremble at these preparations; for she felt that—having now done all
that humanity or principle, or, if so it were, a refined cruelty,
impelled him to do, for the relief of physical suffering—he was next
to treat with her as the man whom she had most deeply and irreparably
injured.

“Hester,” said he, “I ask not wherefore, nor how, thou hast fallen
into the pit, or say, rather, thou hast ascended to the pedestal of
infamy, on which I found thee. The reason is not far to seek. It was
my folly, and thy weakness. I,—a man of thought,—the bookworm of
great libraries,—a man already in decay, having given my best years
to feed the hungry dream of knowledge,—what had I to do with youth
and beauty like thine own! Misshapen from my birth-hour, how could I
delude myself with the idea that intellectual gifts might veil
physical deformity in a young girl’s fantasy! Men call me wise. If
sages were ever wise in their own behoof, I might have foreseen all
this. I might have known that, as I came out of the vast and dismal
forest, and entered this settlement of Christian men, the very first
object to meet my eyes would be thyself, Hester Prynne, standing up, a
statue of ignominy, before the people. Nay, from the moment when we
came down the old church steps together, a married pair, I might have
beheld the bale-fire of that scarlet letter blazing at the end of our
path!”

“Thou knowest,” said Hester,—for, depressed as she was, she could not
endure this last quiet stab at the token of her shame,—“thou knowest
that I was frank with thee. I felt no love, nor feigned any.”

“True,” replied he. “It was my folly! I have said it. But, up to that
epoch of my life, I had lived in vain. The world had been so
cheerless! My heart was a habitation large enough for many guests, but
lonely and chill, and without a household fire. I longed to kindle
one! It seemed not so wild a dream,—old as I was, and sombre as I
was, and misshapen as I was,—that the simple bliss, which is
scattered far and wide, for all mankind to gather up, might yet be
mine. And so, Hester, I drew thee into my heart, into its innermost
chamber, and sought to warm thee by the warmth which thy presence made
there!”

“I have greatly wronged thee,” murmured Hester.

“We have wronged each other,” answered he. “Mine was the first wrong,
when I betrayed thy budding youth into a false and unnatural relation
with my decay. Therefore, as a man who has not thought and
philosophized in vain, I seek no vengeance, plot no evil against thee.
Between thee and me the scale hangs fairly balanced. But, Hester, the
man lives who has wronged us both! Who is he?”

“Ask me not!” replied Hester Prynne, looking firmly into his face.
“That thou shalt never know!”

“Never, sayest thou?” rejoined he, with a smile of dark and
self-relying intelligence. “Never know him! Believe me, Hester, there
are few things,—whether in the outward world, or, to a certain depth,
in the invisible sphere of thought,—few things hidden from the man
who devotes himself earnestly and unreservedly to the solution of a
mystery. Thou mayest cover up thy secret from the prying multitude.
Thou mayest conceal it, too, from the ministers and magistrates, even
as thou didst this day, when they sought to wrench the name out of thy
heart, and give thee a partner on thy pedestal. But, as for me, I come
to the inquest with other senses than they possess. I shall seek this
man, as I have sought truth in books; as I have sought gold in
alchemy. There is a sympathy that will make me conscious of him. I
shall see him tremble. I shall feel myself shudder, suddenly and
unawares. Sooner or later, he must needs be mine!”

The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her, that
Hester Prynne clasped her hands over her heart, dreading lest he
should read the secret there at once.

“Thou wilt not reveal his name? Not the less he is mine,” resumed he,
with a look of confidence, as if destiny were at one with him. “He
bears no letter of infamy wrought into his garment, as thou dost; but
I shall read it on his heart. Yet fear not for him! Think not that I
shall interfere with Heaven’s own method of retribution, or, to my own
loss, betray him to the gripe of human law. Neither do thou imagine
that I shall contrive aught against his life; no, nor against his
fame, if, as I judge, he be a man of fair repute. Let him live! Let
him hide himself in outward honor, if he may! Not the less he shall be
mine!”

“Thy acts are like mercy,” said Hester, bewildered and appalled. “But
thy words interpret thee as a terror!”

“One thing, thou that wast my wife, I would enjoin upon thee,”
continued the scholar. “Thou hast kept the secret of thy paramour.
Keep, likewise, mine! There are none in this land that know me.
Breathe not, to any human soul, that thou didst ever call me husband!
Here, on this wild outskirt of the earth, I shall pitch my tent; for,
elsewhere a wanderer, and isolated from human interests, I find here a
woman, a man, a child, amongst whom and myself there exist the closest
ligaments. No matter whether of love or hate; no matter whether of
right or wrong! Thou and thine, Hester Prynne, belong to me. My home
is where thou art, and where he is. But betray me not!”

[Illustration: “The Eyes of the wrinkled Scholar glowed”]

“Wherefore dost thou desire it?” inquired Hester, shrinking, she
hardly knew why, from this secret bond. “Why not announce thyself
openly, and cast me off at once?”

“It may be,” he replied, “because I will not encounter the dishonor
that besmirches the husband of a faithless woman. It may be for other
reasons. Enough, it is my purpose to live and die unknown. Let,
therefore, thy husband be to the world as one already dead, and of
whom no tidings shall ever come. Recognize me not, by word, by sign,
by look! Breathe not the secret, above all, to the man thou wottest
of. Shouldst thou fail me in this, beware! His fame, his position, his
life, will be in my hands. Beware!”

“I will keep thy secret, as I have his,” said Hester.

“Swear it!” rejoined he.

And she took the oath.

“And now, Mistress Prynne,” said old Roger Chillingworth, as he was
hereafter to be named, “I leave thee alone; alone with thy infant, and
the scarlet letter! How is it, Hester? Doth thy sentence bind thee to
wear the token in thy sleep? Art thou not afraid of nightmares and
hideous dreams?”

“Why dost thou smile so at me?” inquired Hester, troubled at the
expression of his eyes. “Art thou like the Black Man that haunts the
forest round about us? Hast thou enticed me into a bond that will
prove the ruin of my soul?”

“Not thy soul,” he answered, with another smile. “No, not thine!”




                            [Illustration]

                                  V.

                         HESTER AT HER NEEDLE.


Hester Prynne’s term of confinement was now at an end. Her prison-door
was thrown open, and she came forth into the sunshine, which, falling
on all alike, seemed, to her sick and morbid heart, as if meant for no
other purpose than to reveal the scarlet letter on her breast. Perhaps
there was a more real torture in her first unattended footsteps from
the threshold of the prison, than even in the procession and spectacle
that have been described, where she was made the common infamy, at
which all mankind was summoned to point its finger. Then, she was
supported by an unnatural tension of the nerves, and by all the
combative energy of her character, which enabled her to convert the
scene into a kind of lurid triumph. It was, moreover, a separate and
insulated event, to occur but once in her lifetime, and to meet which,
therefore, reckless of economy, she might call up the vital strength
that would have sufficed for many quiet years. The very law that
condemned her—a giant of stern features, but with vigor to support,
as well as to annihilate, in his iron arm—had held her up, through
the terrible ordeal of her ignominy. But now, with this unattended
walk from her prison-door, began the daily custom; and she must either
sustain and carry it forward by the ordinary resources of her nature,
or sink beneath it. She could no longer borrow from the future to help
her through the present grief. To-morrow would bring its own trial
with it; so would the next day, and so would the next; each its own
trial, and yet the very same that was now so unutterably grievous to
be borne. The days of the far-off future would toil onward, still with
the same burden for her to take up, and bear along with her, but never
to fling down; for the accumulating days, and added years, would pile
up their misery upon the heap of shame. Throughout them all, giving up
her individuality, she would become the general symbol at which the
preacher and moralist might point, and in which they might vivify and
embody their images of woman’s frailty and sinful passion. Thus the
young and pure would be taught to look at her, with the scarlet letter
flaming on her breast,—at her, the child of honorable parents,—at
her, the mother of a babe, that would hereafter be a woman,—at her,
who had once been innocent,—as the figure, the body, the reality of
sin. And over her grave, the infamy that she must carry thither would
be her only monument.

It may seem marvellous, that, with the world before her,—kept by no
restrictive clause of her condemnation within the limits of the
Puritan settlement, so remote and so obscure,—free to return to her
birthplace, or to any other European land, and there hide her
character and identity under a new exterior, as completely as if
emerging into another state of being,—and having also the passes of
the dark, inscrutable forest open to her, where the wildness of her
nature might assimilate itself with a people whose customs and life
were alien from the law that had condemned her,—it may seem
marvellous, that this woman should still call that place her home,
where, and where only, she must needs be the type of shame. But there
is a fatality, a feeling so irresistible and inevitable that it has
the force of doom, which almost invariably compels human beings to
linger around and haunt, ghost-like, the spot where some great and
marked event has given the color to their lifetime; and still the more
irresistibly, the darker the tinge that saddens it. Her sin, her
ignominy, were the roots which she had struck into the soil. It was as
if a new birth, with stronger assimilations than the first, had
converted the forest-land, still so uncongenial to every other pilgrim
and wanderer, into Hester Prynne’s wild and dreary, but life-long
home. All other scenes of earth—even that village of rural England,
where happy infancy and stainless maidenhood seemed yet to be in her
mother’s keeping, like garments put off long ago—were foreign to her,
in comparison. The chain that bound her here was of iron links, and
galling to her inmost soul, but could never be broken.

It might be, too,—doubtless it was so, although she hid the secret
from herself, and grew pale whenever it struggled out of her heart,
like a serpent from its hole,—it might be that another feeling kept
her within the scene and pathway that had been so fatal. There dwelt,
there trode the feet of one with whom she deemed herself connected in
a union, that, unrecognized on earth, would bring them together before
the bar of final judgment, and make that their marriage-altar, for a
joint futurity of endless retribution. Over and over again, the
tempter of souls had thrust this idea upon Hester’s contemplation, and
laughed at the passionate and desperate joy with which she seized,
and then strove to cast it from her. She barely looked the idea in the
face, and hastened to bar it in its dungeon. What she compelled
herself to believe—what, finally, she reasoned upon, as her motive
for continuing a resident of New England—was half a truth, and half a
self-delusion. Here, she said to herself, had been the scene of her
guilt, and here should be the scene of her earthly punishment; and so,
perchance, the torture of her daily shame would at length purge her
soul, and work out another purity than that which she had lost; more
saint-like, because the result of martyrdom.

[Illustration: The Lonesome Dwelling]

Hester Prynne, therefore, did not flee. On the outskirts of the town,
within the verge of the peninsula, but not in close vicinity to any
other habitation, there was a small thatched cottage. It had been
built by an earlier settler, and abandoned because the soil about it
was too sterile for cultivation, while its comparative remoteness put
it out of the sphere of that social activity which already marked the
habits of the emigrants. It stood on the shore, looking across a basin
of the sea at the forest-covered hills, towards the west. A clump of
scrubby trees, such as alone grew on the peninsula, did not so much
conceal the cottage from view, as seem to denote that here was some
object which would fain have been, or at least ought to be, concealed.
In this little, lonesome dwelling, with some slender means that she
possessed, and by the license of the magistrates, who still kept an
inquisitorial watch over her, Hester established herself, with her
infant child. A mystic shadow of suspicion immediately attached itself
to the spot. Children, too young to comprehend wherefore this woman
should be shut out from the sphere of human charities, would creep
nigh enough to behold her plying her needle at the cottage-window, or
standing in the doorway, or laboring in her little garden, or coming
forth along the pathway that led townward; and, discerning the scarlet
letter on her breast, would scamper off with a strange, contagious
fear.

Lonely as was Hester’s situation, and without a friend on earth who
dared to show himself, she, however, incurred no risk of want. She
possessed an art that sufficed, even in a land that afforded
comparatively little scope for its exercise, to supply food for her
thriving infant and herself. It was the art—then, as now, almost the
only one within a woman’s grasp—of needlework. She bore on her
breast, in the curiously embroidered letter, a specimen of her
delicate and imaginative skill, of which the dames of a court might
gladly have availed themselves, to add the richer and more spiritual
adornment of human ingenuity to their fabrics of silk and gold. Here,
indeed, in the sable simplicity that generally characterized the
Puritanic modes of dress, there might be an infrequent call for the
finer productions of her handiwork. Yet the taste of the age,
demanding whatever was elaborate in compositions of this kind, did not
fail to extend its influence over our stern progenitors, who had cast
behind them so many fashions which it might seem harder to dispense
with. Public ceremonies, such as ordinations, the installation of
magistrates, and all that could give majesty to the forms in which a
new government manifested itself to the people, were, as a matter of
policy, marked by a stately and well-conducted ceremonial, and a
sombre, but yet a studied magnificence. Deep ruffs, painfully wrought
bands, and gorgeously embroidered gloves, were all deemed necessary to
the official state of men assuming the reins of power; and were
readily allowed to individuals dignified by rank or wealth, even while
sumptuary laws forbade these and similar extravagances to the plebeian
order. In the array of funerals, too,—whether for the apparel of the
dead body, or to typify, by manifold emblematic devices of sable cloth
and snowy lawn, the sorrow of the survivors,—there was a frequent and
characteristic demand for such labor as Hester Prynne could supply.
Baby-linen—for babies then wore robes of state—afforded still
another possibility of toil and emolument.

By degrees, nor very slowly, her handiwork became what would now be
termed the fashion. Whether from commiseration for a woman of so
miserable a destiny; or from the morbid curiosity that gives a
fictitious value even to common or worthless things; or by whatever
other intangible circumstance was then, as now, sufficient to bestow,
on some persons, what others might seek in vain; or because Hester
really filled a gap which must otherwise have remained vacant; it is
certain that she had ready and fairly requited employment for as many
hours as she saw fit to occupy with her needle. Vanity, it may be,
chose to mortify itself, by putting on, for ceremonials of pomp and
state, the garments that had been wrought by her sinful hands. Her
needlework was seen on the ruff of the Governor; military men wore it
on their scarfs, and the minister on his band; it decked the baby’s
little cap; it was shut up, to be mildewed and moulder away, in the
coffins of the dead. But it is not recorded that, in a single
instance, her skill was called in aid to embroider the white veil
which was to cover the pure blushes of a bride. The exception
indicated the ever-relentless rigor with which society frowned upon
her sin.

Hester sought not to acquire anything beyond a subsistence, of the
plainest and most ascetic description, for herself, and a simple
abundance for her child. Her own dress was of the coarsest materials
and the most sombre hue; with only that one ornament,—the scarlet
letter,—which it was her doom to wear. The child’s attire, on the
other hand, was distinguished by a fanciful, or, we might rather say,
a fantastic ingenuity, which served, indeed, to heighten the airy
charm that early began to develop itself in the little girl, but which
appeared to have also a deeper meaning. We may speak further of it
hereafter. Except for that small expenditure in the decoration of her
infant, Hester bestowed all her superfluous means in charity, on
wretches less miserable than herself, and who not unfrequently
insulted the hand that fed them. Much of the time, which she might
readily have applied to the better efforts of her art, she employed in
making coarse garments for the poor. It is probable that there was an
idea of penance in this mode of occupation, and that she offered up a
real sacrifice of enjoyment, in devoting so many hours to such rude
handiwork. She had in her nature a rich, voluptuous, Oriental
characteristic,—a taste for the gorgeously beautiful, which, save in
the exquisite productions of her needle, found nothing else, in all
the possibilities of her life, to exercise itself upon. Women derive
a pleasure, incomprehensible to the other sex, from the delicate toil
of the needle. To Hester Prynne it might have been a mode of
expressing, and therefore soothing, the passion of her life. Like all
other joys, she rejected it as sin. This morbid meddling of conscience
with an immaterial matter betokened, it is to be feared, no genuine
and steadfast penitence, but something doubtful, something that might
be deeply wrong, beneath.

In this manner, Hester Prynne came to have a part to perform in the
world. With her native energy of character, and rare capacity, it
could not entirely cast her off, although it had set a mark upon her,
more intolerable to a woman’s heart than that which branded the brow
of Cain. In all her intercourse with society, however, there was
nothing that made her feel as if she belonged to it. Every gesture,
every word, and even the silence of those with whom she came in
contact, implied, and often expressed, that she was banished, and as
much alone as if she inhabited another sphere, or communicated with
the common nature by other organs and senses than the rest of human
kind. She stood apart from moral interests, yet close beside them,
like a ghost that revisits the familiar fireside, and can no longer
make itself seen or felt; no more smile with the household joy, nor
mourn with the kindred sorrow; or, should it succeed in manifesting
its forbidden sympathy, awakening only terror and horrible repugnance.
These emotions, in fact, and its bitterest scorn besides, seemed to be
the sole portion that she retained in the universal heart. It was not
an age of delicacy; and her position, although she understood it well,
and was in little danger of forgetting it, was often brought before
her vivid self-perception, like a new anguish, by the rudest touch
upon the tenderest spot. The poor, as we have already said, whom she
sought out to be the objects of her bounty, often reviled the hand
that was stretched forth to succor them. Dames of elevated rank,
likewise, whose doors she entered in the way of her occupation, were
accustomed to distil drops of bitterness into her heart; sometimes
through that alchemy of quiet malice, by which women can concoct a
subtle poison from ordinary trifles; and sometimes, also, by a coarser
expression, that fell upon the sufferer’s defenceless breast like a
rough blow upon an ulcerated wound. Hester had schooled herself long
and well; she never responded to these attacks, save by a flush of
crimson that rose irrepressibly over her pale cheek, and again
subsided into the depths of her bosom. She was patient,—a martyr,
indeed,—but she forbore to pray for her enemies; lest, in spite of
her forgiving aspirations, the words of the blessing should stubbornly
twist themselves into a curse.

Continually, and in a thousand other ways, did she feel the
innumerable throbs of anguish that had been so cunningly contrived for
her by the undying, the ever-active sentence of the Puritan tribunal.
Clergymen paused in the street to address words of exhortation, that
brought a crowd, with its mingled grin and frown, around the poor,
sinful woman. If she entered a church, trusting to share the Sabbath
smile of the Universal Father, it was often her mishap to find herself
the text of the discourse. She grew to have a dread of children; for
they had imbibed from their parents a vague idea of something horrible
in this dreary woman, gliding silently through the town, with never
any companion but one only child. Therefore, first allowing her to
pass, they pursued her at a distance with shrill cries, and the
utterance of a word that had no distinct purport to their own
minds, but was none the less terrible to her, as proceeding from lips
that babbled it unconsciously. It seemed to argue so wide a diffusion
of her shame, that all nature knew of it; it could have caused her no
deeper pang, had the leaves of the trees whispered the dark story
among themselves,—had the summer breeze murmured about it,—had the
wintry blast shrieked it aloud! Another peculiar torture was felt in
the gaze of a new eye. When strangers looked curiously at the scarlet
letter,—and none ever failed to do so,—they branded it afresh into
Hester’s soul; so that, oftentimes, she could scarcely refrain, yet
always did refrain, from covering the symbol with her hand. But then,
again, an accustomed eye had likewise its own anguish to inflict. Its
cool stare of familiarity was intolerable. From first to last, in
short, Hester Prynne had always this dreadful agony in feeling a human
eye upon the token; the spot never grew callous; it seemed, on the
contrary, to grow more sensitive with daily torture.

[Illustration: Lonely Footsteps]

But sometimes, once in many days, or perchance in many months, she
felt an eye—a human eye—upon the ignominious brand, that seemed to
give a momentary relief, as if half of her agony were shared. The next
instant, back it all rushed again, with still a deeper throb of pain;
for, in that brief interval, she had sinned anew. Had Hester sinned
alone?

Her imagination was somewhat affected, and, had she been of a softer
moral and intellectual fibre, would have been still more so, by the
strange and solitary anguish of her life. Walking to and fro, with
those lonely footsteps, in the little world with which she was
outwardly connected, it now and then appeared to Hester,—if
altogether fancy, it was nevertheless too potent to be resisted,—she
felt or fancied, then, that the scarlet letter had endowed her with a
new sense. She shuddered to believe, yet could not help believing,
that it gave her a sympathetic knowledge of the hidden sin in other
hearts. She was terror-stricken by the revelations that were thus
made. What were they? Could they be other than the insidious whispers
of the bad angel, who would fain have persuaded the struggling woman,
as yet only half his victim, that the outward guise of purity was but
a lie, and that, if truth were everywhere to be shown, a scarlet
letter would blaze forth on many a bosom besides Hester Prynne’s? Or,
must she receive those intimations—so obscure, yet so distinct—as
truth? In all her miserable experience, there was nothing else so
awful and so loathsome as this sense. It perplexed, as well as shocked
her, by the irreverent inopportuneness of the occasions that brought
it into vivid action. Sometimes the red infamy upon her breast would
give a sympathetic throb, as she passed near a venerable minister or
magistrate, the model of piety and justice, to whom that age of
antique reverence looked up, as to a mortal man in fellowship with
angels. “What evil thing is at hand?” would Hester say to herself.
Lifting her reluctant eyes, there would be nothing human within the
scope of view, save the form of this earthly saint! Again, a mystic
sisterhood would contumaciously assert itself, as she met the
sanctified frown of some matron, who, according to the rumor of all
tongues, had kept cold snow within her bosom throughout life. That
unsunned snow in the matron’s bosom, and the burning shame on Hester
Prynne’s,—what had the two in common? Or, once more, the electric
thrill would give her warning,—“Behold, Hester, here is a
companion!”—and, looking up, she would detect the eyes of a young
maiden glancing at the scarlet letter, shyly and aside, and quickly
averted with a faint, chill crimson in her cheeks; as if her purity
were somewhat sullied by that momentary glance. O Fiend, whose
talisman was that fatal symbol, wouldst thou leave nothing, whether in
youth or age, for this poor sinner to revere?—such loss of faith is
ever one of the saddest results of sin. Be it accepted as a proof that
all was not corrupt in this poor victim of her own frailty, and man’s
hard law, that Hester Prynne yet struggled to believe that no
fellow-mortal was guilty like herself.

The vulgar, who, in those dreary old times, were always contributing a
grotesque horror to what interested their imaginations, had a story
about the scarlet letter which we might readily work up into a
terrific legend. They averred, that the symbol was not mere scarlet
cloth, tinged in an earthly dye-pot, but was red-hot with infernal
fire, and could be seen glowing all alight, whenever Hester Prynne
walked abroad in the night-time. And we must needs say, it seared
Hester’s bosom so deeply, that perhaps there was more truth in the
rumor than our modern incredulity may be inclined to admit.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  VI.

                                PEARL.


[Illustration]

We have as yet hardly spoken of the infant; that little creature,
whose innocent life had sprung, by the inscrutable decree of
Providence, a lovely and immortal flower, out of the rank luxuriance
of a guilty passion. How strange it seemed to the sad woman, as she
watched the growth, and the beauty that became every day more
brilliant, and the intelligence that threw its quivering sunshine over
the tiny features of this child! Her Pearl!—For so had Hester called
her; not as a name expressive of her aspect, which had nothing of the
calm, white, unimpassioned lustre that would be indicated by the
comparison. But she named the infant “Pearl,” as being of great
price,—purchased with all she had,—her mother’s only treasure! How
strange, indeed! Man had marked this woman’s sin by a scarlet letter,
which had such potent and disastrous efficacy that no human sympathy
could reach her, save it were sinful like herself. God, as a direct
consequence of the sin which man thus punished, had given her a lovely
child, whose place was on that same dishonored bosom, to connect her
parent forever with the race and descent of mortals, and to be finally
a blessed soul in heaven! Yet these thoughts affected Hester Prynne
less with hope than apprehension. She knew that her deed had been
evil; she could have no faith, therefore, that its result would be
good. Day after day, she looked fearfully into the child’s expanding
nature, ever dreading to detect some dark and wild peculiarity, that
should correspond with the guiltiness to which she owed her being.

Certainly, there was no physical defect. By its perfect shape, its
vigor, and its natural dexterity in the use of all its untried limbs,
the infant was worthy to have been brought forth in Eden; worthy to
have been left there, to be the plaything of the angels, after the
world’s first parents were driven out. The child had a native grace
which does not invariably coexist with faultless beauty; its attire,
however simple, always impressed the beholder as if it were the very
garb that precisely became it best. But little Pearl was not clad in
rustic weeds. Her mother, with a morbid purpose that may be better
understood hereafter, had bought the richest tissues that could be
procured, and allowed her imaginative faculty its full play in the
arrangement and decoration of the dresses which the child wore, before
the public eye. So magnificent was the small figure, when thus
arrayed, and such was the splendor of Pearl’s own proper beauty,
shining through the gorgeous robes which might have extinguished a
paler loveliness, that there was an absolute circle of radiance around
her, on the darksome cottage floor. And yet a russet gown, torn and
soiled with the child’s rude play, made a picture of her just as
perfect. Pearl’s aspect was imbued with a spell of infinite variety;
in this one child there were many children, comprehending the full
scope between the wild-flower prettiness of a peasant-baby, and the
pomp, in little, of an infant princess. Throughout all, however, there
was a trait of passion, a certain depth of hue, which she never lost;
and if, in any of her changes, she had grown fainter or paler, she
would have ceased to be herself,—it would have been no longer Pearl!

This outward mutability indicated, and did not more than fairly
express, the various properties of her inner life. Her nature appeared
to possess depth, too, as well as variety; but—or else Hester’s fears
deceived her—it lacked reference and adaptation to the world into
which she was born. The child could not be made amenable to rules. In
giving her existence, a great law had been broken; and the result was
a being whose elements were perhaps beautiful and brilliant, but all
in disorder; or with an order peculiar to themselves, amidst which the
point of variety and arrangement was difficult or impossible to be
discovered. Hester could only account for the child’s character—and
even then most vaguely and imperfectly—by recalling what she herself
had been, during that momentous period while Pearl was imbibing her
soul from the spiritual world, and her bodily frame from its material
of earth. The mother’s impassioned state had been the medium through
which were transmitted to the unborn infant the rays of its moral
life; and, however white and clear originally, they had taken the deep
stains of crimson and gold, the fiery lustre, the black shadow, and
the untempered light of the intervening substance. Above all, the
warfare of Hester’s spirit, at that epoch, was perpetuated in Pearl.
She could recognize her wild, desperate, defiant mood, the flightiness
of her temper, and even some of the very cloud-shapes of gloom and
despondency that had brooded in her heart. They were now illuminated
by the morning radiance of a young child’s disposition, but later in
the day of earthly existence might be prolific of the storm and
whirlwind.

The discipline of the family, in those days, was of a far more rigid
kind than now. The frown, the harsh rebuke, the frequent application
of the rod, enjoined by Scriptural authority, were used, not merely in
the way of punishment for actual offences, but as a wholesome regimen
for the growth and promotion of all childish virtues. Hester Prynne,
nevertheless, the lonely mother of this one child, ran little risk of
erring on the side of undue severity. Mindful, however, of her own
errors and misfortunes, she early sought to impose a tender, but
strict control over the infant immortality that was committed to her
charge. But the task was beyond her skill. After testing both smiles
and frowns, and proving that neither mode of treatment possessed any
calculable influence, Hester was ultimately compelled to stand aside,
and permit the child to be swayed by her own impulses. Physical
compulsion or restraint was effectual, of course, while it lasted. As
to any other kind of discipline, whether addressed to her mind or
heart, little Pearl might or might not be within its reach, in
accordance with the caprice that ruled the moment. Her mother, while
Pearl was yet an infant, grew acquainted with a certain peculiar look,
that warned her when it would be labor thrown away to insist,
persuade, or plead. It was a look so intelligent, yet inexplicable,
so perverse, sometimes so malicious, but generally accompanied by a
wild flow of spirits, that Hester could not help questioning, at such
moments, whether Pearl were a human child. She seemed rather an airy
sprite, which, after playing its fantastic sports for a little while
upon the cottage floor, would flit away with a mocking smile. Whenever
that look appeared in her wild, bright, deeply black eyes, it invested
her with a strange remoteness and intangibility; it was as if she were
hovering in the air and might vanish, like a glimmering light, that
comes we know not whence, and goes we know not whither. Beholding it,
Hester was constrained to rush towards the child,—to pursue the
little elf in the flight which she invariably began,—to snatch her to
her bosom, with a close pressure and earnest kisses,—not so much from
overflowing love, as to assure herself that Pearl was flesh and blood,
and not utterly delusive. But Pearl’s laugh, when she was caught,
though full of merriment and music, made her mother more doubtful than
before.

Heart-smitten at this bewildering and baffling spell, that so often
came between herself and her sole treasure, whom she had bought so
dear, and who was all her world, Hester sometimes burst into
passionate tears. Then, perhaps,—for there was no foreseeing how it
might affect her,—Pearl would frown, and clench her little fist, and
harden her small features into a stern, unsympathizing look of
discontent. Not seldom, she would laugh anew, and louder than before,
like a thing incapable and unintelligent of human sorrow. Or—but this
more rarely happened—she would be convulsed with a rage of grief, and
sob out her love for her mother, in broken words, and seem intent on
proving that she had a heart, by breaking it. Yet Hester was hardly
safe in confiding herself to that gusty tenderness; it passed, as
suddenly as it came. Brooding over all these matters, the mother felt
like one who has evoked a spirit, but, by some irregularity in the
process of conjuration, has failed to win the master-word that should
control this new and incomprehensible intelligence. Her only real
comfort was when the child lay in the placidity of sleep. Then she was
sure of her, and tasted hours of quiet, sad, delicious happiness;
until—perhaps with that perverse expression glimmering from beneath
her opening lids—little Pearl awoke!

How soon—with what strange rapidity, indeed!—did Pearl arrive at an
age that was capable of social intercourse, beyond the mother’s
ever-ready smile and nonsense-words! And then what a happiness would
it have been, could Hester Prynne have heard her clear, bird-like
voice mingling with the uproar of other childish voices, and have
distinguished and unravelled her own darling’s tones, amid all the
entangled outcry of a group of sportive children! But this could never
be. Pearl was a born outcast of the infantile world. An imp of evil,
emblem and product of sin, she had no right among christened infants.
Nothing was more remarkable than the instinct, as it seemed, with
which the child comprehended her loneliness; the destiny that had
drawn an inviolable circle round about her; the whole peculiarity, in
short, of her position in respect to other children. Never, since her
release from prison, had Hester met the public gaze without her. In
all her walks about the town, Pearl, too, was there; first as the babe
in arms, and afterwards as the little girl, small companion of her
mother, holding a forefinger with her whole grasp, and tripping along
at the rate of three or four footsteps to one of Hester’s. She saw the
children of the settlement, on the grassy margin of the street, or at
the domestic thresholds, disporting themselves in such grim fashion
as the Puritanic nurture would permit; playing at going to church,
perchance; or at scourging Quakers; or taking scalps in a sham-fight
with the Indians; or scaring one another with freaks of imitative
witchcraft. Pearl saw, and gazed intently, but never sought to make
acquaintance. If spoken to, she would not speak again. If the children
gathered about her, as they sometimes did, Pearl would grow positively
terrible in her puny wrath, snatching up stones to fling at them, with
shrill, incoherent exclamations, that made her mother tremble, because
they had so much the sound of a witch’s anathemas in some unknown
tongue.

The truth was, that the little Puritans, being of the most intolerant
brood that ever lived, had got a vague idea of something outlandish,
unearthly, or at variance with ordinary fashions, in the mother and
child; and therefore scorned them in their hearts, and not
unfrequently reviled them with their tongues. Pearl felt the
sentiment, and requited it with the bitterest hatred that can be
supposed to rankle in a childish bosom. These outbreaks of a fierce
temper had a kind of value, and even comfort, for her mother; because
there was at least an intelligible earnestness in the mood, instead of
the fitful caprice that so often thwarted her in the child’s
manifestations. It appalled her, nevertheless, to discern here, again,
a shadowy reflection of the evil that had existed in herself. All this
enmity and passion had Pearl inherited, by inalienable right, out of
Hester’s heart. Mother and daughter stood together in the same circle
of seclusion from human society; and in the nature of the child seemed
to be perpetuated those unquiet elements that had distracted Hester
Prynne before Pearl’s birth, but had since begun to be soothed away by
the softening influences of maternity.

At home, within and around her mother’s cottage, Pearl wanted not a
wide and various circle of acquaintance. The spell of life went forth
from her ever-creative spirit, and communicated itself to a thousand
objects, as a torch kindles a flame wherever it may be applied. The
unlikeliest materials—a stick, a bunch of rags, a flower—were the
puppets of Pearl’s witchcraft, and, without undergoing any outward
change, became spiritually adapted to whatever drama occupied the
stage of her inner world. Her one baby-voice served a multitude of
imaginary personages, old and young, to talk withal. The pine-trees,
aged, black and solemn, and flinging groans and other melancholy
utterances on the breeze, needed little transformation to figure as
Puritan elders; the ugliest weeds of the garden were their children,
whom Pearl smote down and uprooted, most unmercifully. It was
wonderful, the vast variety of forms into which she threw her
intellect, with no continuity, indeed, but darting up and dancing,
always in a state of preternatural activity,—soon sinking down, as if
exhausted by so rapid and feverish a tide of life,—and succeeded by
other shapes of a similar wild energy. It was like nothing so much as
the phantasmagoric play of the northern lights. In the mere exercise
of the fancy, however, and the sportiveness of a growing mind, there
might be little more than was observable in other children of bright
faculties; except as Pearl, in the dearth of human playmates, was
thrown more upon the visionary throng which she created. The
singularity lay in the hostile feelings with which the child regarded
all these offspring of her own heart and mind. She never created a
friend, but seemed always to be sowing broadcast the dragon’s teeth,
whence sprung a harvest of armed enemies, against whom she rushed to
battle. It was inexpressibly sad—then what depth of sorrow to a
mother, who felt in her own heart the cause!—to observe, in one so
young, this constant recognition of an adverse world, and so fierce a
training of the energies that were to make good her cause, in the
contest that must ensue.

Gazing at Pearl, Hester Prynne often dropped her work upon her knees,
and cried out with an agony which she would fain have hidden, but
which made utterance for itself, betwixt speech and a groan,—“O
Father in Heaven,—if Thou art still my Father,—what is this being
which I have brought into the world!” And Pearl, overhearing the
ejaculation, or aware, through some more subtile channel, of those
throbs of anguish, would turn her vivid and beautiful little face upon
her mother, smile with sprite-like intelligence, and resume her play.

[Illustration: A touch of Pearl’s baby-hand]

One peculiarity of the child’s deportment remains yet to be told. The
very first thing which she had noticed in her life was—what?—not the
mother’s smile, responding to it, as other babies do, by that faint,
embryo smile of the little mouth, remembered so doubtfully afterwards,
and with such fond discussion whether it were indeed a smile. By no
means! But that first object of which Pearl seemed to become aware
was—shall we say it?—the scarlet letter on Hester’s bosom! One day,
as her mother stooped over the cradle, the infant’s eyes had been
caught by the glimmering of the gold embroidery about the letter; and,
putting up her little hand, she grasped at it, smiling, not
doubtfully, but with a decided gleam, that gave her face the look of a
much older child. Then, gasping for breath, did Hester Prynne clutch
the fatal token, instinctively endeavoring to tear it away; so
infinite was the torture inflicted by the intelligent touch of Pearl’s
baby-hand. Again, as if her mother’s agonized gesture were meant only
to make sport for her, did little Pearl look into her eyes, and
smile! From that epoch, except when the child was asleep, Hester had
never felt a moment’s safety; not a moment’s calm enjoyment of her.
Weeks, it is true, would sometimes elapse, during which Pearl’s gaze
might never once be fixed upon the scarlet letter; but then, again, it
would come at unawares, like the stroke of sudden death, and always
with that peculiar smile, and odd expression of the eyes.

Once, this freakish, elvish cast came into the child’s eyes, while
Hester was looking at her own image in them, as mothers are fond of
doing; and, suddenly,—for women in solitude, and with troubled
hearts, are pestered with unaccountable delusions,—she fancied that
she beheld, not her own miniature portrait, but another face, in the
small black mirror of Pearl’s eye. It was a face, fiend-like, full of
smiling malice, yet bearing the semblance of features that she had
known full well, though seldom with a smile, and never with malice in
them. It was as if an evil spirit possessed the child, and had just
then peeped forth in mockery. Many a time afterwards had Hester been
tortured, though less vividly, by the same illusion.

In the afternoon of a certain summer’s day, after Pearl grew big
enough to run about, she amused herself with gathering handfuls of
wild-flowers, and flinging them, one by one, at her mother’s bosom;
dancing up and down, like a little elf, whenever she hit the scarlet
letter. Hester’s first motion had been to cover her bosom with her
clasped hands. But, whether from pride or resignation, or a feeling
that her penance might best be wrought out by this unutterable pain,
she resisted the impulse, and sat erect, pale as death, looking sadly
into little Pearl’s wild eyes. Still came the battery of flowers,
almost invariably hitting the mark, and covering the mother’s breast
with hurts for which she could find no balm in this world, nor knew
how to seek it in another. At last, her shot being all expended, the
child stood still and gazed at Hester, with that little, laughing
image of a fiend peeping out—or, whether it peeped or no, her mother
so imagined it—from the unsearchable abyss of her black eyes.

“Child, what art thou?” cried the mother.

“O, I am your little Pearl!” answered the child.

But, while she said it, Pearl laughed, and began to dance up and down,
with the humorsome gesticulation of a little imp, whose next freak
might be to fly up the chimney.

“Art thou my child, in very truth?” asked Hester.

Nor did she put the question altogether idly, but, for the moment,
with a portion of genuine earnestness; for, such was Pearl’s wonderful
intelligence, that her mother half doubted whether she were not
acquainted with the secret spell of her existence, and might not now
reveal herself.

“Yes; I am little Pearl!” repeated the child, continuing her antics.

“Thou art not my child! Thou art no Pearl of mine!” said the mother,
half playfully; for it was often the case that a sportive impulse came
over her, in the midst of her deepest suffering. “Tell me, then, what
thou art, and who sent thee hither.”

“Tell me, mother!” said the child, seriously, coming up to Hester, and
pressing herself close to her knees. “Do thou tell me!”

“Thy Heavenly Father sent thee!” answered Hester Prynne.

But she said it with a hesitation that did not escape the acuteness of
the child. Whether moved only by her ordinary freakishness, or
because an evil spirit prompted her, she put up her small forefinger,
and touched the scarlet letter.

“He did not send me!” cried she, positively. “I have no Heavenly
Father!”

“Hush, Pearl, hush! Thou must not talk so!” answered the mother,
suppressing a groan. “He sent us all into this world. He sent even me,
thy mother. Then, much more, thee! Or, if not, thou strange and elfish
child, whence didst thou come?”

“Tell me! Tell me!” repeated Pearl, no longer seriously, but laughing,
and capering about the floor. “It is thou that must tell me!”

But Hester could not resolve the query, being herself in a dismal
labyrinth of doubt. She remembered—betwixt a smile and a shudder—the
talk of the neighboring towns-people; who, seeking vainly elsewhere
for the child’s paternity, and observing some of her odd attributes,
had given out that poor little Pearl was a demon offspring; such as,
ever since old Catholic times, had occasionally been seen on earth,
through the agency of their mother’s sin, and to promote some foul and
wicked purpose. Luther, according to the scandal of his monkish
enemies, was a brat of that hellish breed; nor was Pearl the only
child to whom this inauspicious origin was assigned, among the New
England Puritans.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 VII.

                         THE GOVERNOR’S HALL.


[Illustration]

Hester Prynne went, one day, to the mansion of Governor Bellingham,
with a pair of gloves, which she had fringed and embroidered to his
order, and which were to be worn on some great occasion of state; for,
though the chances of a popular election had caused this former ruler
to descend a step or two from the highest rank, he still held an
honorable and influential place among the colonial magistracy.

Another and far more important reason than the delivery of a pair of
embroidered gloves impelled Hester, at this time, to seek an interview
with a personage of so much power and activity in the affairs of the
settlement. It had reached her ears, that there was a design on the
part of some of the leading inhabitants, cherishing the more rigid
order of principles in religion and government, to deprive her of her
child. On the supposition that Pearl, as already hinted, was of demon
origin, these good people not unreasonably argued that a Christian
interest in the mother’s soul required them to remove such a
stumbling-block from her path. If the child, on the other hand, were
really capable of moral and religious growth, and possessed the
elements of ultimate salvation, then, surely, it would enjoy all the
fairer prospect of these advantages, by being transferred to wiser and
better guardianship than Hester Prynne’s. Among those who promoted the
design, Governor Bellingham was said to be one of the most busy. It
may appear singular, and indeed, not a little ludicrous, that an
affair of this kind, which, in later days, would have been referred to
no higher jurisdiction than that of the selectmen of the town, should
then have been a question publicly discussed, and on which statesmen
of eminence took sides. At that epoch of pristine simplicity, however,
matters of even slighter public interest, and of far less intrinsic
weight, than the welfare of Hester and her child, were strangely mixed
up with the deliberations of legislators and acts of state. The period
was hardly, if at all, earlier than that of our story, when a dispute
concerning the right of property in a pig not only caused a fierce and
bitter contest in the legislative body of the colony, but resulted in
an important modification of the framework itself of the legislature.

Full of concern, therefore,—but so conscious of her own right that it
seemed scarcely an unequal match between the public, on the one side,
and a lonely woman, backed by the sympathies of nature, on the
other,—Hester Prynne set forth from her solitary cottage. Little
Pearl, of course, was her companion. She was now of an age to run
lightly along by her mother’s side, and, constantly in motion, from
morn till sunset, could have accomplished a much longer journey than
that before her. Often, nevertheless, more from caprice than
necessity, she demanded to be taken up in arms; but was soon as
imperious to be set down again, and frisked onward before Hester on
the grassy pathway, with many a harmless trip and tumble. We have
spoken of Pearl’s rich and luxuriant beauty; a beauty that shone with
deep and vivid tints; a bright complexion, eyes possessing intensity
both of depth and glow, and hair already of a deep, glossy brown, and
which, in after years, would be nearly akin to black. There was fire
in her and throughout her; she seemed the unpremeditated offshoot of a
passionate moment. Her mother, in contriving the child’s garb, had
allowed the gorgeous tendencies of her imagination their full play;
arraying her in a crimson velvet tunic, of a peculiar cut, abundantly
embroidered with fantasies and flourishes of gold-thread. So much
strength of coloring, which must have given a wan and pallid aspect to
cheeks of a fainter bloom, was admirably adapted to Pearl’s beauty,
and made her the very brightest little jet of flame that ever danced
upon the earth.

But it was a remarkable attribute of this garb, and, indeed, of the
child’s whole appearance, that it irresistibly and inevitably reminded
the beholder of the token which Hester Prynne was doomed to wear upon
her bosom. It was the scarlet letter in another form; the scarlet
letter endowed with life! The mother herself—as if the red ignominy
were so deeply scorched into her brain that all her conceptions
assumed its form—had carefully wrought out the similitude; lavishing
many hours of morbid ingenuity, to create an analogy between the
object of her affection and the emblem of her guilt and torture. But,
in truth, Pearl was the one, as well as the other; and only in
consequence of that identity had Hester contrived so perfectly to
represent the scarlet letter in her appearance.

As the two wayfarers came within the precincts of the town, the
children of the Puritans looked up from their play,—or what passed
for play with those sombre little urchins,—and spake gravely one to
another:—

“Behold, verily, there is the woman of the scarlet letter; and, of a
truth, moreover, there is the likeness of the scarlet letter running
along by her side! Come, therefore, and let us fling mud at them!”

But Pearl, who was a dauntless child, after frowning, stamping her
foot, and shaking her little hand with a variety of threatening
gestures, suddenly made a rush at the knot of her enemies, and put
them all to flight. She resembled, in her fierce pursuit of them, an
infant pestilence,—the scarlet fever, or some such half-fledged angel
of judgment,—whose mission was to punish the sins of the rising
generation. She screamed and shouted, too, with a terrific volume of
sound, which, doubtless, caused the hearts of the fugitives to quake
within them. The victory accomplished, Pearl returned quietly to her
mother, and looked up, smiling, into her face.

Without further adventure, they reached the dwelling of Governor
Bellingham. This was a large wooden house, built in a fashion of which
there are specimens still extant in the streets of our older towns;
now moss-grown, crumbling to decay, and melancholy at heart with the
many sorrowful or joyful occurrences, remembered or forgotten, that
have happened, and passed away, within their dusky chambers. Then,
however, there was the freshness of the passing year on its exterior,
and the cheerfulness, gleaming forth from the sunny windows, of a
human habitation, into which death had never entered. It had, indeed,
a very cheery aspect; the walls being overspread with a kind of
stucco, in which fragments of broken glass were plentifully
intermixed; so that, when the sunshine fell aslant-wise over the front
of the edifice, it glittered and sparkled as if diamonds had been
flung against it by the double handful. The brilliancy might have
befitted Aladdin’s palace, rather than the mansion of a grave old
Puritan ruler. It was further decorated with strange and seemingly
cabalistic figures and diagrams, suitable to the quaint taste of the
age, which had been drawn in the stucco when newly laid on, and had
now grown hard and durable, for the admiration of after times.

Pearl, looking at this bright wonder of a house, began to caper and
dance, and imperatively required that the whole breadth of sunshine
should be stripped off its front, and given her to play with.

“No, my little Pearl!” said her mother. “Thou must gather thine own
sunshine. I have none to give thee!”

They approached the door; which was of an arched form, and flanked on
each side by a narrow tower or projection of the edifice, in both of
which were lattice-windows, with wooden shutters to close over them at
need. Lifting the iron hammer that hung at the portal, Hester Prynne
gave a summons, which was answered by one of the Governor’s
bond-servants; a free-born Englishman, but now a seven years’ slave.
During that term he was to be the property of his master, and as much
a commodity of bargain and sale as an ox, or a joint-stool. The serf
wore the blue coat, which was the customary garb of serving-men of
that period, and long before, in the old hereditary halls of England.

“Is the worshipful Governor Bellingham within?” inquired Hester.

“Yea, forsooth,” replied the bond-servant, staring with wide-open eyes
at the scarlet letter, which, being a new-comer in the country, he had
never before seen. “Yea, his honorable worship is within. But he hath
a godly minister or two with him, and likewise a leech. Ye may not see
his worship now.”

“Nevertheless, I will enter,” answered Hester Prynne, and the
bond-servant, perhaps judging from the decision of her air, and the
glittering symbol in her bosom, that she was a great lady in the land,
offered no opposition.

So the mother and little Pearl were admitted into the hall of
entrance. With many variations, suggested by the nature of his
building-materials, diversity of climate, and a different mode of
social life, Governor Bellingham had planned his new habitation after
the residences of gentlemen of fair estate in his native land. Here,
then, was a wide and reasonably lofty hall, extending through the
whole depth of the house, and forming a medium of general
communication, more or less directly, with all the other apartments.
At one extremity, this spacious room was lighted by the windows of the
two towers, which formed a small recess on either side of the portal.
At the other end, though partly muffled by a curtain, it was more
powerfully illuminated by one of those embowed hall-windows which we
read of in old books, and which was provided with a deep and cushioned
seat. Here, on the cushion, lay a folio tome, probably of the
Chronicles of England, or other such substantial literature; even as,
in our own days, we scatter gilded volumes on the centre-table, to be
turned over by the casual guest. The furniture of the hall consisted
of some ponderous chairs, the backs of which were elaborately carved
with wreaths of oaken flowers; and likewise a table in the same taste;
the whole being of the Elizabethan age, or perhaps earlier, and
heirlooms, transferred hither from the Governor’s paternal home. On
the table—in token that the sentiment of old English hospitality had
not been left behind—stood a large pewter tankard, at the bottom of
which, had Hester or Pearl peeped into it, they might have seen the
frothy remnant of a recent draught of ale.

On the wall hung a row of portraits, representing the forefathers of
the Bellingham lineage, some with armor on their breasts, and others
with stately ruffs and robes of peace. All were characterized by the
sternness and severity which old portraits so invariably put on; as if
they were the ghosts, rather than the pictures, of departed worthies,
and were gazing with harsh and intolerant criticism at the pursuits
and enjoyments of living men.

[Illustration: The Governor’s Breastplate]

At about the centre of the oaken panels, that lined the hall, was
suspended a suit of mail, not, like the pictures, an ancestral relic,
but of the most modern date; for it had been manufactured by a skilful
armorer in London, the same year in which Governor Bellingham came
over to New England. There was a steel head-piece, a cuirass, a
gorget, and greaves, with a pair of gauntlets and a sword hanging
beneath; all, and especially the helmet and breastplate, so highly
burnished as to glow with white radiance, and scatter an illumination
everywhere about upon the floor. This bright panoply was not meant for
mere idle show, but had been worn by the Governor on many a solemn
muster and training field, and had glittered, moreover, at the head of
a regiment in the Pequod war. For, though bred a lawyer, and
accustomed to speak of Bacon, Coke, Noye, and Finch as his
professional associates, the exigencies of this new country had
transformed Governor Bellingham into a soldier, as well as a statesman
and ruler.

Little Pearl—who was as greatly pleased with the gleaming armor as
she had been with the glittering frontispiece of the house—spent some
time looking into the polished mirror of the breastplate.

“Mother,” cried she, “I see you here. Look! Look!”

Hester looked, by way of humoring the child; and she saw that, owing
to the peculiar effect of this convex mirror, the scarlet letter was
represented in exaggerated and gigantic proportions, so as to be
greatly the most prominent feature of her appearance. In truth, she
seemed absolutely hidden behind it. Pearl pointed upward, also, at a
similar picture in the head-piece; smiling at her mother, with the
elfish intelligence that was so familiar an expression on her small
physiognomy. That look of naughty merriment was likewise reflected in
the mirror, with so much breadth and intensity of effect, that it made
Hester Prynne feel as if it could not be the image of her own child,
but of an imp who was seeking to mould itself into Pearl’s shape.

“Come along, Pearl,” said she, drawing her away. “Come and look into
this fair garden. It may be we shall see flowers there; more beautiful
ones than we find in the woods.”

Pearl, accordingly, ran to the bow-window, at the farther end of the
hall, and looked along the vista of a garden-walk, carpeted with
closely shaven grass, and bordered with some rude and immature attempt
at shrubbery. But the proprietor appeared already to have
relinquished, as hopeless, the effort to perpetuate on this side of
the Atlantic, in a hard soil and amid the close struggle for
subsistence, the native English taste for ornamental gardening.
Cabbages grew in plain sight; and a pumpkin-vine, rooted at some
distance, had run across the intervening space, and deposited one of
its gigantic products directly beneath the hall-window; as if to warn
the Governor that this great lump of vegetable gold was as rich an
ornament as New England earth would offer him. There were a few
rose-bushes, however, and a number of apple-trees, probably the
descendants of those planted by the Reverend Mr. Blackstone, the first
settler of the peninsula; that half-mythological personage, who rides
through our early annals, seated on the back of a bull.

Pearl, seeing the rose-bushes, began to cry for a red rose, and would
not be pacified.

“Hush, child, hush!” said her mother, earnestly. “Do not cry, dear
little Pearl! I hear voices in the garden. The Governor is coming, and
gentlemen along with him!”

In fact, adown the vista of the garden avenue a number of persons were
seen approaching towards the house. Pearl, in utter scorn of her
mother’s attempt to quiet her, gave an eldritch scream, and then
became silent; not from any notion of obedience, but because the quick
and mobile curiosity of her disposition was excited by the appearance
of these new personages.




                            [Illustration]

                                 VIII.

                    THE ELF-CHILD AND THE MINISTER.


Governor Bellingham, in a loose gown and easy cap,—such as elderly
gentlemen loved to endue themselves with, in their domestic
privacy,—walked foremost, and appeared to be showing off his estate,
and expatiating on his projected improvements. The wide circumference
of an elaborate ruff, beneath his gray beard, in the antiquated
fashion of King James’s reign, caused his head to look not a little
like that of John the Baptist in a charger. The impression made by his
aspect, so rigid and severe, and frost-bitten with more than autumnal
age, was hardly in keeping with the appliances of worldly enjoyment
wherewith he had evidently done his utmost to surround himself. But it
is an error to suppose that our grave forefathers—though accustomed
to speak and think of human existence as a state merely of trial and
warfare, and though unfeignedly prepared to sacrifice goods and life
at the behest of duty—made it a matter of conscience to reject such
means of comfort, or even luxury, as lay fairly within their grasp.
This creed was never taught, for instance, by the venerable pastor,
John Wilson, whose beard, white as a snow-drift, was seen over
Governor Bellingham’s shoulder; while its wearer suggested that pears
and peaches might yet be naturalized in the New England climate, and
that purple grapes might possibly be compelled to nourish, against the
sunny garden-wall. The old clergyman, nurtured at the rich bosom of
the English Church, had a long-established and legitimate taste for
all good and comfortable things; and however stern he might show
himself in the pulpit, or in his public reproof of such transgressions
as that of Hester Prynne, still the genial benevolence of his private
life had won him warmer affection than was accorded to any of his
professional contemporaries.

Behind the Governor and Mr. Wilson came two other guests: one the
Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale, whom the reader may remember as having
taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of Hester Prynne’s
disgrace; and, in close companionship with him, old Roger
Chillingworth, a person of great skill in physic, who, for two or
three years past, had been settled in the town. It was understood that
this learned man was the physician as well as friend of the young
minister, whose health had severely suffered, of late, by his too
unreserved self-sacrifice to the labors and duties of the pastoral
relation.

The Governor, in advance of his visitors, ascended one or two steps,
and, throwing open the leaves of the great hall-window, found himself
close to little Pearl. The shadow of the curtain fell on Hester
Prynne, and partially concealed her.

“What have we here?” said Governor Bellingham, looking with surprise
at the scarlet little figure before him. “I profess, I have never seen
the like, since my days of vanity, in old King James’s time, when I
was wont to esteem it a high favor to be admitted to a court mask!
There used to be a swarm of these small apparitions, in holiday time;
and we called them children of the Lord of Misrule. But how gat such a
guest into my hall?”

“Ay, indeed!” cried good old Mr. Wilson. “What little bird of scarlet
plumage may this be? Methinks I have seen just such figures, when the
sun has been shining through a richly painted window, and tracing out
the golden and crimson images across the floor. But that was in the
old land. Prithee, young one, who art thou, and what has ailed thy
mother to bedizen thee in this strange fashion? Art thou a Christian
child,—ha? Dost know thy catechism? Or art thou one of those naughty
elfs or fairies, whom we thought to have left behind us, with other
relics of Papistry, in merry old England?”

“I am mother’s child,” answered the scarlet vision, “and my name is
Pearl!”

“Pearl?—Ruby, rather!—or Coral!—or Red Rose, at the very least,
judging from thy hue!” responded the old minister, putting forth his
hand in a vain attempt to pat little Pearl on the cheek. “But where is
this mother of thine? Ah! I see,” he added; and, turning to Governor
Bellingham, whispered, “This is the selfsame child of whom we have
held speech together; and behold here the unhappy woman, Hester
Prynne, her mother!”

“Sayest thou so?” cried the Governor. “Nay, we might have judged that
such a child’s mother must needs be a scarlet woman, and a worthy type
of her of Babylon! But she comes at a good time; and we will look into
this matter forthwith.”

Governor Bellingham stepped through the window into the hall, followed
by his three guests.

“Hester Prynne,” said he, fixing his naturally stern regard on the
wearer of the scarlet letter, “there hath been much question
concerning thee, of late. The point hath been weightily discussed,
whether we, that are of authority and influence, do well discharge our
consciences by trusting an immortal soul, such as there is in yonder
child, to the guidance of one who hath stumbled and fallen, amid the
pitfalls of this world. Speak thou, the child’s own mother! Were it
not, thinkest thou, for thy little one’s temporal and eternal welfare
that she be taken out of thy charge, and clad soberly, and disciplined
strictly, and instructed in the truths of heaven and earth? What canst
thou do for the child, in this kind?”

“I can teach my little Pearl what I have learned from this!” answered
Hester Prynne, laying her finger on the red token.

“Woman, it is thy badge of shame!” replied the stern magistrate. “It
is because of the stain which that letter indicates, that we would
transfer thy child to other hands.”

“Nevertheless,” said the mother, calmly, though growing more pale,
“this badge hath taught me—it daily teaches me—it is teaching me at
this moment—lessons whereof my child may be the wiser and better,
albeit they can profit nothing to myself.”

“We will judge warily,” said Bellingham, “and look well what we are
about to do. Good Master Wilson, I pray you, examine this
Pearl,—since that is her name,—and see whether she hath had such
Christian nurture as befits a child of her age.”

The old minister seated himself in an arm-chair, and made an effort to
draw Pearl betwixt his knees. But the child, unaccustomed to the touch
or familiarity of any but her mother, escaped through the open window,
and stood on the upper step, looking like a wild tropical bird, of
rich plumage, ready to take flight into the upper air. Mr. Wilson, not
a little astonished at this outbreak,—for he was a grandfatherly sort
of personage, and usually a vast favorite with children,—essayed,
however, to proceed with the examination.

“Pearl,” said he, with great solemnity, “thou must take heed to
instruction, that so, in due season, thou mayest wear in thy bosom the
pearl of great price. Canst thou tell me, my child, who made thee?”

Now Pearl knew well enough who made her; for Hester Prynne, the
daughter of a pious home, very soon after her talk with the child
about her Heavenly Father, had begun to inform her of those truths
which the human spirit, at whatever stage of immaturity, imbibes with
such eager interest. Pearl, therefore, so large were the attainments
of her three years’ lifetime, could have borne a fair examination in
the New England Primer, or the first column of the Westminster
Catechisms, although unacquainted with the outward form of either of
those celebrated works. But that perversity which all children have
more or less of, and of which little Pearl had a tenfold portion, now,
at the most inopportune moment, took thorough possession of her, and
closed her lips, or impelled her to speak words amiss. After putting
her finger in her mouth, with many ungracious refusals to answer good
Mr. Wilson’s question, the child finally announced that she had not
been made at all, but had been plucked by her mother off the bush of
wild roses that grew by the prison-door.

This fantasy was probably suggested by the near proximity of the
Governor’s red roses, as Pearl stood outside of the window; together
with her recollection of the prison rose-bush, which she had passed in
coming hither.

Old Roger Chillingworth, with a smile on his face, whispered something
in the young clergyman’s ear. Hester Prynne looked at the man of
skill, and even then, with her fate hanging in the balance, was
startled to perceive what a change had come over his features,—how
much uglier they were,—how his dark complexion seemed to have grown
duskier, and his figure more misshapen,—since the days when she had
familiarly known him. She met his eyes for an instant, but was
immediately constrained to give all her attention to the scene now
going forward.

“This is awful!” cried the Governor, slowly recovering from the
astonishment into which Pearl’s response had thrown him. “Here is a
child of three years old, and she cannot tell who made her! Without
question, she is equally in the dark as to her soul, its present
depravity, and future destiny! Methinks, gentlemen, we need inquire no
further.”

Hester caught hold of Pearl, and drew her forcibly into her arms,
confronting the old Puritan magistrate with almost a fierce
expression. Alone in the world, cast off by it, and with this sole
treasure to keep her heart alive, she felt that she possessed
indefeasible rights against the world, and was ready to defend them to
the death.

“God gave me the child!” cried she. “He gave her in requital of all
things else, which ye had taken from me. She is my happiness!—she is
my torture, none the less! Pearl keeps me here in life! Pearl punishes
me too! See ye not, she is the scarlet letter, only capable of being
loved, and so endowed with a million-fold the power of retribution for
my sin? Ye shall not take her! I will die first!”

[Illustration: “Look thou to it! I will not lose the child!”]

“My poor woman,” said the not unkind old minister, “the child shall be
well cared for!—far better than thou canst do it!”

“God gave her into my keeping,” repeated Hester Prynne, raising her
voice almost to a shriek. “I will not give her up!”—And here, by a
sudden impulse, she turned to the young clergyman, Mr. Dimmesdale, at
whom, up to this moment, she had seemed hardly so much as once to
direct her eyes.—“Speak thou for me!” cried she. “Thou wast my
pastor, and hadst charge of my soul, and knowest me better than these
men can. I will not lose the child! Speak for me! Thou knowest,—for
thou hast sympathies which these men lack!—thou knowest what is in my
heart, and what are a mother’s rights, and how much the stronger they
are, when that mother has but her child and the scarlet letter! Look
thou to it! I will not lose the child! Look to it!”

At this wild and singular appeal, which indicated that Hester Prynne’s
situation had provoked her to little less than madness, the young
minister at once came forward, pale, and holding his hand over his
heart, as was his custom whenever his peculiarly nervous temperament
was thrown into agitation. He looked now more care-worn and emaciated
than as we described him at the scene of Hester’s public ignominy; and
whether it were his failing health, or whatever the cause might be,
his large dark eyes had a world of pain in their troubled and
melancholy depth.

“There is truth in what she says,” began the minister, with a voice
sweet, tremulous, but powerful, insomuch that the hall re-echoed, and
the hollow armor rang with it,—“truth in what Hester says, and in the
feeling which inspires her! God gave her the child, and gave her, too,
an instinctive knowledge of its nature and requirements,—both
seemingly so peculiar,—which no other mortal being can possess. And,
moreover, is there not a quality of awful sacredness in the relation
between this mother and this child?”

“Ay!—how is that, good Master Dimmesdale?” interrupted the Governor.
“Make that plain, I pray you!”

“It must be even so,” resumed the minister. “For, if we deem it
otherwise, do we not thereby say that the Heavenly Father, the Creator
of all flesh, hath lightly recognized a deed of sin, and made of no
account the distinction between unhallowed lust and holy love? This
child of its father’s guilt and its mother’s shame hath come from the
hand of God, to work in many ways upon her heart, who pleads so
earnestly, and with such bitterness of spirit, the right to keep her.
It was meant for a blessing; for the one blessing of her life! It was
meant, doubtless, as the mother herself hath told us, for a
retribution too; a torture to be felt at many an unthought-of moment;
a pang, a sting, an ever-recurring agony, in the midst of a troubled
joy! Hath she not expressed this thought in the garb of the poor
child, so forcibly reminding us of that red symbol which sears her
bosom?”

“Well said, again!” cried good Mr. Wilson. “I feared the woman had no
better thought than to make a mountebank of her child!”

“O, not so!—not so!” continued Mr. Dimmesdale. “She recognizes,
believe me, the solemn miracle which God hath wrought, in the
existence of that child. And may she feel, too,—what, methinks, is
the very truth,—that this boon was meant, above all things else, to
keep the mother’s soul alive, and to preserve her from blacker depths
of sin into which Satan might else have sought to plunge her!
Therefore it is good for this poor, sinful woman that she hath an
infant immortality, a being capable of eternal joy or sorrow,
confided to her care,—to be trained up by her to righteousness,—to
remind her, at every moment, of her fall,—but yet to teach her, as it
were by the Creator’s sacred pledge, that, if she bring the child to
heaven, the child also will bring its parent thither! Herein is the
sinful mother happier than the sinful father. For Hester Prynne’s
sake, then, and no less for the poor child’s sake, let us leave them
as Providence hath seen fit to place them!”

“You speak, my friend, with a strange earnestness,” said old Roger
Chillingworth, smiling at him.

“And there is a weighty import in what my young brother hath spoken,”
added the Reverend Mr. Wilson. “What say you, worshipful Master
Bellingham? Hath he not pleaded well for the poor woman?”

“Indeed hath he,” answered the magistrate, “and hath adduced such
arguments, that we will even leave the matter as it now stands; so
long, at least, as there shall be no further scandal in the woman.
Care must be had, nevertheless, to put the child to due and stated
examination in the catechism, at thy hands or Master Dimmesdale’s.
Moreover, at a proper season, the tithing-men must take heed that she
go both to school and to meeting.”

The young minister, on ceasing to speak, had withdrawn a few steps
from the group, and stood with his face partially concealed in the
heavy folds of the window-curtain; while the shadow of his figure,
which the sunlight cast upon the floor, was tremulous with the
vehemence of his appeal. Pearl, that wild and flighty little elf,
stole softly towards him, and taking his hand in the grasp of both her
own, laid her cheek against it; a caress so tender, and withal so
unobtrusive, that her mother, who was looking on, asked herself,—“Is
that my Pearl?” Yet she knew that there was love in the child’s heart,
although it mostly revealed itself in passion, and hardly twice in her
lifetime had been softened by such gentleness as now. The
minister,—for, save the long-sought regards of woman, nothing is
sweeter than these marks of childish preference, accorded
spontaneously by a spiritual instinct, and therefore seeming to imply
in us something truly worthy to be loved,—the minister looked round,
laid his hand on the child’s head, hesitated an instant, and then
kissed her brow. Little Pearl’s unwonted mood of sentiment lasted no
longer; she laughed, and went capering down the hall, so airily, that
old Mr. Wilson raised a question whether even her tiptoes touched the
floor.

“The little baggage hath witchcraft in her, I profess,” said he to Mr.
Dimmesdale. “She needs no old woman’s broomstick to fly withal!”

“A strange child!” remarked old Roger Chillingworth. “It is easy to
see the mother’s part in her. Would it be beyond a philosopher’s
research, think ye, gentlemen, to analyze that child’s nature, and,
from its make and mould, to give a shrewd guess at the father?”

“Nay; it would be sinful, in such a question, to follow the clew of
profane philosophy,” said Mr. Wilson. “Better to fast and pray upon
it; and still better, it may be, to leave the mystery as we find it,
unless Providence reveal it of its own accord. Thereby, every good
Christian man hath a title to show a father’s kindness towards the
poor, deserted babe.”

The affair being so satisfactorily concluded, Hester Prynne, with
Pearl, departed from the house. As they descended the steps, it is
averred that the lattice of a chamber-window was thrown open, and
forth into the sunny day was thrust the face of Mistress Hibbins,
Governor Bellingham’s bitter-tempered sister, and the same who, a few
years later, was executed as a witch.

“Hist, hist!” said she, while her ill-omened physiognomy seemed to
cast a shadow over the cheerful newness of the house. “Wilt thou go
with us to-night? There will be a merry company in the forest; and I
wellnigh promised the Black Man that comely Hester Prynne should make
one.”

“Make my excuse to him, so please you!” answered Hester, with a
triumphant smile. “I must tarry at home, and keep watch over my little
Pearl. Had they taken her from me, I would willingly have gone with
thee into the forest, and signed my name in the Black Man’s book too,
and that with mine own blood!”

“We shall have thee there anon!” said the witch-lady, frowning, as she
drew back her head.

But here—if we suppose this interview betwixt Mistress Hibbins and
Hester Prynne to be authentic, and not a parable—was already an
illustration of the young minister’s argument against sundering the
relation of a fallen mother to the offspring of her frailty. Even thus
early had the child saved her from Satan’s snare.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  IX.

                              THE LEECH.


Under the appellation of Roger Chillingworth, the reader will
remember, was hidden another name, which its former wearer had
resolved should never more be spoken. It has been related, how, in the
crowd that witnessed Hester Prynne’s ignominious exposure, stood a
man, elderly, travel-worn, who, just emerging from the perilous
wilderness, beheld the woman, in whom he hoped to find embodied the
warmth and cheerfulness of home, set up as a type of sin before the
people. Her matronly fame was trodden under all men’s feet. Infamy was
babbling around her in the public market-place. For her kindred,
should the tidings ever reach them, and for the companions of her
unspotted life, there remained nothing but the contagion of her
dishonor; which would not fail to be distributed in strict accordance
and proportion with the intimacy and sacredness of their previous
relationship. Then why—since the choice was with himself—should the
individual, whose connection with the fallen woman had been the most
intimate and sacred of them all, come forward to vindicate his claim
to an inheritance so little desirable? He resolved not to be pilloried
beside her on her pedestal of shame. Unknown to all but Hester Prynne,
and possessing the lock and key of her silence, he chose to withdraw
his name from the roll of mankind, and, as regarded his former ties
and interests, to vanish out of life as completely as if he indeed lay
at the bottom of the ocean, whither rumor had long ago consigned him.
This purpose once effected, new interests would immediately spring up,
and likewise a new purpose; dark, it is true, if not guilty, but of
force enough to engage the full strength of his faculties.

In pursuance of this resolve, he took up his residence in the Puritan
town, as Roger Chillingworth, without other introduction than the
learning and intelligence of which he possessed more than a common
measure. As his studies, at a previous period of his life, had made
him extensively acquainted with the medical science of the day, it was
as a physician that he presented himself, and as such was cordially
received. Skilful men, of the medical and chirurgical profession, were
of rare occurrence in the colony. They seldom, it would appear,
partook of the religious zeal that brought other emigrants across the
Atlantic. In their researches into the human frame, it may be that the
higher and more subtile faculties of such men were materialized, and
that they lost the spiritual view of existence amid the intricacies of
that wondrous mechanism, which seemed to involve art enough to
comprise all of life within itself. At all events, the health of the
good town of Boston, so far as medicine had aught to do with it, had
hitherto lain in the guardianship of an aged deacon and apothecary,
whose piety and godly deportment were stronger testimonials in his
favor than any that he could have produced in the shape of a diploma.
The only surgeon was one who combined the occasional exercise of that
noble art with the daily and habitual flourish of a razor. To such a
professional body Roger Chillingworth was a brilliant acquisition. He
soon manifested his familiarity with the ponderous and imposing
machinery of antique physic; in which every remedy contained a
multitude of far-fetched and heterogeneous ingredients, as elaborately
compounded as if the proposed result had been the Elixir of Life. In
his Indian captivity, moreover, he had gained much knowledge of the
properties of native herbs and roots; nor did he conceal from his
patients, that these simple medicines, Nature’s boon to the untutored
savage, had quite as large a share of his own confidence as the
European pharmacopœia, which so many learned doctors had spent
centuries in elaborating.

This learned stranger was exemplary, as regarded, at least, the
outward forms of a religious life, and, early after his arrival, had
chosen for his spiritual guide the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. The young
divine, whose scholar-like renown still lived in Oxford, was
considered by his more fervent admirers as little less than a
heaven-ordained apostle, destined, should he live and labor for the
ordinary term of life, to do as great deeds for the now feeble New
England Church, as the early Fathers had achieved for the infancy of
the Christian faith. About this period, however, the health of Mr.
Dimmesdale had evidently begun to fail. By those best acquainted with
his habits, the paleness of the young minister’s cheek was accounted
for by his too earnest devotion to study, his scrupulous fulfilment of
parochial duty, and, more than all, by the fasts and vigils of which
he made a frequent practice, in order to keep the grossness of this
earthly state from clogging and obscuring his spiritual lamp. Some
declared, that, if Mr. Dimmesdale were really going to die, it was
cause enough, that the world was not worthy to be any longer trodden
by his feet. He himself, on the other hand, with characteristic
humility, avowed his belief, that, if Providence should see fit to
remove him, it would be because of his own unworthiness to perform its
humblest mission here on earth. With all this difference of opinion as
to the cause of his decline, there could be no question of the fact.
His form grew emaciated; his voice, though still rich and sweet, had a
certain melancholy prophecy of decay in it; he was often observed, on
any slight alarm or other sudden accident, to put his hand over his
heart, with first a flush and then a paleness, indicative of pain.

Such was the young clergyman’s condition, and so imminent the prospect
that his dawning light would be extinguished, all untimely, when Roger
Chillingworth made his advent to the town. His first entry on the
scene, few people could tell whence, dropping down, as it were, out of
the sky, or starting from the nether earth, had an aspect of mystery,
which was easily heightened to the miraculous. He was now known to be
a man of skill; it was observed that he gathered herbs, and the
blossoms of wild-flowers, and dug up roots, and plucked off twigs from
the forest-trees, like one acquainted with hidden virtues in what was
valueless to common eyes. He was heard to speak of Sir Kenelm Digby,
and other famous men,—whose scientific attainments were esteemed
hardly less than supernatural,—as having been his correspondents or
associates. Why, with such rank in the learned world, had he come
hither? What could he, whose sphere was in great cities, be seeking in
the wilderness? In answer to this query, a rumor gained ground,—and,
however absurd, was entertained by some very sensible people,—that
Heaven had wrought an absolute miracle, by transporting an eminent
Doctor of Physic, from a German university, bodily through the air,
and setting him down at the door of Mr. Dimmesdale’s study!
Individuals of wiser faith, indeed, who knew that Heaven promotes its
purposes without aiming at the stage-effect of what is called
miraculous interposition, were inclined to see a providential hand in
Roger Chillingworth’s so opportune arrival.

This idea was countenanced by the strong interest which the physician
ever manifested in the young clergyman; he attached himself to him as
a parishioner, and sought to win a friendly regard and confidence from
his naturally reserved sensibility. He expressed great alarm at his
pastor’s state of health, but was anxious to attempt the cure, and, if
early undertaken, seemed not despondent of a favorable result. The
elders, the deacons, the motherly dames, and the young and fair
maidens, of Mr. Dimmesdale’s flock, were alike importunate that he
should make trial of the physician’s frankly offered skill. Mr.
Dimmesdale gently repelled their entreaties.

“I need no medicine,” said he.

But how could the young minister say so, when, with every successive
Sabbath, his cheek was paler and thinner, and his voice more tremulous
than before,—when it had now become a constant habit, rather than a
casual gesture, to press his hand over his heart? Was he weary of his
labors? Did he wish to die? These questions were solemnly propounded
to Mr. Dimmesdale by the elder ministers of Boston and the deacons of
his church, who, to use their own phrase, “dealt with him” on the sin
of rejecting the aid which Providence so manifestly held out. He
listened in silence, and finally promised to confer with the
physician.

“Were it God’s will,” said the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, when, in
fulfilment of this pledge, he requested old Roger Chillingworth’s
professional advice, “I could be well content, that my labors, and my
sorrows, and my sins, and my pains, should shortly end with me, and
what is earthly of them be buried in my grave, and the spiritual go
with me to my eternal state, rather than that you should put your
skill to the proof in my behalf.”

“Ah,” replied Roger Chillingworth, with that quietness which, whether
imposed or natural, marked all his deportment, “it is thus that a
young clergyman is apt to speak. Youthful men, not having taken a deep
root, give up their hold of life so easily! And saintly men, who walk
with God on earth, would fain be away, to walk with him on the golden
pavements of the New Jerusalem.”

“Nay,” rejoined the young minister, putting his hand to his heart,
with a flush of pain flitting over his brow, “were I worthier to walk
there, I could be better content to toil here.”

“Good men ever interpret themselves too meanly,” said the physician.

[Illustration: The Minister and Leech]

In this manner, the mysterious old Roger Chillingworth became the
medical adviser of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. As not only the
disease interested the physician, but he was strongly moved to look
into the character and qualities of the patient, these two men, so
different in age, came gradually to spend much time together. For the
sake of the minister’s health, and to enable the leech to gather
plants with healing balm in them, they took long walks on the
sea-shore, or in the forest; mingling various talk with the plash and
murmur of the waves, and the solemn wind-anthem among the tree-tops.
Often, likewise, one was the guest of the other, in his place of
study and retirement. There was a fascination for the minister in the
company of the man of science, in whom he recognized an intellectual
cultivation of no moderate depth or scope; together with a range and
freedom of ideas, that he would have vainly looked for among the
members of his own profession. In truth, he was startled, if not
shocked, to find this attribute in the physician. Mr. Dimmesdale was a
true priest, a true religionist, with the reverential sentiment
largely developed, and an order of mind that impelled itself
powerfully along the track of a creed, and wore its passage
continually deeper with the lapse of time. In no state of society
would he have been what is called a man of liberal views; it would
always be essential to his peace to feel the pressure of a faith about
him, supporting, while it confined him within its iron framework. Not
the less, however, though with a tremulous enjoyment, did he feel the
occasional relief of looking at the universe through the medium of
another kind of intellect than those with which he habitually held
converse. It was as if a window were thrown open, admitting a freer
atmosphere into the close and stifled study, where his life was
wasting itself away, amid lamplight, or obstructed day-beams, and the
musty fragrance, be it sensual or moral, that exhales from books. But
the air was too fresh and chill to be long breathed with comfort. So
the minister, and the physician with him, withdrew again within the
limits of what their church defined as orthodox.

Thus Roger Chillingworth scrutinized his patient carefully, both as he
saw him in his ordinary life, keeping an accustomed pathway in the
range of thoughts familiar to him, and as he appeared when thrown
amidst other moral scenery, the novelty of which might call out
something new to the surface of his character. He deemed it essential,
it would seem, to know the man, before attempting to do him good.
Wherever there is a heart and an intellect, the diseases of the
physical frame are tinged with the peculiarities of these. In Arthur
Dimmesdale, thought and imagination were so active, and sensibility so
intense, that the bodily infirmity would be likely to have its
groundwork there. So Roger Chillingworth—the man of skill, the kind
and friendly physician—strove to go deep into his patient’s bosom,
delving among his principles, prying into his recollections, and
probing everything with a cautious touch, like a treasure-seeker in a
dark cavern. Few secrets can escape an investigator, who has
opportunity and license to undertake such a quest, and skill to follow
it up. A man burdened with a secret should especially avoid the
intimacy of his physician. If the latter possess native sagacity, and
a nameless something more,—let us call it intuition; if he show no
intrusive egotism, nor disagreeably prominent characteristics of his
own; if he have the power, which must be born with him, to bring his
mind into such affinity with his patient’s, that this last shall
unawares have spoken what he imagines himself only to have thought; if
such revelations be received without tumult, and acknowledged not so
often by an uttered sympathy as by silence, an inarticulate breath,
and here and there a word, to indicate that all is understood; if to
these qualifications of a confidant be joined the advantages afforded
by his recognized character as a physician;—then, at some inevitable
moment, will the soul of the sufferer be dissolved, and flow forth in
a dark, but transparent stream, bringing all its mysteries into the
daylight.

Roger Chillingworth possessed all, or most, of the attributes above
enumerated. Nevertheless, time went on; a kind of intimacy, as we have
said, grew up between these two cultivated minds, which had as wide a
field as the whole sphere of human thought and study, to meet upon;
they discussed every topic of ethics and religion, of public affairs
and private character; they talked much, on both sides, of matters
that seemed personal to themselves; and yet no secret, such as the
physician fancied must exist there, ever stole out of the minister’s
consciousness into his companion’s ear. The latter had his suspicions,
indeed, that even the nature of Mr. Dimmesdale’s bodily disease had
never fairly been revealed to him. It was a strange reserve!

After a time, at a hint from Roger Chillingworth, the friends of Mr.
Dimmesdale effected an arrangement by which the two were lodged in the
same house; so that every ebb and flow of the minister’s life-tide
might pass under the eye of his anxious and attached physician. There
was much joy throughout the town, when this greatly desirable object
was attained. It was held to be the best possible measure for the
young clergyman’s welfare; unless, indeed, as often urged by such as
felt authorized to do so, he had selected some one of the many
blooming damsels, spiritually devoted to him, to become his devoted
wife. This latter step, however, there was no present prospect that
Arthur Dimmesdale would be prevailed upon to take; he rejected all
suggestions of the kind, as if priestly celibacy were one of his
articles of church-discipline. Doomed by his own choice, therefore, as
Mr. Dimmesdale so evidently was, to eat his unsavory morsel always at
another’s board, and endure the life-long chill which must be his lot
who seeks to warm himself only at another’s fireside, it truly seemed
that this sagacious, experienced, benevolent old physician, with his
concord of paternal and reverential love for the young pastor, was the
very man, of all mankind, to be constantly within reach of his voice.

The new abode of the two friends was with a pious widow, of good
social rank, who dwelt in a house covering pretty nearly the site on
which the venerable structure of King’s Chapel has since been built.
It had the graveyard, originally Isaac Johnson’s home-field, on one
side, and so was well adapted to call up serious reflections, suited
to their respective employments, in both minister and man of physic.
The motherly care of the good widow assigned to Mr. Dimmesdale a front
apartment, with a sunny exposure, and heavy window-curtains, to create
a noontide shadow, when desirable. The walls were hung round with
tapestry, said to be from the Gobelin looms, and, at all events,
representing the Scriptural story of David and Bathsheba, and Nathan
the Prophet, in colors still unfaded, but which made the fair woman
of the scene almost as grimly picturesque as the woe-denouncing seer.
Here the pale clergyman piled up his library, rich with
parchment-bound folios of the Fathers, and the lore of Rabbis, and
monkish erudition, of which the Protestant divines, even while they
vilified and decried that class of writers, were yet constrained often
to avail themselves. On the other side of the house old Roger
Chillingworth arranged his study and laboratory; not such as a modern
man of science would reckon even tolerably complete, but provided with
a distilling apparatus, and the means of compounding drugs and
chemicals, which the practised alchemist knew well how to turn to
purpose. With such commodiousness of situation, these two learned
persons sat themselves down, each in his own domain, yet familiarly
passing from one apartment to the other, and bestowing a mutual and
not incurious inspection into one another’s business.

And the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale’s best discerning friends, as we
have intimated, very reasonably imagined that the hand of Providence
had done all this, for the purpose—besought in so many public, and
domestic, and secret prayers—of restoring the young minister to
health. But—it must now be said—another portion of the community had
latterly begun to take its own view of the relation betwixt Mr.
Dimmesdale and the mysterious old physician. When an uninstructed
multitude attempts to see with its eyes, it is exceedingly apt to be
deceived. When, however, it forms its judgment, as it usually does, on
the intuitions of its great and warm heart, the conclusions thus
attained are often so profound and so unerring, as to possess the
character of truths supernaturally revealed. The people, in the case
of which we speak, could justify its prejudice against Roger
Chillingworth by no fact or argument worthy of serious refutation.
There was an aged handicraftsman, it is true, who had been a citizen
of London at the period of Sir Thomas Overbury’s murder, now some
thirty years agone; he testified to having seen the physician, under
some other name, which the narrator of the story had now forgotten, in
company with Doctor Forman, the famous old conjurer, who was
implicated in the affair of Overbury. Two or three individuals hinted,
that the man of skill, during his Indian captivity, had enlarged his
medical attainments by joining in the incantations of the savage
priests; who were universally acknowledged to be powerful enchanters,
often performing seemingly miraculous cures by their skill in the
black art. A large number—and many of these were persons of such
sober sense and practical observation that their opinions would have
been valuable, in other matters—affirmed that Roger Chillingworth’s
aspect had undergone a remarkable change while he had dwelt in town,
and especially since his abode with Mr. Dimmesdale. At first, his
expression had been calm, meditative, scholar-like. Now, there was
something ugly and evil in his face, which they had not previously
noticed, and which grew still the more obvious to sight, the oftener
they looked upon him. According to the vulgar idea, the fire in his
laboratory had been brought from the lower regions, and was fed with
infernal fuel; and so, as might be expected, his visage was getting
sooty with the smoke.

To sum up the matter, it grew to be a widely diffused opinion, that
the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale, like many other personages of especial
sanctity, in all ages of the Christian world, was haunted either by
Satan himself, or Satan’s emissary, in the guise of old Roger
Chillingworth. This diabolical agent had the Divine permission, for a
season, to burrow into the clergyman’s intimacy, and plot against his
soul. No sensible man, it was confessed, could doubt on which side the
victory would turn. The people looked, with an unshaken hope, to see
the minister come forth out of the conflict, transfigured with the
glory which he would unquestionably win. Meanwhile, nevertheless, it
was sad to think of the perchance mortal agony through which he must
struggle towards his triumph.

Alas! to judge from the gloom and terror in the depths of the poor
minister’s eyes, the battle was a sore one and the victory anything
but secure.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  X.

                      THE LEECH AND HIS PATIENT.


Old Roger Chillingworth, throughout life, had been calm in
temperament, kindly, though not of warm affections, but ever, and in
all his relations with the world, a pure and upright man. He had begun
an investigation, as he imagined, with the severe and equal integrity
of a judge, desirous only of truth, even as if the question involved
no more than the air-drawn lines and figures of a geometrical problem,
instead of human passions, and wrongs inflicted on himself. But, as he
proceeded, a terrible fascination, a kind of fierce, though still
calm, necessity, seized the old man within its gripe, and never set
him free again, until he had done all its bidding. He now dug into the
poor clergyman’s heart, like a miner searching for gold; or, rather,
like a sexton delving into a grave, possibly in quest of a jewel that
had been buried on the dead man’s bosom, but likely to find nothing
save mortality and corruption. Alas for his own soul, if these were
what he sought!

Sometimes, a light glimmered out of the physician’s eyes, burning blue
and ominous, like the reflection of a furnace, or, let us say, like
one of those gleams of ghastly fire that darted from Bunyan’s awful
doorway in the hillside, and quivered on the pilgrim’s face. The soil
where this dark miner was working had perchance shown indications that
encouraged him.

“This man,” said he, at one such moment, to himself, “pure as they
deem him,—all spiritual as he seems,—hath inherited a strong animal
nature from his father or his mother. Let us dig a little further in
the direction of this vein!”

Then, after long search into the minister’s dim interior, and turning
over many precious materials, in the shape of high aspirations for the
welfare of his race, warm love of souls, pure sentiments, natural
piety, strengthened by thought and study, and illuminated by
revelation,—all of which invaluable gold was perhaps no better than
rubbish to the seeker,—he would turn back, discouraged, and begin his
quest towards another point. He groped along as stealthily, with as
cautious a tread, and as wary an outlook, as a thief entering a
chamber where a man lies only half asleep,—or, it may be, broad
awake,—with purpose to steal the very treasure which this man guards
as the apple of his eye. In spite of his premeditated carefulness, the
floor would now and then creak; his garments would rustle; the shadow
of his presence, in a forbidden proximity, would be thrown across his
victim. In other words, Mr. Dimmesdale, whose sensibility of nerve
often produced the effect of spiritual intuition, would become vaguely
aware that something inimical to his peace had thrust itself into
relation with him. But old Roger Chillingworth, too, had perceptions
that were almost intuitive; and when the minister threw his startled
eyes towards him, there the physician sat; his kind, watchful,
sympathizing, but never intrusive friend.

Yet Mr. Dimmesdale would perhaps have seen this individual’s character
more perfectly, if a certain morbidness, to which, sick hearts are
liable, had not rendered him suspicious of all mankind. Trusting no
man as his friend, he could not recognize his enemy when the latter
actually appeared. He therefore still kept up a familiar intercourse
with him, daily receiving the old physician in his study; or visiting
the laboratory, and, for recreation’s sake, watching the processes by
which weeds were converted into drugs of potency.

One day, leaning his forehead on his hand, and his elbow on the sill
of the open window, that looked towards the graveyard, he talked with
Roger Chillingworth, while the old man was examining a bundle of
unsightly plants.

“Where,” asked he, with a look askance at them,—for it was the
clergyman’s peculiarity that he seldom, nowadays, looked straightforth
at any object, whether human or inanimate,—“where, my kind doctor,
did you gather those herbs, with such a dark, flabby leaf?”

“Even in the graveyard here at hand,” answered the physician,
continuing his employment. “They are new to me. I found them growing
on a grave, which bore no tombstone, nor other memorial of the dead
man, save these ugly weeds, that have taken upon themselves to keep
him in remembrance. They grew out of his heart, and typify, it may be,
some hideous secret that was buried with him, and which he had done
better to confess during his lifetime.”

“Perchance,” said Mr. Dimmesdale, “he earnestly desired it, but could
not.”

“And wherefore?” rejoined the physician. “Wherefore not; since all the
powers of nature call so earnestly for the confession of sin, that
these black weeds have sprung up out of a buried heart, to make
manifest an unspoken crime?”

“That, good Sir, is but a fantasy of yours,” replied the minister.
“There can be, if I forebode aright, no power, short of the Divine
mercy, to disclose, whether by uttered words, or by type or emblem,
the secrets that may be buried with a human heart. The heart, making
itself guilty of such secrets, must perforce hold them, until the day
when all hidden things shall be revealed. Nor have I so read or
interpreted Holy Writ, as to understand that the disclosure of human
thoughts and deeds, then to be made, is intended as a part of the
retribution. That, surely, were a shallow view of it. No; these
revelations, unless I greatly err, are meant merely to promote the
intellectual satisfaction of all intelligent beings, who will stand
waiting, on that day, to see the dark problem of this life made plain.
A knowledge of men’s hearts will be needful to the completest solution
of that problem. And I conceive, moreover, that the hearts holding
such miserable secrets as you speak of will yield them up, at that
last day, not with reluctance, but with a joy unutterable.”

“Then why not reveal them here?” asked Roger Chillingworth, glancing
quietly aside at the minister. “Why should not the guilty ones sooner
avail themselves of this unutterable solace?”

“They mostly do,” said the clergyman, griping hard at his breast as if
afflicted with an importunate throb of pain. “Many, many a poor soul
hath given its confidence to me, not only on the death-bed, but while
strong in life, and fair in reputation. And ever, after such an
outpouring, O, what a relief have I witnessed in those sinful
brethren! even as in one who at last draws free air, after long
stifling with his own polluted breath. How can it be otherwise? Why
should a wretched man, guilty, we will say, of murder, prefer to keep
the dead corpse buried in his own heart, rather than fling it forth at
once, and let the universe take care of it!”

“Yet some men bury their secrets thus,” observed the calm physician.

“True; there are such men,” answered Mr. Dimmesdale. “But, not to
suggest more obvious reasons, it may be that they are kept silent by
the very constitution of their nature. Or,—can we not suppose
it?—guilty as they may be, retaining, nevertheless, a zeal for God’s
glory and man’s welfare, they shrink from displaying themselves black
and filthy in the view of men; because, thenceforward, no good can be
achieved by them; no evil of the past be redeemed by better service.
So, to their own unutterable torment, they go about among their
fellow-creatures, looking pure as new-fallen snow while their hearts
are all speckled and spotted with iniquity of which they cannot rid
themselves.”

“These men deceive themselves,” said Roger Chillingworth, with
somewhat more emphasis than usual, and making a slight gesture with
his forefinger. “They fear to take up the shame that rightfully
belongs to them. Their love for man, their zeal for God’s
service,—these holy impulses may or may not coexist in their hearts
with the evil inmates to which their guilt has unbarred the door, and
which must needs propagate a hellish breed within them. But, if they
seek to glorify God, let them not lift heavenward their unclean hands!
If they would serve their fellow-men, let them do it by making
manifest the power and reality of conscience, in constraining them to
penitential self-abasement! Wouldst thou have me to believe, O wise
and pious friend, that a false show can be better—can be more for
God’s glory, or man’s welfare—than God’s own truth? Trust me, such
men deceive themselves!”

“It may be so,” said the young clergyman, indifferently, as waiving a
discussion that he considered irrelevant or unseasonable. He had a
ready faculty, indeed, of escaping from any topic that agitated his
too sensitive and nervous temperament.—“But, now, I would ask of my
well-skilled physician, whether, in good sooth, he deems me to have
profited by his kindly care of this weak frame of mine?”

Before Roger Chillingworth could answer, they heard the clear, wild
laughter of a young child’s voice, proceeding from the adjacent
burial-ground. Looking instinctively from the open window,—for it was
summer-time,—the minister beheld Hester Prynne and little Pearl
passing along the footpath that traversed the enclosure. Pearl looked
as beautiful as the day, but was in one of those moods of perverse
merriment which, whenever they occurred, seemed to remove her entirely
out of the sphere of sympathy or human contact. She now skipped
irreverently from one grave to another; until, coming to the broad,
flat, armorial tombstone of a departed worthy,—perhaps of Isaac
Johnson himself,—she began to dance upon it. In reply to her mother’s
command and entreaty that she would behave more decorously, little
Pearl paused to gather the prickly burrs from a tall burdock which
grew beside the tomb. Taking a handful of these, she arranged them
along the lines of the scarlet letter that decorated the maternal
bosom, to which the burrs, as their nature was, tenaciously adhered.
Hester did not pluck them off.

Roger Chillingworth had by this time approached the window, and smiled
grimly down.

“There is no law, nor reverence for authority, no regard for human
ordinances or opinions, right or wrong, mixed up with that child’s
composition,” remarked he, as much to himself as to his companion. “I
saw her, the other day, bespatter the Governor himself with water, at
the cattle-trough in Spring Lane. What, in Heaven’s name, is she? Is
the imp altogether evil? Hath she affections? Hath she any
discoverable principle of being?”

“None, save the freedom of a broken law,” answered Mr. Dimmesdale, in
a quiet way, as if he had been discussing the point within himself.
“Whether capable of good, I know not.”

The child probably overheard their voices; for, looking up to the
window, with a bright, but naughty smile of mirth and intelligence,
she threw one of the prickly burrs at the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. The
sensitive clergyman shrunk, with nervous dread, from the light
missile. Detecting his emotion, Pearl clapped her little hands, in the
most extravagant ecstasy. Hester Prynne, likewise, had involuntarily
looked up; and all these four persons, old and young, regarded one
another in silence, till the child laughed aloud, and shouted,—“Come
away, mother! Come away, or yonder old Black Man will catch you! He
hath got hold of the minister already. Come away, mother, or he will
catch you! But he cannot catch little Pearl!”

So she drew her mother away, skipping, dancing, and frisking
fantastically, among the hillocks of the dead people, like a creature
that had nothing in common with a bygone and buried generation, nor
owned herself akin to it. It was as if she had been made afresh, out
of new elements, and must perforce be permitted to live her own life,
and be a law unto herself, without her eccentricities being reckoned
to her for a crime.

“There goes a woman,” resumed Roger Chillingworth, after a pause,
“who, be her demerits what they may, hath none of that mystery of
hidden sinfulness which you deem so grievous to be borne. Is Hester
Prynne the less miserable, think you, for that scarlet letter on her
breast?”

“I do verily believe it,” answered the clergyman. “Nevertheless, I
cannot answer for her. There was a look of pain in her face, which I
would gladly have been spared the sight of. But still, methinks, it
must needs be better for the sufferer to be free to show his pain, as
this poor woman Hester is, than to cover it all up in his heart.”

There was another pause; and the physician began anew to examine and
arrange the plants which he had gathered.

“You inquired of me, a little time agone,” said he, at length, “my
judgment as touching your health.”

“I did,” answered the clergyman, “and would gladly learn it. Speak
frankly, I pray you, be it for life or death.”

“Freely, then, and plainly,” said the physician, still busy with his
plants, but keeping a wary eye on Mr. Dimmesdale, “the disorder is a
strange one; not so much in itself, nor as outwardly manifested,—in
so far, at least, as the symptoms have been laid open to my
observation. Looking daily at you, my good Sir, and watching the
tokens of your aspect, now for months gone by, I should deem you a man
sore sick, it may be, yet not so sick but that an instructed and
watchful physician might well hope to cure you. But—I know not what
to say—the disease is what I seem to know, yet know it not.”

“You speak in riddles, learned Sir,” said the pale minister, glancing
aside out of the window.

“Then, to speak more plainly,” continued the physician, “and I crave
pardon, Sir,—should it seem to require pardon,—for this needful
plainness of my speech. Let me ask,—as your friend,—as one having
charge, under Providence, of your life and physical well-being,—hath
all the operation of this disorder been fairly laid open and recounted
to me?”

“How can you question it?” asked the minister. “Surely, it were
child’s play, to call in a physician, and then hide the sore!”

“You would tell me, then, that I know all?” said Roger Chillingworth,
deliberately, and fixing an eye, bright with intense and concentrated
intelligence, on the minister’s face. “Be it so! But, again! He to
whom only the outward and physical evil is laid open, knoweth,
oftentimes, but half the evil which he is called upon to cure. A
bodily disease, which we look upon as whole and entire within itself,
may, after all, be but a symptom of some ailment in the spiritual
part. Your pardon, once again, good Sir, if my speech give the shadow
of offence. You, Sir, of all men whom I have known, are he whose body
is the closest conjoined, and imbued, and identified, so to speak,
with the spirit whereof it is the instrument.”

“Then I need ask no further,” said the clergyman, somewhat hastily
rising from his chair. “You deal not, I take it, in medicine for the
soul!”

“Thus, a sickness,” continued Roger Chillingworth, going on, in an
unaltered tone, without heeding the interruption,—but standing up,
and confronting the emaciated and white-cheeked minister, with his
low, dark, and misshapen figure,—“a sickness, a sore place, if we may
so call it, in your spirit, hath immediately its appropriate
manifestation in your bodily frame. Would you, therefore, that your
physician heal the bodily evil? How may this be, unless you first lay
open to him the wound or trouble in your soul?”

“No!—not to thee!—not to an earthly physician!” cried Mr.
Dimmesdale, passionately, and turning his eyes, full and bright, and
with a kind of fierceness, on old Roger Chillingworth. “Not to thee!
But if it be the soul’s disease, then do I commit myself to the one
Physician of the soul! He, if it stand with his good pleasure, can
cure; or he can kill! Let him do with me as, in his justice and
wisdom, he shall see good. But who art thou, that meddlest in this
matter?—that dares thrust himself between the sufferer and his God?”

With a frantic gesture he rushed out of the room.

“It is as well to have made this step,” said Roger Chillingworth to
himself, looking after the minister with a grave smile. “There is
nothing lost. We shall be friends again anon. But see, now, how
passion takes hold upon this man, and hurrieth him out of himself! As
with one passion, so with another! He hath done a wild thing erenow,
this pious Master Dimmesdale, in the hot passion of his heart!”

[Illustration: The Leech and his Patient]

It proved not difficult to re-establish the intimacy of the two
companions, on the same footing and in the same degree as heretofore.
The young clergyman, after a few hours of privacy, was sensible that
the disorder of his nerves had hurried him into an unseemly outbreak
of temper, which there had been nothing in the physician’s words to
excuse or palliate. He marvelled, indeed, at the violence with which
he had thrust back the kind old man, when merely proffering the advice
which it was his duty to bestow, and which the minister himself had
expressly sought. With these remorseful feelings, he lost no time in
making the amplest apologies, and besought his friend still to
continue the care, which, if not successful in restoring him to
health, had, in all probability, been the means of prolonging his
feeble existence to that hour. Roger Chillingworth readily assented,
and went on with his medical supervision of the minister; doing his
best for him, in all good faith, but always quitting the patient’s
apartment, at the close of a professional interview, with a mysterious
and puzzled smile upon his lips. This expression was invisible in Mr.
Dimmesdale’s presence, but grew strongly evident as the physician
crossed the threshold.

“A rare case!” he muttered. “I must needs look deeper into it. A
strange sympathy betwixt soul and body! Were it only for the art’s
sake, I must search this matter to the bottom!”

It came to pass, not long after the scene above recorded, that the
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, at noonday, and entirely unawares, fell into
a deep, deep slumber, sitting in his chair, with a large black-letter
volume open before him on the table. It must have been a work of vast
ability in the somniferous school of literature. The profound depth of
the minister’s repose was the more remarkable, inasmuch as he was one
of those persons whose sleep, ordinarily, is as light, as fitful, and
as easily scared away, as a small bird hopping on a twig. To such an
unwonted remoteness, however, had his spirit now withdrawn into
itself, that he stirred not in his chair, when old Roger
Chillingworth, without any extraordinary precaution, came into the
room. The physician advanced directly in front of his patient, laid
his hand upon his bosom, and thrust aside the vestment, that,
hitherto, had always covered it even from the professional eye.

Then, indeed, Mr. Dimmesdale shuddered, and slightly stirred.

After a brief pause, the physician turned away.

But, with what a wild look of wonder, joy, and horror! With what a
ghastly rapture, as it were, too mighty to be expressed only by the
eye and features, and therefore bursting forth through the whole
ugliness of his figure, and making itself even riotously manifest by
the extravagant gestures with which he threw up his arms towards the
ceiling, and stamped his foot upon the floor! Had a man seen old
Roger Chillingworth, at that moment of his ecstasy, he would have had
no need to ask how Satan comports himself, when a precious human soul
is lost to heaven, and won into his kingdom.

But what distinguished the physician’s ecstasy from Satan’s was the
trait of wonder in it!

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  XI.

                       THE INTERIOR OF A HEART.


After the incident last described, the intercourse between the
clergyman and the physician, though externally the same, was really of
another character than it had previously been. The intellect of Roger
Chillingworth had now a sufficiently plain path before it. It was not,
indeed, precisely that which he had laid out for himself to tread.
Calm, gentle, passionless, as he appeared, there was yet, we fear, a
quiet depth of malice, hitherto latent, but active now, in this
unfortunate old man, which led him to imagine a more intimate revenge
than any mortal had ever wreaked upon an enemy. To make himself the
one trusted friend, to whom should be confided all the fear, the
remorse, the agony, the ineffectual repentance, the backward rush of
sinful thoughts, expelled in vain! All that guilty sorrow, hidden from
the world, whose great heart would have pitied and forgiven, to be
revealed to him, the Pitiless, to him, the Unforgiving! All that dark
treasure to be lavished on the very man, to whom nothing else could so
adequately pay the debt of vengeance!

The clergyman’s shy and sensitive reserve had balked this scheme.
Roger Chillingworth, however, was inclined to be hardly, if at all,
less satisfied with the aspect of affairs, which Providence—using the
avenger and his victim for its own purposes, and, perchance, pardoning
where it seemed most to punish—had substituted for his black devices.
A revelation, he could almost say, had been granted to him. It
mattered little, for his object, whether celestial, or from what other
region. By its aid, in all the subsequent relations betwixt him and
Mr. Dimmesdale, not merely the external presence, but the very inmost
soul, of the latter, seemed to be brought out before his eyes, so that
he could see and comprehend its every movement. He became,
thenceforth, not a spectator only, but a chief actor, in the poor
minister’s interior world. He could play upon him as he chose. Would
he arouse him with a throb of agony? The victim was forever on the
rack; it needed only to know the spring that controlled the
engine;—and the physician knew it well! Would he startle him with
sudden fear? As at the waving of a magician’s wand, uprose a grisly
phantom,—uprose a thousand phantoms,—in many shapes, of death, or
more awful shame, all flocking round about the clergyman, and pointing
with their fingers at his breast!

All this was accomplished with a subtlety so perfect, that the
minister, though he had constantly a dim perception of some evil
influence watching over him, could never gain a knowledge of its
actual nature. True, he looked doubtfully, fearfully,—even, at times,
with horror and the bitterness of hatred,—at the deformed figure of
the old physician. His gestures, his gait, his grizzled beard, his
slightest and most indifferent acts, the very fashion of his garments,
were odious in the clergyman’s sight; a token implicitly to be relied
on, of a deeper antipathy in the breast of the latter than he was
willing to acknowledge to himself. For, as it was impossible to assign
a reason for such distrust and abhorrence, so Mr. Dimmesdale,
conscious that the poison of one morbid spot was infecting his heart’s
entire substance, attributed all his presentiments to no other cause.
He took himself to task for his bad sympathies in reference to Roger
Chillingworth, disregarded the lesson that he should have drawn from
them, and did his best to root them out. Unable to accomplish this, he
nevertheless, as a matter of principle, continued his habits of social
familiarity with the old man, and thus gave him constant opportunities
for perfecting the purpose to which—poor, forlorn creature that he
was, and more wretched than his victim—the avenger had devoted
himself.

While thus suffering under bodily disease, and gnawed and tortured by
some black trouble of the soul, and given over to the machinations of
his deadliest enemy, the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale had achieved a
brilliant popularity in his sacred office. He won it, indeed, in great
part, by his sorrows. His intellectual gifts, his moral perceptions,
his power of experiencing and communicating emotion, were kept in a
state of preternatural activity by the prick and anguish of his daily
life. His fame, though still on its upward slope, already overshadowed
the soberer reputations of his fellow-clergymen, eminent as several of
them were. There were scholars among them, who had spent more years in
acquiring abstruse lore, connected with the divine profession, than
Mr. Dimmesdale had lived; and who might well, therefore, be more
profoundly versed in such solid and valuable attainments than their
youthful brother. There were men, too, of a sturdier texture of mind
than his, and endowed with a far greater share of shrewd, hard, iron,
or granite understanding; which, duly mingled with a fair proportion
of doctrinal ingredient, constitutes a highly respectable,
efficacious, and unamiable variety of the clerical species. There were
others, again, true saintly fathers, whose faculties had been
elaborated by weary toil among their books, and by patient thought,
and etherealized, moreover, by spiritual communications with the
better world, into which their purity of life had almost introduced
these holy personages, with their garments of mortality still clinging
to them. All that they lacked was the gift that descended upon the
chosen disciples at Pentecost, in tongues of flame; symbolizing, it
would seem, not the power of speech in foreign and unknown languages,
but that of addressing the whole human brotherhood in the heart’s
native language. These fathers, otherwise so apostolic, lacked
Heaven’s last and rarest attestation of their office, the Tongue of
Flame. They would have vainly sought—had they ever dreamed of
seeking—to express the highest truths through the humblest medium of
familiar words and images. Their voices came down, afar and
indistinctly, from the upper heights where they habitually dwelt.

[Illustration: The Virgins of the Church]

Not improbably, it was to this latter class of men that Mr.
Dimmesdale, by many of his traits of character, naturally belonged. To
the high mountain-peaks of faith and sanctity he would have climbed,
had not the tendency been thwarted by the burden, whatever it might
be, of crime or anguish, beneath which it was his doom to totter. It
kept him down, on a level with the lowest; him, the man of ethereal
attributes, whose voice the angels might else have listened to and
answered! But this very burden it was, that gave him sympathies so
intimate with the sinful brotherhood of mankind; so that his heart
vibrated in unison with theirs, and received their pain into itself,
and sent its own throb of pain through a thousand other hearts, in
gushes of sad, persuasive eloquence. Oftenest persuasive, but
sometimes terrible! The people knew not the power that moved them
thus. They deemed the young clergyman a miracle of holiness. They
fancied him the mouthpiece of Heaven’s messages of wisdom, and rebuke,
and love. In their eyes, the very ground on which he trod was
sanctified. The virgins of his church grew pale around him, victims of
a passion so imbued with religious sentiment that they imagined it to
be all religion, and brought it openly, in their white bosoms, as
their most acceptable sacrifice before the altar. The aged members of
his flock, beholding Mr. Dimmesdale’s frame so feeble, while they were
themselves so rugged in their infirmity, believed that he would go
heavenward before them, and enjoined it upon their children, that
their old bones should be buried close to their young pastor’s holy
grave. And, all this time, perchance, when poor Mr. Dimmesdale was
thinking of his grave, he questioned with himself whether the grass
would ever grow on it, because an accursed thing must there be buried!

It is inconceivable, the agony with which this public veneration
tortured him! It was his genuine impulse to adore the truth, and to
reckon all things shadow-like, and utterly devoid of weight or value,
that had not its divine essence as the life within their life. Then,
what was he?—a substance?—or the dimmest of all shadows? He longed
to speak out, from his own pulpit, at the full height of his voice,
and tell the people what he was. “I, whom you behold in these black
garments of the priesthood,—I, who ascend the sacred desk, and turn
my pale face heavenward, taking upon myself to hold communion, in your
behalf, with the Most High Omniscience,—I, in whose daily life you
discern the sanctity of Enoch,—I, whose footsteps, as you suppose,
leave a gleam along my earthly track, whereby the pilgrims that shall
come after me may be guided to the regions of the blest,—I, who have
laid the hand of baptism upon your children,—I, who have breathed the
parting prayer over your dying friends, to whom the Amen sounded
faintly from a world which they had quitted,—I, your pastor, whom you
so reverence and trust, am utterly a pollution and a lie!”

More than once, Mr. Dimmesdale had gone into the pulpit, with a
purpose never to come down its steps, until he should have spoken
words like the above. More than once, he had cleared his throat, and
drawn in the long, deep, and tremulous breath, which, when sent forth
again, would come burdened with the black secret of his soul. More
than once—nay, more than a hundred times—he had actually spoken!
Spoken! But how? He had told his hearers that he was altogether vile,
a viler companion of the vilest, the worst of sinners, an abomination,
a thing of unimaginable iniquity; and that the only wonder was, that
they did not see his wretched body shrivelled up before their eyes, by
the burning wrath of the Almighty! Could there be plainer speech than
this? Would not the people start up in their seats, by a simultaneous
impulse, and tear him down out of the pulpit which he defiled? Not so,
indeed! They heard it all, and did but reverence him the more. They
little guessed what deadly purport lurked in those self-condemning
words. “The godly youth!” said they among themselves. “The saint on
earth! Alas, if he discern such sinfulness in his own white soul, what
horrid spectacle would he behold in thine or mine!” The minister well
knew—subtle, but remorseful hypocrite that he was!—the light in
which his vague confession would be viewed. He had striven to put a
cheat upon himself by making the avowal of a guilty conscience, but
had gained only one other sin, and a self-acknowledged shame, without
the momentary relief of being self-deceived. He had spoken the very
truth, and transformed it into the veriest falsehood. And yet, by the
constitution of his nature, he loved the truth, and loathed the lie,
as few men ever did. Therefore, above all things else, he loathed his
miserable self!

His inward trouble drove him to practices more in accordance with the
old, corrupted faith of Rome, than with the better light of the church
in which he had been born and bred. In Mr. Dimmesdale’s secret closet,
under lock and key, there was a bloody scourge. Oftentimes, this
Protestant and Puritan divine had plied it on his own shoulders;
laughing bitterly at himself the while, and smiting so much the more
pitilessly because of that bitter laugh. It was his custom, too, as it
has been that of many other pious Puritans, to fast,—not, however,
like them, in order to purify the body and render it the fitter medium
of celestial illumination, but rigorously, and until his knees
trembled beneath him, as an act of penance. He kept vigils, likewise,
night after night, sometimes in utter darkness; sometimes with a
glimmering lamp; and sometimes, viewing his own face in a
looking-glass, by the most powerful light which he could throw upon
it. He thus typified the constant introspection wherewith he tortured,
but could not purify, himself. In these lengthened vigils, his brain
often reeled, and visions seemed to flit before him; perhaps seen
doubtfully, and by a faint light of their own, in the remote dimness
of the chamber, or more vividly, and close beside him, within the
looking-glass. Now it was a herd of diabolic shapes, that grinned and
mocked at the pale minister, and beckoned him away with them; now a
group of shining angels, who flew upward heavily, as sorrow-laden, but
grew more ethereal as they rose. Now came the dead friends of his
youth, and his white-bearded father, with a saint-like frown, and his
mother, turning her face away as she passed by. Ghost of a
mother,—thinnest fantasy of a mother,—methinks she might yet have
thrown a pitying glance towards her son! And now, through the chamber
which these spectral thoughts had made so ghastly, glided Hester
Prynne, leading along little Pearl, in her scarlet garb, and pointing
her forefinger, first at the scarlet letter on her bosom, and then at
the clergyman’s own breast.

None of these visions ever quite deluded him. At any moment, by an
effort of his will, he could discern substances through their misty
lack of substance, and convince himself that they were not solid in
their nature, like yonder table of carved oak, or that big, square,
leathern-bound and brazen-clasped volume of divinity. But, for all
that, they were, in one sense, the truest and most substantial things
which the poor minister now dealt with. It is the unspeakable misery
of a life so false as his, that it steals the pith and substance out
of whatever realities there are around us, and which were meant by
Heaven to be the spirit’s joy and nutriment. To the untrue man, the
whole universe is false,—it is impalpable,—it shrinks to nothing
within his grasp. And he himself, in so far as he shows himself in a
false light, becomes a shadow, or, indeed, ceases to exist. The only
truth that continued to give Mr. Dimmesdale a real existence on this
earth, was the anguish in his inmost soul, and the undissembled
expression of it in his aspect. Had he once found power to smile, and
wear a face of gayety, there would have been no such man!

On one of those ugly nights, which we have faintly hinted at, but
forborne to picture forth, the minister started from his chair. A new
thought had struck him. There might be a moment’s peace in it.
Attiring himself with as much care as if it had been for public
worship, and precisely in the same manner, he stole softly down the
staircase, undid the door, and issued forth.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XII.

                         THE MINISTER’S VIGIL.


Walking in the shadow of a dream, as it were, and perhaps actually
under the influence of a species of somnambulism, Mr. Dimmesdale
reached the spot where, now so long since, Hester Prynne had lived
through her first hours of public ignominy. The same platform or
scaffold, black and weather-stained with the storm or sunshine of
seven long years, and foot-worn, too, with the tread of many culprits
who had since ascended it, remained standing beneath the balcony of
the meeting-house. The minister went up the steps.

It was an obscure night of early May. An unvaried pall of cloud
muffled the whole expanse of sky from zenith to horizon. If the same
multitude which had stood as eye-witnesses while Hester Prynne
sustained her punishment could now have been summoned forth, they
would have discerned no face above the platform, nor hardly the
outline of a human shape, in the dark gray of the midnight. But the
town was all asleep. There was no peril of discovery. The minister
might stand there, if it so pleased him, until morning should redden
in the east, without other risk than that the dank and chill night-air
would creep into his frame, and stiffen his joints with rheumatism,
and clog his throat with catarrh and cough; thereby defrauding the
expectant audience of to-morrow’s prayer and sermon. No eye could see
him, save that ever-wakeful one which had seen him in his closet,
wielding the bloody scourge. Why, then, had he come hither? Was it but
the mockery of penitence? A mockery, indeed, but in which his soul
trifled with itself! A mockery at which angels blushed and wept, while
fiends rejoiced, with jeering laughter! He had been driven hither by
the impulse of that Remorse which dogged him everywhere, and whose own
sister and closely linked companion was that Cowardice which
invariably drew him back, with her tremulous gripe, just when the
other impulse had hurried him to the verge of a disclosure. Poor,
miserable man! what right had infirmity like his to burden itself with
crime? Crime is for the iron-nerved, who have their choice either to
endure it, or, if it press too hard, to exert their fierce and savage
strength for a good purpose, and fling it off at once! This feeble and
most sensitive of spirits could do neither, yet continually did one
thing or another, which intertwined, in the same inextricable knot,
the agony of heaven-defying guilt and vain repentance.

And thus, while standing on the scaffold, in this vain show of
expiation, Mr. Dimmesdale was overcome with a great horror of mind, as
if the universe were gazing at a scarlet token on his naked breast,
right over his heart. On that spot, in very truth, there was, and
there had long been, the gnawing and poisonous tooth of bodily pain.
Without any effort of his will, or power to restrain himself, he
shrieked aloud; an outcry that went pealing through the night, and
was beaten back from one house to another, and reverberated from the
hills in the background; as if a company of devils, detecting so much
misery and terror in it, had made a plaything of the sound, and were
bandying it to and fro.

“It is done!” muttered the minister, covering his face with his hands.
“The whole town will awake, and hurry forth, and find me here!”

But it was not so. The shriek had perhaps sounded with a far greater
power, to his own startled ears, than it actually possessed. The town
did not awake; or, if it did, the drowsy slumberers mistook the cry
either for something frightful in a dream, or for the noise of
witches; whose voices, at that period, were often heard to pass over
the settlements or lonely cottages, as they rode with Satan through
the air. The clergyman, therefore, hearing no symptoms of disturbance,
uncovered his eyes and looked about him. At one of the chamber-windows
of Governor Bellingham’s mansion, which stood at some distance, on the
line of another street, he beheld the appearance of the old magistrate
himself, with a lamp in his hand, a white night-cap on his head, and a
long white gown enveloping his figure. He looked like a ghost, evoked
unseasonably from the grave. The cry had evidently startled him. At
another window of the same house, moreover, appeared old Mistress
Hibbins, the Governor’s sister, also with a lamp, which, even thus far
off, revealed the expression of her sour and discontented face. She
thrust forth her head from the lattice, and looked anxiously upward.
Beyond the shadow of a doubt, this venerable witch-lady had heard Mr.
Dimmesdale’s outcry, and interpreted it, with its multitudinous echoes
and reverberations, as the clamor of the fiends and night-hags, with
whom she was well known to make excursions into the forest.

Detecting the gleam of Governor Bellingham’s lamp, the old lady
quickly extinguished her own, and vanished. Possibly, she went up
among the clouds. The minister saw nothing further of her motions. The
magistrate, after a wary observation of the darkness,—into which,
nevertheless, he could see but little further than he might into a
mill-stone,—retired from the window.

The minister grew comparatively calm. His eyes, however, were soon
greeted by a little, glimmering light, which, at first a long way off,
was approaching up the street. It threw a gleam of recognition on here
a post, and there a garden-fence, and here a latticed window-pane, and
there a pump, with its full trough of water, and here, again, an
arched door of oak, with an iron knocker, and a rough log for the
doorstep. The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale noted all these minute
particulars, even while firmly convinced that the doom of his
existence was stealing onward, in the footsteps which he now heard;
and that the gleam of the lantern would fall upon him, in a few
moments more, and reveal his long-hidden secret. As the light drew
nearer, he beheld, within its illuminated circle, his brother
clergyman,—or, to speak more accurately, his professional father, as
well as highly valued friend,—the Reverend Mr. Wilson; who, as Mr.
Dimmesdale now conjectured, had been praying at the bedside of some
dying man. And so he had. The good old minister came freshly from the
death-chamber of Governor Winthrop, who had passed from earth to
heaven within that very hour. And now, surrounded, like the saint-like
personages of olden times, with a radiant halo, that glorified him
amid this gloomy night of sin,—as if the departed Governor had left
him an inheritance of his glory, or as if he had caught upon himself
the distant shine of the celestial city, while looking thitherward to
see the triumphant pilgrim pass within its gates,—now, in short, good
Father Wilson was moving homeward, aiding his footsteps with a lighted
lantern! The glimmer of this luminary suggested the above conceits to
Mr. Dimmesdale, who smiled,—nay, almost laughed at them,—and then
wondered if he were going mad.

As the Reverend Mr. Wilson passed beside the scaffold, closely
muffling his Geneva cloak about him with one arm, and holding the
lantern before his breast with the other, the minister could hardly
restrain himself from speaking.

“A good evening to you, venerable Father Wilson! Come up hither, I
pray you, and pass a pleasant hour with me!”

Good heavens! Had Mr. Dimmesdale actually spoken? For one instant, he
believed that these words had passed his lips. But they were uttered
only within his imagination. The venerable Father Wilson continued to
step slowly onward, looking carefully at the muddy pathway before his
feet, and never once turning his head towards the guilty platform.
When the light of the glimmering lantern had faded quite away, the
minister discovered, by the faintness which came over him, that the
last few moments had been a crisis of terrible anxiety; although his
mind had made an involuntary effort to relieve itself by a kind of
lurid playfulness.

Shortly afterwards, the like grisly sense of the humorous again stole
in among the solemn phantoms of his thought. He felt his limbs growing
stiff with the unaccustomed chilliness of the night, and doubted
whether he should be able to descend the steps of the scaffold.
Morning would break, and find him there. The neighborhood would begin
to rouse itself. The earliest riser, coming forth in the dim
twilight, would perceive a vaguely defined figure aloft on the place
of shame; and, half crazed betwixt alarm and curiosity, would go,
knocking from door to door, summoning all the people to behold the
ghost—as he needs must think it—of some defunct transgressor. A
dusky tumult would flap its wings from one house to another. Then—the
morning light still waxing stronger—old patriarchs would rise up in
great haste, each in his flannel gown, and matronly dames, without
pausing to put off their night-gear. The whole tribe of decorous
personages, who had never heretofore been seen with a single hair of
their heads awry, would start into public view, with the disorder of a
nightmare in their aspects. Old Governor Bellingham would come grimly
forth, with his King James’s ruff fastened askew; and Mistress
Hibbins, with some twigs of the forest clinging to her skirts, and
looking sourer than ever, as having hardly got a wink of sleep after
her night ride; and good Father Wilson, too, after spending half the
night at a death-bed, and liking ill to be disturbed, thus early, out
of his dreams about the glorified saints. Hither, likewise, would come
the elders and deacons of Mr. Dimmesdale’s church, and the young
virgins who so idolized their minister, and had made a shrine for him
in their white bosoms; which now, by the by, in their hurry and
confusion, they would scantly have given themselves time to cover with
their kerchiefs. All people, in a word, would come stumbling over
their thresholds, and turning up their amazed and horror-stricken
visages around the scaffold. Whom would they discern there, with the
red eastern light upon his brow? Whom, but the Reverend Arthur
Dimmesdale, half frozen to death, overwhelmed with shame, and standing
where Hester Prynne had stood!

Carried away by the grotesque horror of this picture, the minister,
unawares, and to his own infinite alarm, burst into a great peal of
laughter. It was immediately responded to by a light, airy, childish
laugh, in which, with a thrill of the heart,—but he knew not whether
of exquisite pain, or pleasure as acute,—he recognized the tones of
little Pearl.

“Pearl! Little Pearl!” cried he after a moment’s pause; then,
suppressing his voice,—“Hester! Hester Prynne! Are you there?”

“Yes; it is Hester Prynne!” she replied, in a tone of surprise; and
the minister heard her footsteps approaching from the sidewalk, along
which she had been passing. “It is I, and my little Pearl.”

“Whence come you, Hester?” asked the minister. “What sent you hither?”

“I have been watching at a death-bed,” answered Hester Prynne;—“at
Governor Winthrop’s death-bed, and have taken his measure for a robe,
and am now going homeward to my dwelling.”

“Come up hither, Hester, thou and little Pearl,” said the Reverend Mr.
Dimmesdale. “Ye have both been here before, but I was not with you.
Come up hither once again, and we will stand all three together!”

She silently ascended the steps, and stood on the platform, holding
little Pearl by the hand. The minister felt for the child’s other
hand, and took it. The moment that he did so, there came what seemed a
tumultuous rush of new life, other life than his own, pouring like a
torrent into his heart, and hurrying through all his veins, as if the
mother and the child were communicating their vital warmth to his
half-torpid system. The three formed an electric chain.

“Minister!” whispered little Pearl.

“What wouldst thou say, child?” asked Mr. Dimmesdale.

“Wilt thou stand here with mother and me, to-morrow noontide?”
inquired Pearl.

“Nay; not so, my little Pearl,” answered the minister; for, with the
new energy of the moment, all the dread of public exposure, that had
so long been the anguish of his life, had returned upon him; and he
was already trembling at the conjunction in which—with a strange joy,
nevertheless—he now found himself. “Not so, my child. I shall,
indeed, stand with thy mother and thee one other day, but not
to-morrow.”

Pearl laughed, and attempted to pull away her hand. But the minister
held it fast.

“A moment longer, my child!” said he.

“But wilt thou promise,” asked Pearl, “to take my hand, and mother’s
hand, to-morrow noontide?”

“Not then, Pearl,” said the minister, “but another time.”

“And what other time?” persisted the child.

“At the great judgment day,” whispered the minister,—and, strangely
enough, the sense that he was a professional teacher of the truth
impelled him to answer the child so. “Then, and there, before the
judgment-seat, thy mother, and thou, and I must stand together. But
the daylight of this world shall not see our meeting!”

Pearl laughed again.

[Illustration: “They stood in the noon of that strange splendor”]

But, before Mr. Dimmesdale had done speaking, a light gleamed far and
wide over all the muffled sky. It was doubtless caused by one of those
meteors, which the night-watcher may so often observe burning out to
waste, in the vacant regions of the atmosphere. So powerful was its
radiance, that it thoroughly illuminated the dense medium of cloud
betwixt the sky and earth. The great vault brightened, like the dome
of an immense lamp. It showed the familiar scene of the street, with
the distinctness of mid-day, but also with the awfulness that is
always imparted to familiar objects by an unaccustomed light. The
wooden houses, with their jutting stories and quaint gable-peaks; the
doorsteps and thresholds, with the early grass springing up about
them; the garden-plots, black with freshly turned earth; the
wheel-track, little worn, and, even in the market-place, margined with
green on either side;—all were visible, but with a singularity of
aspect that seemed to give another moral interpretation to the things
of this world than they had ever borne before. And there stood the
minister, with his hand over his heart; and Hester Prynne, with the
embroidered letter glimmering on her bosom; and little Pearl, herself
a symbol, and the connecting link between those two. They stood in the
noon of that strange and solemn splendor, as if it were the light that
is to reveal all secrets, and the daybreak that shall unite all who
belong to one another.

There was witchcraft in little Pearl’s eyes, and her face, as she
glanced upward at the minister, wore that naughty smile which made its
expression frequently so elvish. She withdrew her hand from Mr.
Dimmesdale’s, and pointed across the street. But he clasped both his
hands over his breast, and cast his eyes towards the zenith.

Nothing was more common, in those days, than to interpret all meteoric
appearances, and other natural phenomena, that occurred with less
regularity than the rise and set of sun and moon, as so many
revelations from a supernatural source. Thus, a blazing spear, a sword
of flame, a bow, or a sheaf of arrows, seen in the midnight sky,
prefigured Indian warfare. Pestilence was known to have been foreboded
by a shower of crimson light. We doubt whether any marked event, for
good or evil, ever befell New England, from its settlement down to
Revolutionary times, of which the inhabitants had not been previously
warned by some spectacle of this nature. Not seldom, it had been seen
by multitudes. Oftener, however, its credibility rested on the faith
of some lonely eye-witness, who beheld the wonder through the colored,
magnifying, and distorting medium of his imagination, and shaped it
more distinctly in his after-thought. It was, indeed, a majestic idea,
that the destiny of nations should be revealed, in these awful
hieroglyphics, on the cope of heaven. A scroll so wide might not be
deemed too expansive for Providence to write a people’s doom upon. The
belief was a favorite one with our forefathers, as betokening that
their infant commonwealth was under a celestial guardianship of
peculiar intimacy and strictness. But what shall we say, when an
individual discovers a revelation addressed to himself alone, on the
same vast sheet of record! In such a case, it could only be the
symptom of a highly disordered mental state, when a man, rendered
morbidly self-contemplative by long, intense, and secret pain, had
extended his egotism over the whole expanse of nature, until the
firmament itself should appear no more than a fitting page for his
soul’s history and fate!

We impute it, therefore, solely to the disease in his own eye and
heart, that the minister, looking upward to the zenith, beheld there
the appearance of an immense letter,—the letter A,—marked out in
lines of dull red light. Not but the meteor may have shown itself at
that point, burning duskily through a veil of cloud; but with no such
shape as his guilty imagination gave it; or, at least, with so little
definiteness, that another’s guilt might have seen another symbol in
it.

There was a singular circumstance that characterized Mr. Dimmesdale’s
psychological state, at this moment. All the time that he gazed upward
to the zenith, he was, nevertheless, perfectly aware that little Pearl
was pointing her finger towards old Roger Chillingworth, who stood at
no great distance from the scaffold. The minister appeared to see him,
with the same glance that discerned the miraculous letter. To his
features, as to all other objects, the meteoric light imparted a new
expression; or it might well be that the physician was not careful
then, as at all other times, to hide the malevolence with which he
looked upon his victim. Certainly, if the meteor kindled up the sky,
and disclosed the earth, with an awfulness that admonished Hester
Prynne and the clergyman of the day of judgment, then might Roger
Chillingworth have passed with them for the arch-fiend, standing there
with a smile and scowl, to claim his own. So vivid was the expression,
or so intense the minister’s perception of it, that it seemed still to
remain painted on the darkness, after the meteor had vanished, with an
effect as if the street and all things else were at once annihilated.

“Who is that man, Hester?” gasped Mr. Dimmesdale, overcome with
terror. “I shiver at him! Dost thou know the man? I hate him, Hester!”

She remembered her oath, and was silent.

“I tell thee, my soul shivers at him!” muttered the minister again.
“Who is he? Who is he? Canst thou do nothing for me? I have a nameless
horror of the man!”

“Minister,” said little Pearl, “I can tell thee who he is!”

“Quickly, then, child!” said the minister, bending his ear close to
her lips. “Quickly!—and as low as thou canst whisper.”

Pearl mumbled something into his ear, that sounded, indeed, like human
language, but was only such gibberish as children may be heard amusing
themselves with, by the hour together. At all events, if it involved
any secret information in regard to old Roger Chillingworth, it was in
a tongue unknown to the erudite clergyman, and did but increase the
bewilderment of his mind. The elvish child then laughed aloud.

“Dost thou mock me now?” said the minister.

“Thou wast not bold!—thou wast not true!”—answered the child. “Thou
wouldst not promise to take my hand, and mother’s hand, to-morrow
noontide!”

“Worthy Sir,” answered the physician, who had now advanced to the foot
of the platform. “Pious Master Dimmesdale, can this be you? Well,
well, indeed! We men of study, whose heads are in our books, have need
to be straitly looked after! We dream in our waking moments, and walk
in our sleep. Come, good Sir, and my dear friend, I pray you, let me
lead you home!”

“How knewest thou that I was here?” asked the minister, fearfully.

“Verily, and in good faith,” answered Roger Chillingworth, “I knew
nothing of the matter. I had spent the better part of the night at the
bedside of the worshipful Governor Winthrop, doing what my poor skill
might to give him ease. He going home to a better world, I, likewise,
was on my way homeward, when this strange light shone out. Come with
me, I beseech you, Reverend Sir; else you will be poorly able to do
Sabbath duty to-morrow. Aha! see now, how they trouble the
brain,—these books!—these books! You should study less, good Sir,
and take a little pastime; or these night-whimseys will grow upon
you.”

“I will go home with you,” said Mr. Dimmesdale.

With a chill despondency, like one awaking, all nerveless, from an
ugly dream, he yielded himself to the physician, and was led away.

The next day, however, being the Sabbath, he preached a discourse
which was held to be the richest and most powerful, and the most
replete with heavenly influences, that had ever proceeded from his
lips. Souls, it is said more souls than one, were brought to the truth
by the efficacy of that sermon, and vowed within themselves to cherish
a holy gratitude towards Mr. Dimmesdale throughout the long hereafter.
But, as he came down the pulpit steps, the gray-bearded sexton met
him, holding up a black glove, which the minister recognized as his
own.

“It was found,” said the sexton, “this morning, on the scaffold where
evil-doers are set up to public shame. Satan dropped it there, I take
it, intending a scurrilous jest against your reverence. But, indeed,
he was blind and foolish, as he ever and always is. A pure hand needs
no glove to cover it!”

“Thank you, my good friend,” said the minister, gravely, but startled
at heart; for, so confused was his remembrance, that he had almost
brought himself to look at the events of the past night as visionary.
“Yes, it seems to be my glove, indeed!”

“And since Satan saw fit to steal it, your reverence must needs handle
him without gloves, henceforward,” remarked the old sexton, grimly
smiling. “But did your reverence hear of the portent that was seen
last night?—a great red letter in the sky,—the letter A, which we
interpret to stand for Angel. For, as our good Governor Winthrop was
made an angel this past night, it was doubtless held fit that there
should be some notice thereof!”

“No,” answered the minister, “I had not heard of it.”

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XIII.

                        ANOTHER VIEW OF HESTER.


In her late singular interview with Mr. Dimmesdale, Hester Prynne was
shocked at the condition to which she found the clergyman reduced. His
nerve seemed absolutely destroyed. His moral force was abased into
more than childish weakness. It grovelled helpless on the ground, even
while his intellectual faculties retained their pristine strength, or
had perhaps acquired a morbid energy, which disease only could have
given them. With her knowledge of a train of circumstances hidden from
all others, she could readily infer that, besides the legitimate
action of his own conscience, a terrible machinery had been brought to
bear, and was still operating, on Mr. Dimmesdale’s well-being and
repose. Knowing what this poor, fallen man had once been, her whole
soul was moved by the shuddering terror with which he had appealed to
her,—the outcast woman,—for support against his instinctively
discovered enemy. She decided, moreover, that he had a right to her
utmost aid. Little accustomed, in her long seclusion from society, to
measure her ideas of right and wrong by any standard external to
herself, Hester saw—or seemed to see—that there lay a responsibility
upon her, in reference to the clergyman, which she owed to no other,
nor to the whole world besides. The links that united her to the rest
of human kind—links of flowers, or silk, or gold, or whatever the
material—had all been broken. Here was the iron link of mutual crime,
which neither he nor she could break. Like all other ties, it brought
along with it its obligations.

Hester Prynne did not now occupy precisely the same position in which
we beheld her during the earlier periods of her ignominy. Years had
come and gone. Pearl was now seven years old. Her mother, with the
scarlet letter on her breast, glittering in its fantastic embroidery,
had long been a familiar object to the towns-people. As is apt to be
the case when a person stands out in any prominence before the
community, and, at the same time, interferes neither with public nor
individual interests and convenience, a species of general regard had
ultimately grown up in reference to Hester Prynne. It is to the credit
of human nature, that, except where its selfishness is brought into
play, it loves more readily than it hates. Hatred, by a gradual and
quiet process, will even be transformed to love, unless the change be
impeded by a continually new irritation of the original feeling of
hostility. In this matter of Hester Prynne, there was neither
irritation nor irksomeness. She never battled with the public, but
submitted, uncomplainingly, to its worst usage; she made no claim upon
it, in requital for what she suffered; she did not weigh upon its
sympathies. Then, also, the blameless purity of her life during all
these years in which she had been set apart to infamy, was reckoned
largely in her favor. With nothing now to lose, in the sight of
mankind, and with no hope, and seemingly no wish, of gaining anything,
it could only be a genuine regard for virtue that had brought back the
poor wanderer to its paths.

[Illustration: Hester in the House of Mourning]

It was perceived, too, that while Hester never put forward even the
humblest title to share in the world’s privileges,—further than to
breathe the common air, and earn daily bread for little Pearl and
herself by the faithful labor of her hands,—she was quick to
acknowledge her sisterhood with the race of man, whenever benefits
were to be conferred. None so ready as she to give of her little
substance to every demand of poverty; even though the bitter-hearted
pauper threw back a gibe in requital of the food brought regularly to
his door, or the garments wrought for him by the fingers that could
have embroidered a monarch’s robe. None so self-devoted as Hester,
when pestilence stalked through the town. In all seasons of calamity,
indeed, whether general or of individuals, the outcast of society at
once found her place. She came, not as a guest, but as a rightful
inmate, into the household that was darkened by trouble; as if its
gloomy twilight were a medium in which she was entitled to hold
intercourse with her fellow-creatures. There glimmered the embroidered
letter, with comfort in its unearthly ray. Elsewhere the token of sin,
it was the taper of the sick-chamber. It had even thrown its gleam, in
the sufferer’s hard extremity, across the verge of time. It had shown
him where to set his foot, while the light of earth was fast becoming
dim, and ere the light of futurity could reach him. In such
emergencies, Hester’s nature showed itself warm and rich; a
well-spring of human tenderness, unfailing to every real demand, and
inexhaustible by the largest. Her breast, with its badge of shame, was
but the softer pillow for the head that needed one. She was
self-ordained a Sister of Mercy; or, we may rather say, the world’s
heavy hand had so ordained her, when neither the world nor she looked
forward to this result. The letter was the symbol of her calling. Such
helpfulness was found in her,—so much power to do, and power to
sympathize,—that many people refused to interpret the scarlet A by
its original signification. They said that it meant Able; so strong
was Hester Prynne, with a woman’s strength.

It was only the darkened house that could contain her. When sunshine
came again, she was not there. Her shadow had faded across the
threshold. The helpful inmate had departed, without one backward
glance to gather up the meed of gratitude, if any were in the hearts
of those whom she had served so zealously. Meeting them in the
street, she never raised her head to receive their greeting. If they
were resolute to accost her, she laid her finger on the scarlet
letter, and passed on. This might be pride, but was so like humility,
that it produced all the softening influence of the latter quality on
the public mind. The public is despotic in its temper; it is capable
of denying common justice, when too strenuously demanded as a right;
but quite as frequently it awards more than justice, when the appeal
is made, as despots love to have it made, entirely to its generosity.
Interpreting Hester Prynne’s deportment as an appeal of this nature,
society was inclined to show its former victim a more benign
countenance than she cared to be favored with, or, perchance, than she
deserved.

The rulers, and the wise and learned men of the community, were longer
in acknowledging the influence of Hester’s good qualities than the
people. The prejudices which they shared in common with the latter
were fortified in themselves by an iron framework of reasoning, that
made it a far tougher labor to expel them. Day by day, nevertheless,
their sour and rigid wrinkles were relaxing into something which, in
the due course of years, might grow to be an expression of almost
benevolence. Thus it was with the men of rank, on whom their eminent
position imposed the guardianship of the public morals. Individuals in
private life, meanwhile, had quite forgiven Hester Prynne for her
frailty; nay, more, they had begun to look upon the scarlet letter as
the token, not of that one sin, for which she had borne so long and
dreary a penance, but of her many good deeds since. “Do you see that
woman with the embroidered badge?” they would say to strangers. “It is
our Hester,—the town’s own Hester, who is so kind to the poor, so
helpful to the sick, so comfortable to the afflicted!” Then, it is
true, the propensity of human nature to tell the very worst of itself,
when embodied in the person of another, would constrain them to
whisper the black scandal of bygone years. It was none the less a
fact, however, that, in the eyes of the very men who spoke thus, the
scarlet letter had the effect of the cross on a nun’s bosom. It
imparted to the wearer a kind of sacredness, which enabled her to walk
securely amid all peril. Had she fallen among thieves, it would have
kept her safe. It was reported, and believed by many, that an Indian
had drawn his arrow against the badge, and that the missile struck it,
but fell harmless to the ground.

The effect of the symbol—or, rather, of the position in respect to
society that was indicated by it—on the mind of Hester Prynne
herself, was powerful and peculiar. All the light and graceful foliage
of her character had been withered up by this red-hot brand, and had
long ago fallen away, leaving a bare and harsh outline, which might
have been repulsive, had she possessed friends or companions to be
repelled by it. Even the attractiveness of her person had undergone a
similar change. It might be partly owing to the studied austerity of
her dress, and partly to the lack of demonstration in her manners. It
was a sad transformation, too, that her rich and luxuriant hair had
either been cut off, or was so completely hidden by a cap, that not a
shining lock of it ever once gushed into the sunshine. It was due in
part to all these causes, but still more to something else, that there
seemed to be no longer anything in Hester’s face for Love to dwell
upon; nothing in Hester’s form, though majestic and statue-like, that
Passion would ever dream of clasping in its embrace; nothing in
Hester’s bosom, to make it ever again the pillow of Affection. Some
attribute had departed from her, the permanence of which had been
essential to keep her a woman. Such is frequently the fate, and such
the stern development, of the feminine character and person, when the
woman has encountered, and lived through, an experience of peculiar
severity. If she be all tenderness, she will die. If she survive, the
tenderness will either be crushed out of her, or—and the outward
semblance is the same—crushed so deeply into her heart that it can
never show itself more. The latter is perhaps the truest theory. She
who has once been woman, and ceased to be so, might at any moment
become a woman again if there were only the magic touch to effect the
transfiguration. We shall see whether Hester Prynne were ever
afterwards so touched, and so transfigured.

Much of the marble coldness of Hester’s impression was to be
attributed to the circumstance, that her life had turned, in a great
measure, from passion and feeling, to thought. Standing alone in the
world,—alone, as to any dependence on society, and with little Pearl
to be guided and protected,—alone, and hopeless of retrieving her
position, even had she not scorned to consider it desirable,—she cast
away the fragments of a broken chain. The world’s law was no law for
her mind. It was an age in which the human intellect, newly
emancipated, had taken a more active and a wider range than for many
centuries before. Men of the sword had overthrown nobles and kings.
Men bolder than these had overthrown and rearranged—not actually, but
within the sphere of theory, which was their most real abode—the
whole system of ancient prejudice, wherewith was linked much of
ancient principle. Hester Prynne imbibed this spirit. She assumed a
freedom of speculation, then common enough on the other side of the
Atlantic, but which our forefathers, had they known it, would have
held to be a deadlier crime than that stigmatized by the scarlet
letter. In her lonesome cottage, by the sea-shore, thoughts visited
her, such as dared to enter no other dwelling in New England; shadowy
guests, that would have been as perilous as demons to their
entertainer, could they have been seen so much as knocking at her
door.

It is remarkable, that persons who speculate the most boldly often
conform with the most perfect quietude to the external regulations of
society. The thought suffices them, without investing itself in the
flesh and blood of action. So it seemed to be with Hester. Yet, had
little Pearl never come to her from the spiritual world, it might have
been far otherwise. Then, she might have come down to us in history,
hand in hand with Ann Hutchinson, as the foundress of a religious
sect. She might, in one of her phases, have been a prophetess. She
might, and not improbably would, have suffered death from the stern
tribunals of the period, for attempting to undermine the foundations
of the Puritan establishment. But, in the education of her child, the
mother’s enthusiasm of thought had something to wreak itself upon.
Providence, in the person of this little girl, had assigned to
Hester’s charge the germ and blossom of womanhood, to be cherished and
developed amid a host of difficulties. Everything was against her. The
world was hostile. The child’s own nature had something wrong in it,
which continually betokened that she had been born amiss,—the
effluence of her mother’s lawless passion,—and often impelled Hester
to ask, in bitterness of heart, whether it were for ill or good that
the poor little creature had been born at all.

Indeed, the same dark question often rose into her mind, with
reference to the whole race of womanhood. Was existence worth
accepting, even to the happiest among them? As concerned her own
individual existence, she had long ago decided in the negative, and
dismissed the point as settled. A tendency to speculation, though it
may keep woman quiet, as it does man, yet makes her sad. She discerns,
it may be, such a hopeless task before her. As a first step, the whole
system of society is to be torn down, and built up anew. Then, the
very nature of the opposite sex, or its long hereditary habit, which
has become like nature, is to be essentially modified, before woman
can be allowed to assume what seems a fair and suitable position.
Finally, all other difficulties being obviated, woman cannot take
advantage of these preliminary reforms, until she herself shall have
undergone a still mightier change; in which, perhaps, the ethereal
essence, wherein she has her truest life, will be found to have
evaporated. A woman never overcomes these problems by any exercise of
thought. They are not to be solved, or only in one way. If her heart
chance to come uppermost, they vanish. Thus, Hester Prynne, whose
heart had lost its regular and healthy throb, wandered without a clew
in the dark labyrinth of mind; now turned aside by an insurmountable
precipice; now starting back from a deep chasm. There was wild and
ghastly scenery all around her, and a home and comfort nowhere. At
times, a fearful doubt strove to possess her soul, whether it were not
better to send Pearl at once to heaven, and go herself to such
futurity as Eternal Justice should provide.

The scarlet letter had not done its office.

Now, however, her interview with the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, on the
night of his vigil, had given her a new theme of reflection, and held
up to her an object that appeared worthy of any exertion and sacrifice
for its attainment. She had witnessed the intense misery beneath
which the minister struggled, or, to speak more accurately, had ceased
to struggle. She saw that he stood on the verge of lunacy, if he had
not already stepped across it. It was impossible to doubt, that,
whatever painful efficacy there might be in the secret sting of
remorse, a deadlier venom had been infused into it by the hand that
proffered relief. A secret enemy had been continually by his side,
under the semblance of a friend and helper, and had availed himself of
the opportunities thus afforded for tampering with the delicate
springs of Mr. Dimmesdale’s nature. Hester could not but ask herself,
whether there had not originally been a defect of truth, courage, and
loyalty, on her own part, in allowing the minister to be thrown into a
position where so much evil was to be foreboded, and nothing
auspicious to be hoped. Her only justification lay in the fact, that
she had been able to discern no method of rescuing him from a blacker
ruin than had overwhelmed herself, except by acquiescing in Roger
Chillingworth’s scheme of disguise. Under that impulse, she had made
her choice, and had chosen, as it now appeared, the more wretched
alternative of the two. She determined to redeem her error, so far as
it might yet be possible. Strengthened by years of hard and solemn
trial, she felt herself no longer so inadequate to cope with Roger
Chillingworth as on that night, abased by sin, and half maddened by
the ignominy that was still new, when they had talked together in the
prison-chamber. She had climbed her way, since then, to a higher
point. The old man, on the other hand, had brought himself nearer to
her level, or perhaps below it, by the revenge which he had stooped
for.

In fine, Hester Prynne resolved to meet her former husband, and do
what might be in her power for the rescue of the victim on whom he
had so evidently set his gripe. The occasion was not long to seek. One
afternoon, walking with Pearl in a retired part of the peninsula, she
beheld the old physician, with a basket on one arm, and a staff in the
other hand, stooping along the ground, in quest of roots and herbs to
concoct his medicines withal.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XIV.

                       HESTER AND THE PHYSICIAN.


Hester bade little Pearl run down to the margin of the water, and play
with the shells and tangled sea-weed, until she should have talked
awhile with yonder gatherer of herbs. So the child flew away like a
bird, and, making bare her small white feet, went pattering along the
moist margin of the sea. Here and there she came to a full stop, and
peeped curiously into a pool, left by the retiring tide as a mirror
for Pearl to see her face in. Forth peeped at her, out of the pool,
with dark, glistening curls around her head, and an elf-smile in her
eyes, the image of a little maid, whom Pearl, having no other
playmate, invited to take her hand, and run a race with her. But the
visionary little maid, on her part, beckoned likewise, as if to
say,—“This is a better place! Come thou into the pool!” And Pearl,
stepping in, mid-leg deep, beheld her own white feet at the bottom;
while, out of a still lower depth, came the gleam of a kind of
fragmentary smile, floating to and fro in the agitated water.

Meanwhile, her mother had accosted the physician.

“I would speak a word with you,” said she,—“a word that concerns us
much.”

“Aha! and is it Mistress Hester that has a word for old Roger
Chillingworth?” answered he, raising himself from his stooping
posture. “With all my heart! Why, Mistress, I hear good tidings of you
on all hands! No longer ago than yester-eve, a magistrate, a wise and
godly man, was discoursing of your affairs, Mistress Hester, and
whispered me that there had been question concerning you in the
council. It was debated whether or no, with safety to the common weal,
yonder scarlet letter might be taken off your bosom. On my life,
Hester, I made my entreaty to the worshipful magistrate that it might
be done forthwith!”

“It lies not in the pleasure of the magistrates to take off this
badge,” calmly replied Hester. “Were I worthy to be quit of it, it
would fall away of its own nature, or be transformed into something
that should speak a different purport.”

“Nay, then, wear it, if it suit you better,” rejoined he. “A woman
must needs follow her own fancy, touching the adornment of her person.
The letter is gayly embroidered, and shows right bravely on your
bosom!”

All this while, Hester had been looking steadily at the old man, and
was shocked, as well as wonder-smitten, to discern what a change had
been wrought upon him within the past seven years. It was not so much
that he had grown older; for though the traces of advancing life were
visible, he bore his age well, and seemed to retain a wiry vigor and
alertness. But the former aspect of an intellectual and studious man,
calm and quiet, which was what she best remembered in him, had
altogether vanished, and been succeeded by an eager, searching,
almost fierce, yet carefully guarded look. It seemed to be his wish
and purpose to mask this expression with a smile; but the latter
played him false, and flickered over his visage so derisively, that
the spectator could see his blackness all the better for it. Ever and
anon, too, there came a glare of red light out of his eyes; as if the
old man’s soul were on fire, and kept on smouldering duskily within
his breast, until, by some casual puff of passion, it was blown into a
momentary flame. This he repressed, as speedily as possible, and
strove to look as if nothing of the kind had happened.

In a word, old Roger Chillingworth was a striking evidence of man’s
faculty of transforming himself into a devil, if he will only, for a
reasonable space of time, undertake a devil’s office. This unhappy
person had effected such a transformation, by devoting himself, for
seven years, to the constant analysis of a heart full of torture, and
deriving his enjoyment thence, and adding fuel to those fiery tortures
which he analyzed and gloated over.

The scarlet letter burned on Hester Prynne’s bosom. Here was another
ruin, the responsibility of which came partly home to her.

“What see you in my face,” asked the physician, “that you look at it
so earnestly?”

“Something that would make me weep, if there were any tears bitter
enough for it,” answered she. “But let it pass! It is of yonder
miserable man that I would speak.”

“And what of him?” cried Roger Chillingworth, eagerly, as if he loved
the topic, and were glad of an opportunity to discuss it with the only
person of whom he could make a confidant. “Not to hide the truth,
Mistress Hester, my thoughts happen just now to be busy with the
gentleman. So speak freely; and I will make answer.”

“When we last spake together,” said Hester, “now seven years ago, it
was your pleasure to extort a promise of secrecy, as touching the
former relation betwixt yourself and me. As the life and good fame of
yonder man were in your hands, there seemed no choice to me, save to
be silent, in accordance with your behest. Yet it was not without
heavy misgivings that I thus bound myself; for, having cast off all
duty towards other human beings, there remained a duty towards him;
and something whispered me that I was betraying it, in pledging myself
to keep your counsel. Since that day, no man is so near to him as you.
You tread behind his every footstep. You are beside him, sleeping and
waking. You search his thoughts. You burrow and rankle in his heart!
Your clutch is on his life, and you cause him to die daily a living
death; and still he knows you not. In permitting this, I have surely
acted a false part by the only man to whom the power was left me to be
true!”

“What choice had you?” asked Roger Chillingworth. “My finger, pointed
at this man, would have hurled him from his pulpit into a
dungeon,—thence, peradventure, to the gallows!”

“It had been better so!” said Hester Prynne.

“What evil have I done the man?” asked Roger Chillingworth again. “I
tell thee, Hester Prynne, the richest fee that ever physician earned
from monarch could not have bought such care as I have wasted on this
miserable priest! But for my aid, his life would have burned away in
torments, within the first two years after the perpetration of his
crime and thine. For, Hester, his spirit lacked the strength that
could have borne up, as thine has, beneath a burden like thy scarlet
letter. O, I could reveal a goodly secret! But enough! What art can
do, I have exhausted on him. That he now breathes, and creeps about on
earth, is owing all to me!”

“Better he had died at once!” said Hester Prynne.

“Yea, woman, thou sayest truly!” cried old Roger Chillingworth,
letting the lurid fire of his heart blaze out before her eyes. “Better
had he died at once! Never did mortal suffer what this man has
suffered. And all, all, in the sight of his worst enemy! He has been
conscious of me. He has felt an influence dwelling always upon him
like a curse. He knew, by some spiritual sense,—for the Creator never
made another being so sensitive as this,—he knew that no friendly
hand was pulling at his heart-strings, and that an eye was looking
curiously into him, which sought only evil, and found it. But he knew
not that the eye and hand were mine! With the superstition common to
his brotherhood, he fancied himself given over to a fiend, to be
tortured with frightful dreams, and desperate thoughts, the sting of
remorse, and despair of pardon; as a foretaste of what awaits him
beyond the grave. But it was the constant shadow of my presence!—the
closest propinquity of the man whom he had most vilely wronged!—and
who had grown to exist only by this perpetual poison of the direst
revenge! Yea, indeed!—he did not err!—there was a fiend at his
elbow! A mortal man, with once a human heart, has become a fiend for
his especial torment!”

The unfortunate physician, while uttering these words, lifted his
hands with a look of horror, as if he had beheld some frightful shape,
which he could not recognize, usurping the place of his own image in
a glass. It was one of those moments—which sometimes occur only at
the interval of years—when a man’s moral aspect is faithfully
revealed to his mind’s eye. Not improbably, he had never before viewed
himself as he did now.

“Hast thou not tortured him enough?” said Hester, noticing the old
man’s look. “Has he not paid thee all?”

“No!—no!—He has but increased the debt!” answered the physician; and
as he proceeded his manner lost its fiercer characteristics, and
subsided into gloom. “Dost thou remember me, Hester, as I was nine
years agone? Even then, I was in the autumn of my days, nor was it the
early autumn. But all my life had been made up of earnest, studious,
thoughtful, quiet years, bestowed faithfully for the increase of mine
own knowledge, and faithfully, too, though this latter object was but
casual to the other,—faithfully for the advancement of human welfare.
No life had been more peaceful and innocent than mine; few lives so
rich with benefits conferred. Dost thou remember me? Was I not, though
you might deem me cold, nevertheless a man thoughtful for others,
craving little for himself,—kind, true, just, and of constant, if not
warm affections? Was I not all this?”

“All this, and more,” said Hester.

“And what am I now?” demanded he, looking into her face, and
permitting the whole evil within him to be written on his features. “I
have already told thee what I am! A fiend! Who made me so?”

“It was myself!” cried Hester, shuddering. “It was I, not less than
he. Why hast thou not avenged thyself on me?”

“I have left thee to the scarlet letter,” replied Roger Chillingworth.
“If that have not avenged me, I can do no more!”

He laid his finger on it, with a smile.

“It has avenged thee!” answered Hester Prynne.

“I judged no less,” said the physician. “And now, what wouldst thou
with me touching this man?”

“I must reveal the secret,” answered Hester, firmly. “He must discern
thee in thy true character. What may be the result, I know not. But
this long debt of confidence, due from me to him, whose bane and ruin
I have been, shall at length be paid. So far as concerns the overthrow
or preservation of his fair fame and his earthly state, and perchance
his life, he is in thy hands. Nor do I,—whom the scarlet letter has
disciplined to truth, though it be the truth of red-hot iron, entering
into the soul,—nor do I perceive such advantage in his living any
longer a life of ghastly emptiness, that I shall stoop to implore thy
mercy. Do with him as thou wilt! There is no good for him,—no good
for me,—no good for thee! There is no good for little Pearl! There is
no path to guide us out of this dismal maze!”

“Woman, I could wellnigh pity thee!” said Roger Chillingworth, unable
to restrain a thrill of admiration too; for there was a quality almost
majestic in the despair which she expressed. “Thou hadst great
elements. Peradventure, hadst thou met earlier with a better love than
mine, this evil had not been. I pity thee, for the good that has been
wasted in thy nature!”

“And I thee,” answered Hester Prynne, “for the hatred that has
transformed a wise and just man to a fiend! Wilt thou yet purge it out
of thee, and be once more human? If not for his sake, then doubly for
thine own! Forgive, and leave his further retribution to the Power
that claims it! I said, but now, that there could be no good event for
him, or thee, or me, who are here wandering together in this gloomy
maze of evil, and stumbling, at every step, over the guilt wherewith
we have strewn our path. It is not so! There might be good for thee,
and thee alone, since thou hast been deeply wronged, and hast it at
thy will to pardon. Wilt thou give up that only privilege? Wilt thou
reject that priceless benefit?”

“Peace, Hester, peace!” replied the old man, with gloomy sternness.
“It is not granted me to pardon. I have no such power as thou tellest
me of. My old faith, long forgotten, comes back to me, and explains
all that we do, and all we suffer. By thy first step awry thou didst
plant the germ of evil; but since that moment, it has all been a dark
necessity. Ye that have wronged me are not sinful, save in a kind of
typical illusion; neither am I fiend-like, who have snatched a fiend’s
office from his hands. It is our fate. Let the black flower blossom as
it may! Now go thy ways, and deal as thou wilt with yonder man.”

He waved his hand, and betook himself again to his employment of
gathering herbs.

[Illustration: Mandrake]




                            [Illustration]

                                  XV.

                           HESTER AND PEARL.


So Roger Chillingworth—a deformed old figure, with a face that
haunted men’s memories longer than they liked—took leave of Hester
Prynne, and went stooping away along the earth. He gathered here and
there an herb, or grubbed up a root, and put it into the basket on his
arm. His gray beard almost touched the ground, as he crept onward.
Hester gazed after him a little while, looking with a half-fantastic
curiosity to see whether the tender grass of early spring would not be
blighted beneath him, and show the wavering track of his footsteps,
sere and brown, across its cheerful verdure. She wondered what sort of
herbs they were, which the old man was so sedulous to gather. Would
not the earth, quickened to an evil purpose by the sympathy of his
eye, greet him with poisonous shrubs, of species hitherto unknown,
that would start up under his fingers? Or might it suffice him, that
every wholesome growth should be converted into something deleterious
and malignant at his touch? Did the sun, which shone so brightly
everywhere else, really fall upon him? Or was there, as it rather
seemed, a circle of ominous shadow moving along with his deformity,
whichever way he turned himself? And whither was he now going? Would
he not suddenly sink into the earth, leaving a barren and blasted
spot, where, in due course of time, would be seen deadly nightshade,
dogwood, henbane, and whatever else of vegetable wickedness the
climate could produce, all flourishing with hideous luxuriance? Or
would he spread bat’s wings and flee away, looking so much the uglier,
the higher he rose towards heaven?

[Illustration: “He gathered herbs here and there”]

“Be it sin or no,” said Hester Prynne, bitterly, as she still gazed
after him, “I hate the man!”

She upbraided herself for the sentiment, but could not overcome or
lessen it. Attempting to do so, she thought of those long-past days,
in a distant land, when he used to emerge at eventide from the
seclusion of his study, and sit down in the firelight of their home,
and in the light of her nuptial smile. He needed to bask himself in
that smile, he said, in order that the chill of so many lonely hours
among his books might be taken off the scholar’s heart. Such scenes
had once appeared not otherwise than happy, but now, as viewed through
the dismal medium of her subsequent life, they classed themselves
among her ugliest remembrances. She marvelled how such scenes could
have been! She marvelled how she could ever have been wrought upon to
marry him! She deemed it her crime most to be repented of, that she
had ever endured, and reciprocated, the lukewarm grasp of his hand,
and had suffered the smile of her lips and eyes to mingle and melt
into his own. And it seemed a fouler offence committed by Roger
Chillingworth, than any which had since been done him, that, in the
time when her heart knew no better, he had persuaded her to fancy
herself happy by his side.

“Yes, I hate him!” repeated Hester, more bitterly than before. “He
betrayed me! He has done me worse wrong than I did him!”

Let men tremble to win the hand of woman, unless they win along with
it the utmost passion of her heart! Else it may be their miserable
fortune, as it was Roger Chillingworth’s, when some mightier touch
than their own may have awakened all her sensibilities, to be
reproached even for the calm content, the marble image of happiness,
which they will have imposed upon her as the warm reality. But Hester
ought long ago to have done with this injustice. What did it betoken?
Had seven long years, under the torture of the scarlet letter,
inflicted so much of misery, and wrought out no repentance?

The emotions of that brief space, while she stood gazing after the
crooked figure of old Roger Chillingworth, threw a dark light on
Hester’s state of mind, revealing much that she might not otherwise
have acknowledged to herself.

He being gone, she summoned back her child.

“Pearl! Little Pearl! Where are you?”

[Illustration: Pearl on the Sea-Shore]

Pearl, whose activity of spirit never flagged, had been at no loss for
amusement while her mother talked with the old gatherer of herbs. At
first, as already told, she had flirted fancifully with her own image
in a pool of water, beckoning the phantom forth, and—as it declined
to venture—seeking a passage for herself into its sphere of
impalpable earth and unattainable sky. Soon finding, however, that
either she or the image was unreal, she turned elsewhere for better
pastime. She made little boats out of birch-bark, and freighted them
with snail-shells, and sent out more ventures on the mighty deep than
any merchant in New England; but the larger part of them foundered
near the shore. She seized a live horseshoe by the tail, and made
prize of several five-fingers, and laid out a jelly-fish to melt in
the warm sun. Then she took up the white foam, that streaked the line
of the advancing tide, and threw it upon the breeze, scampering after
it, with winged footsteps, to catch the great snow-flakes ere they
fell. Perceiving a flock of beach-birds, that fed and fluttered along
the shore, the naughty child picked up her apron full of pebbles, and,
creeping from rock to rock after these small sea-fowl, displayed
remarkable dexterity in pelting them. One little gray bird, with a
white breast, Pearl was almost sure, had been hit by a pebble, and
fluttered away with a broken wing. But then the elf-child sighed, and
gave up her sport; because it grieved her to have done harm to a
little being that was as wild as the sea-breeze, or as wild as Pearl
herself.

Her final employment was to gather sea-weed, of various kinds, and
make herself a scarf, or mantle, and a head-dress, and thus assume the
aspect of a little mermaid. She inherited her mother’s gift for
devising drapery and costume. As the last touch to her mermaid’s garb,
Pearl took some eel-grass, and imitated, as best she could, on her own
bosom, the decoration with which she was so familiar on her mother’s.
A letter,—the letter A,—but freshly green, instead of scarlet! The
child bent her chin upon her breast, and contemplated this device with
strange interest; even as if the one only thing for which she had been
sent into the world was to make out its hidden import.

“I wonder if mother will ask me what it means?” thought Pearl.

Just then, she heard her mother’s voice, and flitting along as lightly
as one of the little sea-birds, appeared before Hester Prynne,
dancing, laughing, and pointing her finger to the ornament upon her
bosom.

“My little Pearl,” said Hester, after a moment’s silence, “the green
letter, and on thy childish bosom, has no purport. But dost thou know,
my child, what this letter means which thy mother is doomed to wear?”

“Yes, mother,” said the child. “It is the great letter A. Thou hast
taught me in the horn-book.”

Hester looked steadily into her little face; but, though there was
that singular expression which she had so often remarked in her black
eyes, she could not satisfy herself whether Pearl really attached any
meaning to the symbol. She felt a morbid desire to ascertain the
point.

“Dost thou know, child, wherefore thy mother wears this letter?”

“Truly do I!” answered Pearl, looking brightly into her mother’s face.
“It is for the same reason that the minister keeps his hand over his
heart!”

“And what reason is that?” asked Hester, half smiling at the absurd
incongruity of the child’s observation; but, on second thoughts,
turning pale. “What has the letter to do with any heart, save mine?”

“Nay, mother, I have told all I know,” said Pearl, more seriously than
she was wont to speak. “Ask yonder old man whom thou hast been talking
with! It may be he can tell. But in good earnest now, mother dear,
what does this scarlet letter mean?—and why dost thou wear it on thy
bosom?—and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart?”

She took her mother’s hand in both her own, and gazed into her eyes
with an earnestness that was seldom seen in her wild and capricious
character. The thought occurred to Hester, that the child might really
be seeking to approach her with childlike confidence, and doing what
she could, and as intelligently as she knew how, to establish a
meeting-point of sympathy. It showed Pearl in an unwonted aspect.
Heretofore, the mother, while loving her child with the intensity of a
sole affection, had schooled herself to hope for little other return
than the waywardness of an April breeze; which spends its time in airy
sport, and has its gusts of inexplicable passion, and is petulant in
its best of moods, and chills oftener than caresses you, when you take
it to your bosom; in requital of which misdemeanors, it will
sometimes, of its own vague purpose, kiss your cheek with a kind of
doubtful tenderness, and play gently with your hair, and then be gone
about its other idle business, leaving a dreamy pleasure at your
heart. And this, moreover, was a mother’s estimate of the child’s
disposition. Any other observer might have seen few but unamiable
traits, and have given them a far darker coloring. But now the idea
came strongly into Hester’s mind, that Pearl, with her remarkable
precocity and acuteness, might already have approached the age when
she could be made a friend, and intrusted with as much of her mother’s
sorrows as could be imparted, without irreverence either to the parent
or the child. In the little chaos of Pearl’s character there might be
seen emerging—and could have been, from the very first—the steadfast
principles of an unflinching courage,—an uncontrollable will,—a
sturdy pride, which might be disciplined into self-respect,—and a
bitter scorn of many things, which, when examined, might be found to
have the taint of falsehood in them. She possessed affections, too,
though hitherto acrid and disagreeable, as are the richest flavors of
unripe fruit. With all these sterling attributes, thought Hester, the
evil which she inherited from her mother must be great indeed, if a
noble woman do not grow out of this elfish child.

Pearl’s inevitable tendency to hover about the enigma of the scarlet
letter seemed an innate quality of her being. From the earliest epoch
of her conscious life, she had entered upon this as her appointed
mission. Hester had often fancied that Providence had a design of
justice and retribution, in endowing the child with this marked
propensity; but never, until now, had she bethought herself to ask,
whether, linked with that design, there might not likewise be a
purpose of mercy and beneficence. If little Pearl were entertained
with faith and trust, as a spirit messenger no less than an earthly
child, might it not be her errand to soothe away the sorrow that lay
cold in her mother’s heart, and converted it into a tomb?—and to help
her to overcome the passion, once so wild, and even yet neither dead
nor asleep, but only imprisoned within the same tomb-like heart?

Such were some of the thoughts that now stirred in Hester’s mind, with
as much vivacity of impression as if they had actually been whispered
into her ear. And there was little Pearl, all this while, holding her
mother’s hand in both her own, and turning her face upward, while she
put these searching questions, once, and again, and still a third
time.

“What does the letter mean, mother?—and why dost thou wear it?—and
why does the minister keep his hand over his heart?”

“What shall I say?” thought Hester to herself. “No! If this be the
price of the child’s sympathy, I cannot pay it.”

Then she spoke aloud.

“Silly Pearl,” said she, “what questions are these? There are many
things in this world that a child must not ask about. What know I of
the minister’s heart? And as for the scarlet letter, I wear it for the
sake of its gold-thread.”

In all the seven bygone years, Hester Prynne had never before been
false to the symbol on her bosom. It may be that it was the talisman
of a stern and severe, but yet a guardian spirit, who now forsook her;
as recognizing that, in spite of his strict watch over her heart, some
new evil had crept into it, or some old one had never been expelled.
As for little Pearl, the earnestness soon passed out of her face.

But the child did not see fit to let the matter drop. Two or three
times, as her mother and she went homeward, and as often at
supper-time, and while Hester was putting her to bed, and once after
she seemed to be fairly asleep, Pearl looked up, with mischief
gleaming in her black eyes.

“Mother,” said she, “what does the scarlet letter mean?”

And the next morning, the first indication the child gave of being
awake was by popping up her head from the pillow, and making that
other inquiry, which she had so unaccountably connected with her
investigations about the scarlet letter:—

“Mother!—Mother!—Why does the minister keep his hand over his
heart?”

“Hold thy tongue, naughty child!” answered her mother, with an
asperity that she had never permitted to herself before. “Do not tease
me; else I shall shut thee into the dark closet!”

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XVI.

                            A FOREST WALK.


Hester Prynne remained constant in her resolve to make known to Mr.
Dimmesdale, at whatever risk of present pain or ulterior consequences,
the true character of the man who had crept into his intimacy. For
several days, however, she vainly sought an opportunity of addressing
him in some of the meditative walks which she knew him to be in the
habit of taking, along the shores of the peninsula, or on the wooded
hills of the neighboring country. There would have been no scandal,
indeed, nor peril to the holy whiteness of the clergyman’s good fame,
had she visited him in his own study; where many a penitent, ere now,
had confessed sins of perhaps as deep a dye as the one betokened by
the scarlet letter. But, partly that she dreaded the secret or
undisguised interference of old Roger Chillingworth, and partly that
her conscious heart imputed suspicion where none could have been felt,
and partly that both the minister and she would need the whole wide
world to breathe in, while they talked together,—for all these
reasons, Hester never thought of meeting him in any narrower privacy
than beneath the open sky.

At last, while attending in a sick-chamber, whither the Reverend Mr.
Dimmesdale had been summoned to make a prayer, she learnt that he had
gone, the day before, to visit the Apostle Eliot, among his Indian
converts. He would probably return, by a certain hour, in the
afternoon of the morrow. Betimes, therefore, the next day, Hester took
little Pearl,—who was necessarily the companion of all her mother’s
expeditions, however inconvenient her presence,—and set forth.

The road, after the two wayfarers had crossed from the peninsula to
the mainland, was no other than a footpath. It straggled onward into
the mystery of the primeval forest. This hemmed it in so narrowly, and
stood so black and dense on either side, and disclosed such imperfect
glimpses of the sky above, that, to Hester’s mind, it imaged not amiss
the moral wilderness in which she had so long been wandering. The day
was chill and sombre. Overhead was a gray expanse of cloud, slightly
stirred, however, by a breeze; so that a gleam of flickering sunshine
might now and then be seen at its solitary play along the path. This
flitting cheerfulness was always at the farther extremity of some long
vista through the forest. The sportive sunlight—feebly sportive, at
best, in the predominant pensiveness of the day and scene—withdrew
itself as they came nigh, and left the spots where it had danced the
drearier, because they had hoped to find them bright.

“Mother,” said little Pearl, “the sunshine does not love you. It runs
away and hides itself, because it is afraid of something on your
bosom. Now, see! There it is, playing, a good way off. Stand you
here, and let me run and catch it. I am but a child. It will not flee
from me; for I wear nothing on my bosom yet!”

“Nor ever will, my child, I hope,” said Hester.

“And why not, mother?” asked Pearl, stopping short, just at the
beginning of her race. “Will not it come of its own accord, when I am
a woman grown?”

“Run away, child,” answered her mother, “and catch the sunshine! It
will soon be gone.”

Pearl set forth, at a great pace, and, as Hester smiled to perceive,
did actually catch the sunshine, and stood laughing in the midst of
it, all brightened by its splendor, and scintillating with the
vivacity excited by rapid motion. The light lingered about the lonely
child, as if glad of such a playmate, until her mother had drawn
almost nigh enough to step into the magic circle too.

“It will go now,” said Pearl, shaking her head.

“See!” answered Hester, smiling. “Now I can stretch out my hand, and
grasp some of it.”

As she attempted to do so, the sunshine vanished; or, to judge from
the bright expression that was dancing on Pearl’s features, her mother
could have fancied that the child had absorbed it into herself, and
would give it forth again, with a gleam about her path, as they should
plunge into some gloomier shade. There was no other attribute that so
much impressed her with a sense of new and untransmitted vigor in
Pearl’s nature, as this never-failing vivacity of spirits; she had not
the disease of sadness, which almost all children, in these latter
days, inherit, with the scrofula, from the troubles of their
ancestors. Perhaps this too was a disease, and but the reflex of the
wild energy with which Hester had fought against her sorrows, before
Pearl’s birth. It was certainly a doubtful charm, imparting a hard,
metallic lustre to the child’s character. She wanted—what some people
want throughout life—a grief that should deeply touch her, and thus
humanize and make her capable of sympathy. But there was time enough
yet for little Pearl.

“Come, my child!” said Hester, looking about her from the spot where
Pearl had stood still in the sunshine. “We will sit down a little way
within the wood, and rest ourselves.”

“I am not aweary, mother,” replied the little girl. “But you may sit
down, if you will tell me a story meanwhile.”

“A story, child!” said Hester. “And about what?”

“O, a story about the Black Man,” answered Pearl, taking hold of her
mother’s gown, and looking up, half earnestly, half mischievously,
into her face. “How he haunts this forest, and carries a book with
him,—a big, heavy book, with iron clasps; and how this ugly Black Man
offers his book and an iron pen to everybody that meets him here among
the trees; and they are to write their names with their own blood. And
then he sets his mark on their bosoms! Didst thou ever meet the Black
Man, mother?”

“And who told you this story, Pearl?” asked her mother, recognizing a
common superstition of the period.

“It was the old dame in the chimney-corner, at the house where you
watched last night,” said the child. “But she fancied me asleep while
she was talking of it. She said that a thousand and a thousand people
had met him here, and had written in his book, and have his mark on
them. And that ugly-tempered lady, old Mistress Hibbins, was one. And,
mother, the old dame said that this scarlet letter was the Black Man’s
mark on thee, and that it glows like a red flame when thou meetest
him at midnight, here in the dark wood. Is it true, mother? And dost
thou go to meet him in the night-time?”

“Didst thou ever awake, and find thy mother gone?” asked Hester.

“Not that I remember,” said the child. “If thou fearest to leave me in
our cottage, thou mightest take me along with thee. I would very
gladly go! But, mother, tell me now! Is there such a Black Man? And
didst thou ever meet him? And is this his mark?”

“Wilt thou let me be at peace, if I once tell thee?” asked her mother.

“Yes, if thou tellest me all,” answered Pearl.

“Once in my life I met the Black Man!” said her mother. “This scarlet
letter is his mark!”

Thus conversing, they entered sufficiently deep into the wood to
secure themselves from the observation of any casual passenger along
the forest track. Here they sat down on a luxuriant heap of moss;
which, at some epoch of the preceding century, had been a gigantic
pine, with its roots and trunk in the darksome shade, and its head
aloft in the upper atmosphere. It was a little dell where they had
seated themselves, with a leaf-strewn bank rising gently on either
side, and a brook flowing through the midst, over a bed of fallen and
drowned leaves. The trees impending over it had flung down great
branches, from time to time, which choked up the current and compelled
it to form eddies and black depths at some points; while, in its
swifter and livelier passages, there appeared a channel-way of
pebbles, and brown, sparkling sand. Letting the eyes follow along the
course of the stream, they could catch the reflected light from its
water, at some short distance within the forest, but soon lost all
traces of it amid the bewilderment of tree-trunks and underbrush, and
here and there a huge rock covered over with gray lichens. All these
giant trees and bowlders of granite seemed intent on making a mystery
of the course of this small brook; fearing, perhaps, that, with its
never-ceasing loquacity, it should whisper tales out of the heart of
the old forest whence it flowed, or mirror its revelations on the
smooth surface of a pool. Continually, indeed, as it stole onward, the
streamlet kept up a babble, kind, quiet, soothing, but melancholy,
like the voice of a young child that was spending its infancy without
playfulness, and knew not how to be merry among sad acquaintance and
events of sombre hue.

“O brook! O foolish and tiresome little brook!” cried Pearl, after
listening awhile to its talk. “Why art thou so sad? Pluck up a spirit,
and do not be all the time sighing and murmuring!”

But the brook, in the course of its little lifetime among the
forest-trees, had gone through so solemn an experience that it could
not help talking about it, and seemed to have nothing else to say.
Pearl resembled the brook, inasmuch as the current of her life gushed
from a well-spring as mysterious, and had flowed through scenes
shadowed as heavily with gloom. But, unlike the little stream, she
danced and sparkled, and prattled airily along her course.

“What does this sad little brook say, mother?” inquired she.

“If thou hadst a sorrow of thine own, the brook might tell thee of
it,” answered her mother, “even as it is telling me of mine! But now,
Pearl, I hear a footstep along the path, and the noise of one putting
aside the branches. I would have thee betake thyself to play, and
leave me to speak with him that comes yonder.”

“Is it the Black Man?” asked Pearl.

“Wilt thou go and play, child?” repeated her mother. “But do not stray
far into the wood. And take heed that thou come at my first call.”

“Yes, mother,” answered Pearl. “But if it be the Black Man, wilt thou
not let me stay a moment, and look at him, with his big book under his
arm?”

“Go, silly child!” said her mother, impatiently. “It is no Black Man!
Thou canst see him now, through the trees. It is the minister!”

“And so it is!” said the child. “And, mother, he has his hand over his
heart! Is it because, when the minister wrote his name in the book,
the Black Man set his mark in that place? But why does he not wear it
outside his bosom, as thou dost, mother?”

“Go now, child, and thou shalt tease me as thou wilt another time,”
cried Hester Prynne. “But do not stray far. Keep where thou canst hear
the babble of the brook.”

The child went singing away, following up the current of the brook,
and striving to mingle a more lightsome cadence with its melancholy
voice. But the little stream would not be comforted, and still kept
telling its unintelligible secret of some very mournful mystery that
had happened—or making a prophetic lamentation about something that
was yet to happen—within the verge of the dismal forest. So Pearl,
who had enough of shadow in her own little life, chose to break off
all acquaintance with this repining brook. She set herself, therefore,
to gathering violets and wood-anemones, and some scarlet columbines
that she found growing in the crevices of a high rock.

When her elf-child had departed, Hester Prynne made a step or two
towards the track that led through the forest, but still remained
under the deep shadow of the trees. She beheld the minister advancing
along the path, entirely alone, and leaning on a staff which he had
cut by the wayside. He looked haggard and feeble, and betrayed a
nerveless despondency in his air, which had never so remarkably
characterized him in his walks about the settlement, nor in any other
situation where he deemed himself liable to notice. Here it was
wofully visible, in this intense seclusion of the forest, which of
itself would have been a heavy trial to the spirits. There was a
listlessness in his gait; as if he saw no reason for taking one step
farther, nor felt any desire to do so, but would have been glad, could
he be glad of anything, to fling himself down at the root of the
nearest tree, and lie there passive, forevermore. The leaves might
bestrew him, and the soil gradually accumulate and form a little
hillock over his frame, no matter whether there were life in it or no.
Death was too definite an object to be wished for, or avoided.

To Hester’s eye, the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale exhibited no symptom of
positive and vivacious suffering, except that, as little Pearl had
remarked, he kept his hand over his heart.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XVII.

                    THE PASTOR AND HIS PARISHIONER.


Slowly as the minister walked, he had almost gone by, before Hester
Prynne could gather voice enough to attract his observation. At
length, she succeeded.

“Arthur Dimmesdale!” she said, faintly at first; then louder, but
hoarsely. “Arthur Dimmesdale!”

“Who speaks?” answered the minister.

Gathering himself quickly up, he stood more erect, like a man taken by
surprise in a mood to which he was reluctant to have witnesses.
Throwing his eyes anxiously in the direction of the voice, he
indistinctly beheld a form under the trees, clad in garments so
sombre, and so little relieved from the gray twilight into which the
clouded sky and the heavy foliage had darkened the noontide, that he
knew not whether it were a woman or a shadow. It may be, that his
pathway through life was haunted thus, by a spectre that had stolen
out from among his thoughts.

He made a step nigher, and discovered the scarlet letter.

“Hester! Hester Prynne!” said he. “Is it thou? Art thou in life?”

“Even so!” she answered. “In such life as has been mine these seven
years past! And thou, Arthur Dimmesdale, dost thou yet live?”

It was no wonder that they thus questioned one another’s actual and
bodily existence, and even doubted of their own. So strangely did they
meet, in the dim wood, that it was like the first encounter, in the
world beyond the grave, of two spirits who had been intimately
connected in their former life, but now stood coldly shuddering, in
mutual dread; as not yet familiar with their state, nor wonted to the
companionship of disembodied beings. Each a ghost, and awe-stricken at
the other ghost! They were awe-stricken likewise at themselves;
because the crisis flung back to them their consciousness, and
revealed to each heart its history and experience, as life never does,
except at such breathless epochs. The soul beheld its features in the
mirror of the passing moment. It was with fear, and tremulously, and,
as it were, by a slow, reluctant necessity, that Arthur Dimmesdale put
forth his hand, chill as death, and touched the chill hand of Hester
Prynne. The grasp, cold as it was, took away what was dreariest in the
interview. They now felt themselves, at least, inhabitants of the same
sphere.

Without a word more spoken,—neither he nor she assuming the guidance,
but with an unexpressed consent,—they glided back into the shadow of
the woods, whence Hester had emerged, and sat down on the heap of moss
where she and Pearl had before been sitting. When they found voice to
speak, it was, at first, only to utter remarks and inquiries such as
any two acquaintance might have made, about the gloomy sky, the
threatening storm, and, next, the health of each. Thus they went
onward, not boldly, but step by step, into the themes that were
brooding deepest in their hearts. So long estranged by fate and
circumstances, they needed something slight and casual to run before,
and throw open the doors of intercourse, so that their real thoughts
might be led across the threshold.

After a while, the minister fixed his eyes on Hester Prynne’s.

“Hester,” said he, “hast thou found peace?”

She smiled drearily, looking down upon her bosom.

“Hast thou?” she asked.

“None!—nothing but despair!” he answered. “What else could I look
for, being what I am, and leading such a life as mine? Were I an
atheist,—a man devoid of conscience,—a wretch with coarse and brutal
instincts,—I might have found peace, long ere now. Nay, I never
should have lost it! But, as matters stand with my soul, whatever of
good capacity there originally was in me, all of God’s gifts that were
the choicest have become the ministers of spiritual torment. Hester, I
am most miserable!”

“The people reverence thee,” said Hester. “And surely thou workest
good among them! Doth this bring thee no comfort?”

“More misery, Hester!—only the more misery!” answered the clergyman,
with a bitter smile. “As concerns the good which I may appear to do, I
have no faith in it. It must needs be a delusion. What can a ruined
soul, like mine, effect towards the redemption of other souls?—or a
polluted soul towards their purification? And as for the people’s
reverence, would that it were turned to scorn and hatred! Canst thou
deem it, Hester, a consolation, that I must stand up in my pulpit, and
meet so many eyes turned upward to my face, as if the light of heaven
were beaming from it!—must see my flock hungry for the truth, and
listening to my words as if a tongue of Pentecost were speaking!—and
then look inward, and discern the black reality of what they idolize?
I have laughed, in bitterness and agony of heart, at the contrast
between what I seem and what I am! And Satan laughs at it!”

“You wrong yourself in this,” said Hester, gently. “You have deeply
and sorely repented. Your sin is left behind you, in the days long
past. Your present life is not less holy, in very truth, than it seems
in people’s eyes. Is there no reality in the penitence thus sealed and
witnessed by good works? And wherefore should it not bring you peace?”

“No, Hester, no!” replied the clergyman. “There is no substance in it!
It is cold and dead, and can do nothing for me! Of penance, I have had
enough! Of penitence, there has been none! Else, I should long ago
have thrown off these garments of mock holiness, and have shown myself
to mankind as they will see me at the judgment-seat. Happy are you,
Hester, that wear the scarlet letter openly upon your bosom! Mine
burns in secret! Thou little knowest what a relief it is, after the
torment of a seven years’ cheat, to look into an eye that recognizes
me for what I am! Had I one friend,—or were it my worst enemy!—to
whom, when sickened with the praises of all other men, I could daily
betake myself, and be known as the vilest of all sinners, methinks my
soul might keep itself alive thereby. Even thus much of truth would
save me! But, now, it is all falsehood!—all emptiness!—all death!”

Hester Prynne looked into his face, but hesitated to speak. Yet,
uttering his long-restrained emotions so vehemently as he did, his
words here offered her the very point of circumstances in which to
interpose what she came to say. She conquered her fears, and spoke.

“Such a friend as thou hast even now wished for,” said she, “with whom
to weep over thy sin, thou hast in me, the partner of it!”—Again she
hesitated, but brought out the words with an effort.—“Thou hast long
had such an enemy, and dwellest with him, under the same roof!”

The minister started to his feet, gasping for breath, and clutching at
his heart, as if he would have torn it out of his bosom.

“Ha! What sayest thou!” cried he. “An enemy! And under mine own roof!
What mean you?”

Hester Prynne was now fully sensible of the deep injury for which she
was responsible to this unhappy man, in permitting him to lie for so
many years, or, indeed, for a single moment, at the mercy of one whose
purposes could not be other than malevolent. The very contiguity of
his enemy, beneath whatever mask the latter might conceal himself, was
enough to disturb the magnetic sphere of a being so sensitive as
Arthur Dimmesdale. There had been a period when Hester was less alive
to this consideration; or, perhaps, in the misanthropy of her own
trouble, she left the minister to bear what she might picture to
herself as a more tolerable doom. But of late, since the night of his
vigil, all her sympathies towards him had been both softened and
invigorated. She now read his heart more accurately. She doubted not,
that the continual presence of Roger Chillingworth,—the secret poison
of his malignity, infecting all the air about him,—and his authorized
interference, as a physician, with the minister’s physical and
spiritual infirmities,—that these bad opportunities had been turned
to a cruel purpose. By means of them, the sufferer’s conscience had
been kept in an irritated state, the tendency of which was, not to
cure by wholesome pain, but to disorganize and corrupt his spiritual
being. Its result, on earth, could hardly fail to be insanity, and
hereafter, that eternal alienation from the Good and True, of which
madness is perhaps the earthly type.

Such was the ruin to which she had brought the man, once,—nay, why
should we not speak it?—still so passionately loved! Hester felt that
the sacrifice of the clergyman’s good name, and death itself, as she
had already told Roger Chillingworth, would have been infinitely
preferable to the alternative which she had taken upon herself to
choose. And now, rather than have had this grievous wrong to confess,
she would gladly have lain down on the forest-leaves, and died there,
at Arthur Dimmesdale’s feet.

“O Arthur,” cried she, “forgive me! In all things else, I have striven
to be true! Truth was the one virtue which I might have held fast, and
did hold fast, through all extremity; save when thy good,—thy
life,—thy fame,—were put in question! Then I consented to a
deception. But a lie is never good, even though death threaten on the
other side! Dost thou not see what I would say? That old man!—the
physician!—he whom they call Roger Chillingworth!—he was my
husband!”

[Illustration: “Wilt thou yet forgive me?”]

The minister looked at her, for an instant, with all that violence of
passion, which—intermixed, in more shapes than one, with his higher,
purer, softer qualities—was, in fact, the portion of him which the
Devil claimed, and through which he sought to win the rest. Never was
there a blacker or a fiercer frown than Hester now encountered. For
the brief space that it lasted, it was a dark transfiguration. But his
character had been so much enfeebled by suffering, that even its
lower energies were incapable of more than a temporary struggle. He
sank down on the ground, and buried his face in his hands.

“I might have known it,” murmured he. “I did know it! Was not the
secret told me, in the natural recoil of my heart, at the first sight
of him, and as often as I have seen him since? Why did I not
understand? O Hester Prynne, thou little, little knowest all the
horror of this thing! And the shame!—the indelicacy!—the horrible
ugliness of this exposure of a sick and guilty heart to the very eye
that would gloat over it! Woman, woman, thou art accountable for this!
I cannot forgive thee!”

“Thou shalt forgive me!” cried Hester, flinging herself on the fallen
leaves beside him. “Let God punish! Thou shalt forgive!”

With sudden and desperate tenderness, she threw her arms around him,
and pressed his head against her bosom; little caring though his cheek
rested on the scarlet letter. He would have released himself, but
strove in vain to do so. Hester would not set him free, lest he should
look her sternly in the face. All the world had frowned on her,—for
seven long years had it frowned upon this lonely woman,—and still she
bore it all, nor ever once turned away her firm, sad eyes. Heaven,
likewise, had frowned upon her, and she had not died. But the frown of
this pale, weak, sinful, and sorrow-stricken man was what Hester could
not bear and live!

“Wilt thou yet forgive me?” she repeated, over and over again. “Wilt
thou not frown? Wilt thou forgive?”

“I do forgive you, Hester,” replied the minister, at length, with a
deep utterance, out of an abyss of sadness, but no anger. “I freely
forgive you now. May God forgive us both! We are not, Hester, the
worst sinners in the world. There is one worse than even the polluted
priest! That old man’s revenge has been blacker than my sin. He has
violated, in cold blood, the sanctity of a human heart. Thou and I,
Hester, never did so!”

“Never, never!” whispered she. “What we did had a consecration of its
own. We felt it so! We said so to each other! Hast thou forgotten it?”

“Hush, Hester!” said Arthur Dimmesdale, rising from the ground. “No; I
have not forgotten!”

They sat down again, side by side, and hand clasped in hand, on the
mossy trunk of the fallen tree. Life had never brought them a gloomier
hour; it was the point whither their pathway had so long been tending,
and darkening ever, as it stole along;—and yet it enclosed a charm
that made them linger upon it, and claim another, and another, and,
after all, another moment. The forest was obscure around them, and
creaked with a blast that was passing through it. The boughs were
tossing heavily above their heads; while one solemn old tree groaned
dolefully to another, as if telling the sad story of the pair that sat
beneath, or constrained to forebode evil to come.

And yet they lingered. How dreary looked the forest-track that led
backward to the settlement, where Hester Prynne must take up again the
burden of her ignominy, and the minister the hollow mockery of his
good name! So they lingered an instant longer. No golden light had
ever been so precious as the gloom of this dark forest. Here, seen
only by his eyes, the scarlet letter need not burn into the bosom of
the fallen woman! Here, seen only by her eyes, Arthur Dimmesdale,
false to God and man, might be, for one moment, true!

He started at a thought that suddenly occurred to him.

“Hester,” cried he, “here is a new horror! Roger Chillingworth knows
your purpose to reveal his true character. Will he continue, then, to
keep our secret? What will now be the course of his revenge?”

“There is a strange secrecy in his nature,” replied Hester,
thoughtfully; “and it has grown upon him by the hidden practices of
his revenge. I deem it not likely that he will betray the secret. He
will doubtless seek other means of satiating his dark passion.”

“And I!—how am I to live longer, breathing the same air with this
deadly enemy?” exclaimed Arthur Dimmesdale, shrinking within himself,
and pressing his hand nervously against his heart,—a gesture that had
grown involuntary with him.

“Think for me, Hester! Thou art strong. Resolve for me!”

“Thou must dwell no longer with this man,” said Hester, slowly and
firmly. “Thy heart must be no longer under his evil eye!”

“It were far worse than death!” replied the minister. “But how to
avoid it? What choice remains to me? Shall I lie down again on these
withered leaves, where I cast myself when thou didst tell me what he
was? Must I sink down there, and die at once?”

“Alas, what a ruin has befallen thee!” said Hester, with the tears
gushing into her eyes. “Wilt thou die for very weakness? There is no
other cause!”

“The judgment of God is on me,” answered the conscience-stricken
priest. “It is too mighty for me to struggle with!”

“Heaven would show mercy,” rejoined Hester, “hadst thou but the
strength to take advantage of it.”

“Be thou strong for me!” answered he. “Advise me what to do.”

“Is the world, then, so narrow?” exclaimed Hester Prynne, fixing her
deep eyes on the minister’s, and instinctively exercising a magnetic
power over a spirit so shattered and subdued that it could hardly hold
itself erect. “Doth the universe lie within the compass of yonder
town, which only a little time ago was but a leaf-strewn desert, as
lonely as this around us? Whither leads yonder forest-track? Backward
to the settlement, thou sayest! Yes; but onward, too. Deeper it goes,
and deeper, into the wilderness, less plainly to be seen at every
step; until, some few miles hence, the yellow leaves will show no
vestige of the white man’s tread. There thou art free! So brief a
journey would bring thee from a world where thou hast been most
wretched, to one where thou mayest still be happy! Is there not shade
enough in all this boundless forest to hide thy heart from the gaze of
Roger Chillingworth?”

“Yes, Hester; but only under the fallen leaves!” replied the minister,
with a sad smile.

“Then there is the broad pathway of the sea!” continued Hester. “It
brought thee hither. If thou so choose, it will bear thee back again.
In our native land, whether in some remote rural village or in vast
London,—or, surely, in Germany, in France, in pleasant Italy,—thou
wouldst be beyond his power and knowledge! And what hast thou to do
with all these iron men, and their opinions? They have kept thy better
part in bondage too long already!”

“It cannot be!” answered the minister, listening as if he were called
upon to realize a dream. “I am powerless to go! Wretched and sinful as
I am, I have had no other thought than to drag on my earthly
existence in the sphere where Providence hath placed me. Lost as my
own soul is, I would still do what I may for other human souls! I dare
not quit my post, though an unfaithful sentinel, whose sure reward is
death and dishonor, when his dreary watch shall come to an end!”

“Thou art crushed under this seven years’ weight of misery,” replied
Hester, fervently resolved to buoy him up with her own energy. “But
thou shalt leave it all behind thee! It shall not cumber thy steps, as
thou treadest along the forest-path; neither shalt thou freight the
ship with it, if thou prefer to cross the sea. Leave this wreck and
ruin here where it hath happened. Meddle no more with it! Begin all
anew! Hast thou exhausted possibility in the failure of this one
trial? Not so! The future is yet full of trial and success. There is
happiness to be enjoyed! There is good to be done! Exchange this false
life of thine for a true one. Be, if thy spirit summon thee to such a
mission, the teacher and apostle of the red men. Or,—as is more thy
nature,—be a scholar and a sage among the wisest and the most
renowned of the cultivated world. Preach! Write! Act! Do anything,
save to lie down and die! Give up this name of Arthur Dimmesdale, and
make thyself another, and a high one, such as thou canst wear without
fear or shame. Why shouldst thou tarry so much as one other day in the
torments that have so gnawed into thy life!—that have made thee
feeble to will and to do!—that will leave thee powerless even to
repent! Up, and away!”

“O Hester!” cried Arthur Dimmesdale, in whose eyes a fitful light,
kindled by her enthusiasm, flashed up and died away, “thou tellest of
running a race to a man whose knees are tottering beneath him! I must
die here! There is not the strength or courage left me to venture
into the wide, strange, difficult world, alone!”

It was the last expression of the despondency of a broken spirit. He
lacked energy to grasp the better fortune that seemed within his
reach.

He repeated the word.

“Alone, Hester!”

“Thou shalt not go alone!” answered she, in a deep whisper.

Then, all was spoken!

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                XVIII.

                         A FLOOD OF SUNSHINE.


Arthur Dimmesdale gazed into Hester’s face with a look in which hope
and joy shone out, indeed, but with fear betwixt them, and a kind of
horror at her boldness, who had spoken what he vaguely hinted at, but
dared not speak.

But Hester Prynne, with a mind of native courage and activity, and for
so long a period not merely estranged, but outlawed, from society, had
habituated herself to such latitude of speculation as was altogether
foreign to the clergyman. She had wandered, without rule or guidance,
in a moral wilderness; as vast, as intricate and shadowy, as the
untamed forest, amid the gloom of which they were now holding a
colloquy that was to decide their fate. Her intellect and heart had
their home, as it were, in desert places, where she roamed as freely
as the wild Indian in his woods. For years past she had looked from
this estranged point of view at human institutions, and whatever
priests or legislators had established; criticising all with hardly
more reverence than the Indian would feel for the clerical band, the
judicial robe, the pillory, the gallows, the fireside, or the church.
The tendency of her fate and fortunes had been to set her free. The
scarlet letter was her passport into regions where other women dared
not tread. Shame, Despair, Solitude! These had been her
teachers,—stern and wild ones,—and they had made her strong, but
taught her much amiss.

The minister, on the other hand, had never gone through an experience
calculated to lead him beyond the scope of generally received laws;
although, in a single instance, he had so fearfully transgressed one
of the most sacred of them. But this had been a sin of passion, not of
principle, nor even purpose. Since that wretched epoch, he had
watched, with morbid zeal and minuteness, not his acts,—for those it
was easy to arrange,—but each breath of emotion, and his every
thought. At the head of the social system, as the clergymen of that
day stood, he was only the more trammelled by its regulations, its
principles, and even its prejudices. As a priest, the framework of his
order inevitably hemmed him in. As a man who had once sinned, but who
kept his conscience all alive and painfully sensitive by the fretting
of an unhealed wound, he might have been supposed safer within the
line of virtue than if he had never sinned at all.

Thus, we seem to see that, as regarded Hester Prynne, the whole seven
years of outlaw and ignominy had been little other than a preparation
for this very hour. But Arthur Dimmesdale! Were such a man once more
to fall, what plea could be urged in extenuation of his crime? None;
unless it avail him somewhat, that he was broken down by long and
exquisite suffering; that his mind was darkened and confused by the
very remorse which harrowed it; that, between fleeing as an avowed
criminal, and remaining as a hypocrite, conscience might find it hard
to strike the balance; that it was human to avoid the peril of death
and infamy, and the inscrutable machinations of an enemy; that,
finally, to this poor pilgrim, on his dreary and desert path, faint,
sick, miserable, there appeared a glimpse of human affection and
sympathy, a new life, and a true one, in exchange for the heavy doom
which he was now expiating. And be the stern and sad truth spoken,
that the breach which guilt has once made into the human soul is
never, in this mortal state, repaired. It may be watched and guarded;
so that the enemy shall not force his way again into the citadel, and
might even, in his subsequent assaults, select some other avenue, in
preference to that where he had formerly succeeded. But there is still
the ruined wall, and, near it, the stealthy tread of the foe that
would win over again his unforgotten triumph.

The struggle, if there were one, need not be described. Let it
suffice, that the clergyman resolved to flee, and not alone.

“If, in all these past seven years,” thought he, “I could recall one
instant of peace or hope, I would yet endure, for the sake of that
earnest of Heaven’s mercy. But now,—since I am irrevocably
doomed,—wherefore should I not snatch the solace allowed to the
condemned culprit before his execution? Or, if this be the path to a
better life, as Hester would persuade me, I surely give up no fairer
prospect by pursuing it! Neither can I any longer live without her
companionship; so powerful is she to sustain,—so tender to soothe! O
Thou to whom I dare not lift mine eyes, wilt Thou yet pardon me!”

“Thou wilt go!” said Hester, calmly, as he met her glance.

The decision once made, a glow of strange enjoyment threw its
flickering brightness over the trouble of his breast. It was the
exhilarating effect—upon a prisoner just escaped from the dungeon of
his own heart—of breathing the wild, free atmosphere of an
unredeemed, unchristianized, lawless region. His spirit rose, as it
were, with a bound, and attained a nearer prospect of the sky, than
throughout all the misery which had kept him grovelling on the earth.
Of a deeply religious temperament, there was inevitably a tinge of the
devotional in his mood.

“Do I feel joy again?” cried he, wondering at himself. “Methought the
germ of it was dead in me! O Hester, thou art my better angel! I seem
to have flung myself—sick, sin-stained, and sorrow-blackened—down
upon these forest-leaves, and to have risen up all made anew, and with
new powers to glorify Him that hath been merciful! This is already the
better life! Why did we not find it sooner?”

“Let us not look back,” answered Hester Prynne. “The past is gone!
Wherefore should we linger upon it now? See! With this symbol, I undo
it all, and make it as it had never been!”

So speaking, she undid the clasp that fastened the scarlet letter,
and, taking it from her bosom, threw it to a distance among the
withered leaves. The mystic token alighted on the hither verge of the
stream. With a hand’s breadth farther flight it would have fallen into
the water, and have given the little brook another woe to carry
onward, besides the unintelligible tale which it still kept murmuring
about. But there lay the embroidered letter, glittering like a lost
jewel, which some ill-fated wanderer might pick up, and thenceforth be
haunted by strange phantoms of guilt, sinkings of the heart, and
unaccountable misfortune.

[Illustration: A Gleam of Sunshine]

The stigma gone, Hester heaved a long, deep sigh, in which the burden
of shame and anguish departed from her spirit. O exquisite relief! She
had not known the weight, until she felt the freedom! By another
impulse, she took off the formal cap that confined her hair; and down
it fell upon her shoulders, dark and rich, with at once a shadow and a
light in its abundance, and imparting the charm of softness to her
features. There played around her mouth, and beamed out of her eyes, a
radiant and tender smile, that seemed gushing from the very heart of
womanhood. A crimson flush was glowing on her cheek, that had been
long so pale. Her sex, her youth, and the whole richness of her
beauty, came back from what men call the irrevocable past, and
clustered themselves, with her maiden hope, and a happiness before
unknown, within the magic circle of this hour. And, as if the gloom of
the earth and sky had been but the effluence of these two mortal
hearts, it vanished with their sorrow. All at once, as with a sudden
smile of heaven, forth burst the sunshine, pouring a very flood into
the obscure forest, gladdening each green leaf, transmuting the yellow
fallen ones to gold, and gleaming adown the gray trunks of the solemn
trees. The objects that had made a shadow hitherto, embodied the
brightness now. The course of the little brook might be traced by its
merry gleam afar into the wood’s heart of mystery, which had become a
mystery of joy.

Such was the sympathy of Nature—that wild, heathen Nature of the
forest, never subjugated by human law, nor illumined by higher
truth—with the bliss of these two spirits! Love, whether newly born,
or aroused from a death-like slumber, must always create a sunshine,
filling the heart so full of radiance, that it overflows upon the
outward world. Had the forest still kept its gloom, it would have been
bright in Hester’s eyes, and bright in Arthur Dimmesdale’s!

Hester looked at him with the thrill of another joy.

“Thou must know Pearl!” said she. “Our little Pearl! Thou hast seen
her,—yes, I know it!—but thou wilt see her now with other eyes. She
is a strange child! I hardly comprehend her! But thou wilt love her
dearly, as I do, and wilt advise me how to deal with her.”

“Dost thou think the child will be glad to know me?” asked the
minister, somewhat uneasily. “I have long shrunk from children,
because they often show a distrust,—a backwardness to be familiar
with me. I have even been afraid of little Pearl!”

“Ah, that was sad!” answered the mother. “But she will love thee
dearly, and thou her. She is not far off. I will call her! Pearl!
Pearl!”

“I see the child,” observed the minister. “Yonder she is, standing in
a streak of sunshine, a good way off, on the other side of the brook.
So thou thinkest the child will love me?”

Hester smiled, and again called to Pearl, who was visible, at some
distance, as the minister had described her, like a bright-apparelled
vision, in a sunbeam, which fell down upon her through an arch of
boughs. The ray quivered to and fro, making her figure dim or
distinct,—now like a real child, now like a child’s spirit,—as the
splendor went and came again. She heard her mother’s voice, and
approached slowly through the forest.

Pearl had not found the hour pass wearisomely, while her mother sat
talking with the clergyman. The great black forest—stern as it showed
itself to those who brought the guilt and troubles of the world into
its bosom—became the playmate of the lonely infant, as well as it
knew how. Sombre as it was, it put on the kindest of its moods to
welcome her. It offered her the partridge-berries, the growth of the
preceding autumn, but ripening only in the spring, and now red as
drops of blood upon the withered leaves. These Pearl gathered, and was
pleased with their wild flavor. The small denizens of the wilderness
hardly took pains to move out of her path. A partridge, indeed, with a
brood of ten behind her, ran forward threateningly, but soon repented
of her fierceness, and clucked to her young ones not to be afraid. A
pigeon, alone on a low branch, allowed Pearl to come beneath, and
uttered a sound as much of greeting as alarm. A squirrel, from the
lofty depths of his domestic tree, chattered either in anger or
merriment,—for a squirrel is such a choleric and humorous little
personage, that it is hard to distinguish between his moods,—so he
chattered at the child, and flung down a nut upon her head. It was a
last year’s nut, and already gnawed by his sharp tooth. A fox,
startled from his sleep by her light footstep on the leaves, looked
inquisitively at Pearl, as doubting whether it were better to steal
off, or renew his nap on the same spot. A wolf, it is said,—but here
the tale has surely lapsed into the improbable,—came up, and smelt of
Pearl’s robe, and offered his savage head to be patted by her hand.
The truth seems to be, however, that the mother-forest, and these wild
things which it nourished, all recognized a kindred wildness in the
human child.

And she was gentler here than in the grassy-margined streets of the
settlement, or in her mother’s cottage. The flowers appeared to know
it; and one and another whispered as she passed, “Adorn thyself with
me, thou beautiful child, adorn thyself with me!”—and, to please
them, Pearl gathered the violets, and anemones, and columbines, and
some twigs of the freshest green, which the old trees held down before
her eyes. With these she decorated her hair, and her young waist, and
became a nymph-child, or an infant dryad, or whatever else was in
closest sympathy with the antique wood. In such guise had Pearl
adorned herself, when she heard her mother’s voice, and came slowly
back.

Slowly; for she saw the clergyman.




                            [Illustration]

                                 XIX.

                     THE CHILD AT THE BROOK-SIDE.


“Thou wilt love her dearly,” repeated Hester Prynne, as she and the
minister sat watching little Pearl. “Dost thou not think her
beautiful? And see with what natural skill she has made those simple
flowers adorn her! Had she gathered pearls, and diamonds, and rubies,
in the wood, they could not have become her better. She is a splendid
child! But I know whose brow she has!”

“Dost thou know, Hester,” said Arthur Dimmesdale, with an unquiet
smile, “that this dear child, tripping about always at thy side, hath
caused me many an alarm? Methought—O Hester, what a thought is that,
and how terrible to dread it!—that my own features were partly
repeated in her face, and so strikingly that the world might see them!
But she is mostly thine!”

“No, no! Not mostly!” answered the mother, with a tender smile. “A
little longer, and thou needest not to be afraid to trace whose child
she is. But how strangely beautiful she looks, with those
wild-flowers in her hair! It is as if one of the fairies, whom we left
in our dear old England, had decked her out to meet us.”

It was with a feeling which neither of them had ever before
experienced, that they sat and watched Pearl’s slow advance. In her
was visible the tie that united them. She had been offered to the
world, these seven years past, as the living hieroglyphic, in which
was revealed the secret they so darkly sought to hide,—all written in
this symbol,—all plainly manifest,—had there been a prophet or
magician skilled to read the character of flame! And Pearl was the
oneness of their being. Be the foregone evil what it might, how could
they doubt that their earthly lives and future destinies were
conjoined, when they beheld at once the material union, and the
spiritual idea, in whom they met, and were to dwell immortally
together? Thoughts like these—and perhaps other thoughts, which they
did not acknowledge or define—threw an awe about the child, as she
came onward.

“Let her see nothing strange—no passion nor eagerness—in thy way of
accosting her,” whispered Hester. “Our Pearl is a fitful and fantastic
little elf, sometimes. Especially, she is seldom tolerant of emotion,
when she does not fully comprehend the why and wherefore. But the
child hath strong affections! She loves me, and will love thee!”

“Thou canst not think,” said the minister, glancing aside at Hester
Prynne, “how my heart dreads this interview, and yearns for it! But,
in truth, as I already told thee, children are not readily won to be
familiar with me. They will not climb my knee, nor prattle in my ear,
nor answer to my smile; but stand apart, and eye me strangely. Even
little babes, when I take them in my arms, weep bitterly. Yet Pearl,
twice in her little lifetime, hath been kind to me! The first
time,—thou knowest it well! The last was when thou ledst her with
thee to the house of yonder stern old Governor.”

“And thou didst plead so bravely in her behalf and mine!” answered the
mother. “I remember it; and so shall little Pearl. Fear nothing! She
may be strange and shy at first, but will soon learn to love thee!”

By this time Pearl had reached the margin of the brook, and stood on
the farther side, gazing silently at Hester and the clergyman, who
still sat together on the mossy tree-trunk, waiting to receive her.
Just where she had paused, the brook chanced to form a pool, so smooth
and quiet that it reflected a perfect image of her little figure, with
all the brilliant picturesqueness of her beauty, in its adornment of
flowers and wreathed foliage, but more refined and spiritualized than
the reality. This image, so nearly identical with the living Pearl,
seemed to communicate somewhat of its own shadowy and intangible
quality to the child herself. It was strange, the way in which Pearl
stood, looking so steadfastly at them through the dim medium of the
forest-gloom; herself, meanwhile, all glorified with a ray of
sunshine, that was attracted thitherward as by a certain sympathy. In
the brook beneath stood another child,—another and the same,—with
likewise its ray of golden light. Hester felt herself, in some
indistinct and tantalizing manner, estranged from Pearl; as if the
child, in her lonely ramble through the forest, had strayed out of the
sphere in which she and her mother dwelt together, and was now vainly
seeking to return to it.

There was both truth and error in the impression; the child and
mother were estranged, but through Hester’s fault, not Pearl’s. Since
the latter rambled from her side, another inmate had been admitted
within the circle of the mother’s feelings, and so modified the aspect
of them all, that Pearl, the returning wanderer, could not find her
wonted place, and hardly knew where she was.

“I have a strange fancy,” observed the sensitive minister, “that this
brook is the boundary between two worlds, and that thou canst never
meet thy Pearl again. Or is she an elfish spirit, who, as the legends
of our childhood taught us, is forbidden to cross a running stream?
Pray hasten her; for this delay has already imparted a tremor to my
nerves.”

“Come, dearest child!” said Hester, encouragingly, and stretching out
both her arms. “How slow thou art! When hast thou been so sluggish
before now? Here is a friend of mine, who must be thy friend also.
Thou wilt have twice as much love, henceforward, as thy mother alone
could give thee! Leap across the brook, and come to us. Thou canst
leap like a young deer!”

[Illustration: The Child at the Brook-Side]

Pearl, without responding in any manner to these honey-sweet
expressions, remained on the other side of the brook. Now she fixed
her bright, wild eyes on her mother, now on the minister, and now
included them both in the same glance; as if to detect and explain to
herself the relation which they bore to one another. For some
unaccountable reason, as Arthur Dimmesdale felt the child’s eyes upon
himself, his hand—with that gesture so habitual as to have become
involuntary—stole over his heart. At length, assuming a singular air
of authority, Pearl stretched out her hand, with the small forefinger
extended, and pointing evidently towards her mother’s breast. And
beneath, in the mirror of the brook, there was the flower-girdled and
sunny image of little Pearl, pointing her small forefinger too.

“Thou strange child, why dost thou not come to me?” exclaimed Hester.

Pearl still pointed with her forefinger; and a frown gathered on her
brow; the more impressive from the childish, the almost baby-like
aspect of the features that conveyed it. As her mother still kept
beckoning to her, and arraying her face in a holiday suit of
unaccustomed smiles, the child stamped her foot with a yet more
imperious look and gesture. In the brook, again, was the fantastic
beauty of the image, with its reflected frown, its pointed finger, and
imperious gesture, giving emphasis to the aspect of little Pearl.

“Hasten, Pearl; or I shall be angry with thee!” cried Hester Prynne,
who, however inured to such behavior on the elf-child’s part at other
seasons, was naturally anxious for a more seemly deportment now. “Leap
across the brook, naughty child, and run hither! Else I must come to
thee!”

But Pearl, not a whit startled at her mother’s threats, any more than
mollified by her entreaties, now suddenly burst into a fit of passion,
gesticulating violently, and throwing her small figure into the most
extravagant contortions. She accompanied this wild outbreak with
piercing shrieks, which the woods reverberated on all sides; so that,
alone as she was in her childish and unreasonable wrath, it seemed as
if a hidden multitude were lending her their sympathy and
encouragement. Seen in the brook, once more, was the shadowy wrath of
Pearl’s image, crowned and girdled with flowers, but stamping its
foot, wildly gesticulating, and, in the midst of all, still pointing
its small forefinger at Hester’s bosom!

“I see what ails the child,” whispered Hester to the clergyman, and
turning pale in spite of a strong effort to conceal her trouble and
annoyance. “Children will not abide any, the slightest, change in the
accustomed aspect of things that are daily before their eyes. Pearl
misses something which she has always seen me wear!”

“I pray you,” answered the minister, “if thou hast any means of
pacifying the child, do it forthwith! Save it were the cankered wrath
of an old witch, like Mistress Hibbins,” added he, attempting to
smile, “I know nothing that I would not sooner encounter than this
passion in a child. In Pearl’s young beauty, as in the wrinkled witch,
it has a preternatural effect. Pacify her, if thou lovest me!”

Hester turned again towards Pearl, with a crimson blush upon her
cheek, a conscious glance aside at the clergyman, and then a heavy
sigh; while, even before she had time to speak, the blush yielded to a
deadly pallor.

“Pearl,” said she, sadly, “look down at thy feet! There!—before
thee!—on the hither side of the brook!”

The child turned her eyes to the point indicated; and there lay the
scarlet letter, so close upon the margin of the stream, that the gold
embroidery was reflected in it.

“Bring it hither!” said Hester.

“Come thou and take it up!” answered Pearl.

“Was ever such a child!” observed Hester, aside to the minister. “O, I
have much to tell thee about her! But, in very truth, she is right as
regards this hateful token. I must bear its torture yet a little
longer,—only a few days longer,—until we shall have left this
region, and look back hither as to a land which we have dreamed of.
The forest cannot hide it! The mid-ocean shall take it from my hand,
and swallow it up forever!”

With these words, she advanced to the margin of the brook, took up the
scarlet letter, and fastened it again into her bosom. Hopefully, but a
moment ago, as Hester had spoken of drowning it in the deep sea, there
was a sense of inevitable doom upon her, as she thus received back
this deadly symbol from the hand of fate. She had flung it into
infinite space!—she had drawn an hour’s free breath!—and here again
was the scarlet misery, glittering on the old spot! So it ever is,
whether thus typified or no, that an evil deed invests itself with the
character of doom. Hester next gathered up the heavy tresses of her
hair, and confined them beneath her cap. As if there were a withering
spell in the sad letter, her beauty, the warmth and richness of her
womanhood, departed, like fading sunshine; and a gray shadow seemed to
fall across her.

When the dreary change was wrought, she extended her hand to Pearl.

“Dost thou know thy mother now, child?” asked she, reproachfully, but
with a subdued tone. “Wilt thou come across the brook, and own thy
mother, now that she has her shame upon her,—now that she is sad?”

“Yes; now I will!” answered the child, bounding across the brook, and
clasping Hester in her arms. “Now thou art my mother indeed! And I am
thy little Pearl!”

In a mood of tenderness that was not usual with her, she drew down her
mother’s head, and kissed her brow and both her cheeks. But then—by a
kind of necessity that always impelled this child to alloy whatever
comfort she might chance to give with a throb of anguish—Pearl put up
her mouth, and kissed the scarlet letter too!

“That was not kind!” said Hester. “When thou hast shown me a little
love, thou mockest me!”

“Why doth the minister sit yonder?” asked Pearl.

“He waits to welcome thee,” replied her mother. “Come thou, and
entreat his blessing! He loves thee, my little Pearl, and loves thy
mother too. Wilt thou not love him? Come! he longs to greet thee!”

“Doth he love us?” said Pearl, looking up, with acute intelligence,
into her mother’s face. “Will he go back with us, hand in hand, we
three together, into the town?”

“Not now, dear child,” answered Hester. “But in days to come he will
walk hand in hand with us. We will have a home and fireside of our
own; and thou shalt sit upon his knee; and he will teach thee many
things, and love thee dearly. Thou wilt love him; wilt thou not?”

“And will he always keep his hand over his heart?” inquired Pearl.

“Foolish child, what a question is that!” exclaimed her mother. “Come
and ask his blessing!”

But, whether influenced by the jealousy that seems instinctive with
every petted child towards a dangerous rival, or from whatever caprice
of her freakish nature, Pearl would show no favor to the clergyman. It
was only by an exertion of force that her mother brought her up to
him, hanging back, and manifesting her reluctance by odd grimaces; of
which, ever since her babyhood, she had possessed a singular variety,
and could transform her mobile physiognomy into a series of different
aspects, with a new mischief in them, each and all. The
minister—painfully embarrassed, but hoping that a kiss might prove a
talisman to admit him into the child’s kindlier regards—bent forward,
and impressed one on her brow. Hereupon, Pearl broke away from her
mother, and, running to the brook, stooped over it, and bathed her
forehead, until the unwelcome kiss was quite washed off, and diffused
through a long lapse of the gliding water. She then remained apart,
silently watching Hester and the clergyman; while they talked
together, and made such arrangements as were suggested by their new
position, and the purposes soon to be fulfilled.

And now this fateful interview had come to a close. The dell was to be
left a solitude among its dark, old trees, which, with their
multitudinous tongues, would whisper long of what had passed there,
and no mortal be the wiser. And the melancholy brook would add this
other tale to the mystery with which its little heart was already
overburdened, and whereof it still kept up a murmuring babble, with
not a whit more cheerfulness of tone than for ages heretofore.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                  XX.

                        THE MINISTER IN A MAZE.


As the minister departed, in advance of Hester Prynne and little
Pearl, he threw a backward glance; half expecting that he should
discover only some faintly traced features or outline of the mother
and the child, slowly fading into the twilight of the woods. So great
a vicissitude in his life could not at once be received as real. But
there was Hester, clad in her gray robe, still standing beside the
tree-trunk, which some blast had overthrown a long antiquity ago, and
which time had ever since been covering with moss, so that these two
fated ones, with earth’s heaviest burden on them, might there sit down
together, and find a single hour’s rest and solace. And there was
Pearl, too, lightly dancing from the margin of the brook,—now that
the intrusive third person was gone,—and taking her old place by her
mother’s side. So the minister had not fallen asleep and dreamed!

In order to free his mind from this indistinctness and duplicity of
impression, which vexed it with a strange disquietude, he recalled and
more thoroughly defined the plans which Hester and himself had
sketched for their departure. It had been determined between them,
that the Old World, with its crowds and cities, offered them a more
eligible shelter and concealment than the wilds of New England, or all
America, with its alternatives of an Indian wigwam, or the few
settlements of Europeans, scattered thinly along the seaboard. Not to
speak of the clergyman’s health, so inadequate to sustain the
hardships of a forest life, his native gifts, his culture, and his
entire development, would secure him a home only in the midst of
civilization and refinement; the higher the state, the more delicately
adapted to it the man. In furtherance of this choice, it so happened
that a ship lay in the harbor; one of those questionable cruisers,
frequent at that day, which, without being absolutely outlaws of the
deep, yet roamed over its surface with a remarkable irresponsibility
of character. This vessel had recently arrived from the Spanish Main,
and, within three days’ time, would sail for Bristol. Hester
Prynne—whose vocation, as a self-enlisted Sister of Charity, had
brought her acquainted with the captain and crew—could take upon
herself to secure the passage of two individuals and a child, with all
the secrecy which circumstances rendered more than desirable.

The minister had inquired of Hester, with no little interest, the
precise time at which the vessel might be expected to depart. It would
probably be on the fourth day from the present. “That is most
fortunate!” he had then said to himself. Now, why the Reverend Mr.
Dimmesdale considered it so very fortunate, we hesitate to reveal.
Nevertheless,—to hold nothing back from the reader,—it was because,
on the third day from the present, he was to preach the Election
Sermon; and, as such an occasion formed an honorable epoch in the life
of a New England clergyman, he could not have chanced upon a more
suitable mode and time of terminating his professional career. “At
least, they shall say of me,” thought this exemplary man, “that I
leave no public duty unperformed, nor ill performed!” Sad, indeed,
that an introspection so profound and acute as this poor minister’s
should be so miserably deceived! We have had, and may still have,
worse things to tell of him; but none, we apprehend, so pitiably weak;
no evidence, at once so slight and irrefragable, of a subtle disease,
that had long since begun to eat into the real substance of his
character. No man, for any considerable period, can wear one face to
himself, and another to the multitude, without finally getting
bewildered as to which may be the true.

The excitement of Mr. Dimmesdale’s feelings, as he returned from his
interview with Hester, lent him unaccustomed physical energy, and
hurried him townward at a rapid pace. The pathway among the woods
seemed wilder, more uncouth with its rude natural obstacles, and less
trodden by the foot of man, than he remembered it on his outward
journey. But he leaped across the plashy places, thrust himself
through the clinging underbrush, climbed the ascent, plunged into the
hollow, and overcame, in short, all the difficulties of the track,
with an unweariable activity that astonished him. He could not but
recall how feebly, and with what frequent pauses for breath, he had
toiled over the same ground, only two days before. As he drew near the
town, he took an impression of change from the series of familiar
objects that presented themselves. It seemed not yesterday, not one,
nor two, but many days, or even years ago, since he had quitted them.
There, indeed, was each former trace of the street, as he remembered
it, and all the peculiarities of the houses, with the due multitude
of gable-peaks, and a weathercock at every point where his memory
suggested one. Not the less, however, came this importunately
obtrusive sense of change. The same was true as regarded the
acquaintances whom he met, and all the well-known shapes of human
life, about the little town. They looked neither older nor younger
now; the beards of the aged were no whiter, nor could the creeping
babe of yesterday walk on his feet to-day; it was impossible to
describe in what respect they differed from the individuals on whom he
had so recently bestowed a parting glance; and yet the minister’s
deepest sense seemed to inform him of their mutability. A similar
impression struck him most remarkably, as he passed under the walls of
his own church. The edifice had so very strange, and yet so familiar,
an aspect, that Mr. Dimmesdale’s mind vibrated between two ideas;
either that he had seen it only in a dream hitherto, or that he was
merely dreaming about it now.

This phenomenon, in the various shapes which it assumed, indicated no
external change, but so sudden and important a change in the spectator
of the familiar scene, that the intervening space of a single day had
operated on his consciousness like the lapse of years. The minister’s
own will, and Hester’s will, and the fate that grew between them, had
wrought this transformation. It was the same town as heretofore; but
the same minister returned not from the forest. He might have said to
the friends who greeted him,—“I am not the man for whom you take me!
I left him yonder in the forest, withdrawn into a secret dell, by a
mossy tree-trunk, and near a melancholy brook! Go, seek your minister,
and see if his emaciated figure, his thin cheek, his white, heavy,
pain-wrinkled brow, be not flung down there, like a cast-off
garment!” His friends, no doubt, would still have insisted with
him,—“Thou art thyself the man!”—but the error would have been their
own, not his.

Before Mr. Dimmesdale reached home, his inner man gave him other
evidences of a revolution in the sphere of thought and feeling. In
truth, nothing short of a total change of dynasty and moral code, in
that interior kingdom, was adequate to account for the impulses now
communicated to the unfortunate and startled minister. At every step
he was incited to do some strange, wild, wicked thing or other, with a
sense that it would be at once involuntary and intentional; in spite
of himself, yet growing out of a profounder self than that which
opposed the impulse. For instance, he met one of his own deacons. The
good old man addressed him with the paternal affection and patriarchal
privilege, which his venerable age, his upright and holy character,
and his station in the Church, entitled him to use; and, conjoined
with this, the deep, almost worshipping respect, which the minister’s
professional and private claims alike demanded. Never was there a more
beautiful example of how the majesty of age and wisdom may comport
with the obeisance and respect enjoined upon it, as from a lower
social rank, and inferior order of endowment, towards a higher. Now,
during a conversation of some two or three moments between the
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale and this excellent and hoary-bearded deacon,
it was only by the most careful self-control that the former could
refrain from uttering certain blasphemous suggestions that rose into
his mind, respecting the communion supper. He absolutely trembled and
turned pale as ashes, lest his tongue should wag itself, in utterance
of these horrible matters, and plead his own consent for so doing,
without his having fairly given it. And, even with this terror in his
heart, he could hardly avoid laughing, to imagine how the sanctified
old patriarchal deacon would have been petrified by his minister’s
impiety!

Again, another incident of the same nature. Hurrying along the street,
the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale encountered the eldest female member of
his church; a most pious and exemplary old dame; poor, widowed,
lonely, and with a heart as full of reminiscences about her dead
husband and children, and her dead friends of long ago, as a
burial-ground is full of storied gravestones. Yet all this, which
would else have been such heavy sorrow, was made almost a solemn joy
to her devout old soul, by religious consolations and the truths of
Scripture, wherewith she had fed herself continually for more than
thirty years. And, since Mr. Dimmesdale had taken her in charge, the
good grandam’s chief earthly comfort—which, unless it had been
likewise a heavenly comfort, could have been none at all—was to meet
her pastor, whether casually, or of set purpose, and be refreshed with
a word of warm, fragrant, heaven-breathing Gospel truth, from his
beloved lips, into her dulled, but rapturously attentive ear. But, on
this occasion, up to the moment of putting his lips to the old woman’s
ear, Mr. Dimmesdale, as the great enemy of souls would have it, could
recall no text of Scripture, nor aught else, except a brief, pithy,
and, as it then appeared to him, unanswerable argument against the
immortality of the human soul. The instilment thereof into her mind
would probably have caused this aged sister to drop down dead, at
once, as by the effect of an intensely poisonous infusion. What he
really did whisper, the minister could never afterwards recollect.
There was, perhaps, a fortunate disorder in his utterance, which
failed to impart any distinct idea to the good widow’s comprehension,
or which Providence interpreted after a method of its own. Assuredly,
as the minister looked back, he beheld an expression of divine
gratitude and ecstasy that seemed like the shine of the celestial city
on her face, so wrinkled and ashy pale.

Again, a third instance. After parting from the old church-member, he
met the youngest sister of them all. It was a maiden newly won—and
won by the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale’s own sermon, on the Sabbath after
his vigil—to barter the transitory pleasures of the world for the
heavenly hope, that was to assume brighter substance as life grew dark
around her, and which would gild the utter gloom with final glory. She
was fair and pure as a lily that had bloomed in Paradise. The minister
knew well that he was himself enshrined within the stainless sanctity
of her heart, which hung its snowy curtains about his image, imparting
to religion the warmth of love, and to love a religious purity. Satan,
that afternoon, had surely led the poor young girl away from her
mother’s side, and thrown her into the pathway of this sorely tempted,
or—shall we not rather say?—this lost and desperate man. As she drew
nigh, the arch-fiend whispered him to condense into small compass and
drop into her tender bosom a germ of evil that would be sure to
blossom darkly soon, and bear black fruit betimes. Such was his sense
of power over this virgin soul, trusting him as she did, that the
minister felt potent to blight all the field of innocence with but one
wicked look, and develop all its opposite with but a word. So—with a
mightier struggle than he had yet sustained—he held his Geneva cloak
before his face, and hurried onward, making no sign of recognition,
and leaving the young sister to digest his rudeness as she might. She
ransacked her conscience,—which was full of harmless little matters,
like her pocket or her work-bag,—and took herself to task, poor
thing! for a thousand imaginary faults; and went about her household
duties with swollen eyelids the next morning.

Before the minister had time to celebrate his victory over this last
temptation, he was conscious of another impulse, more ludicrous, and
almost as horrible. It was,—we blush to tell it,—it was to stop
short in the road, and teach some very wicked words to a knot of
little Puritan children who were playing there, and had but just begun
to talk. Denying himself this freak, as unworthy of his cloth, he met
a drunken seaman, one of the ship’s crew from the Spanish Main. And,
here, since he had so valiantly forborne all other wickedness, poor
Mr. Dimmesdale longed, at least, to shake hands with the tarry
blackguard, and recreate himself with a few improper jests, such as
dissolute sailors so abound with, and a volley of good, round, solid,
satisfactory, and heaven-defying oaths! It was not so much a better
principle as partly his natural good taste, and still more his
buckramed habit of clerical decorum, that carried him safely through
the latter crisis.

“What is it that haunts and tempts me thus?” cried the minister to
himself, at length, pausing in the street, and striking his hand
against his forehead. “Am I mad? or am I given over utterly to the
fiend? Did I make a contract with him in the forest, and sign it with
my blood? And does he now summon me to its fulfilment, by suggesting
the performance of every wickedness which his most foul imagination
can conceive?”

At the moment when the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale thus communed with
himself, and struck his forehead with his hand, old Mistress Hibbins,
the reputed witch-lady, is said to have been passing by. She made a
very grand appearance; having on a high head-dress, a rich gown of
velvet, and a ruff done up with the famous yellow starch, of which Ann
Turner, her especial friend, had taught her the secret, before this
last good lady had been hanged for Sir Thomas Overbury’s murder.
Whether the witch had read the minister’s thoughts, or no, she came to
a full stop, looked shrewdly into his face, smiled craftily,
and—though little given to converse with clergymen—began a
conversation.

“So, reverend Sir, you have made a visit into the forest,” observed
the witch-lady, nodding her high head-dress at him. “The next time, I
pray you to allow me only a fair warning, and I shall be proud to bear
you company. Without taking overmuch upon myself, my good word will go
far towards gaining any strange gentleman a fair reception from yonder
potentate you wot of!”

“I profess, madam,” answered the clergyman, with a grave obeisance,
such as the lady’s rank demanded, and his own good-breeding made
imperative,—“I profess, on my conscience and character, that I am
utterly bewildered as touching the purport of your words! I went not
into the forest to seek a potentate; neither do I, at any future time,
design a visit thither, with a view to gaining the favor of such a
personage. My one sufficient object was to greet that pious friend of
mine, the Apostle Eliot, and rejoice with him over the many precious
souls he hath won from heathendom!”

“Ha, ha, ha!” cackled the old witch-lady, still nodding her high
head-dress at the minister. “Well, well, we must needs talk thus in
the daytime! You carry it off like an old hand! But at midnight, and
in the forest, we shall have other talk together!”

She passed on with her aged stateliness, but often turning back her
head and smiling at him, like one willing to recognize a secret
intimacy of connection.

“Have I then sold myself,” thought the minister, “to the fiend whom,
if men say true, this yellow-starched and velveted old hag has chosen
for her prince and master!”

The wretched minister! He had made a bargain very like it! Tempted by
a dream of happiness, he had yielded himself, with deliberate choice,
as he had never done before, to what he knew was deadly sin. And the
infectious poison of that sin had been thus rapidly diffused
throughout his moral system. It had stupefied all blessed impulses,
and awakened into vivid life the whole brotherhood of bad ones. Scorn,
bitterness, unprovoked malignity, gratuitous desire of ill, ridicule
of whatever was good and holy, all awoke, to tempt, even while they
frightened him. And his encounter with old Mistress Hibbins, if it
were a real incident, did but show his sympathy and fellowship with
wicked mortals, and the world of perverted spirits.

He had, by this time, reached his dwelling, on the edge of the
burial-ground, and, hastening up the stairs, took refuge in his study.
The minister was glad to have reached this shelter, without first
betraying himself to the world by any of those strange and wicked
eccentricities to which he had been continually impelled while passing
through the streets. He entered the accustomed room, and looked around
him on its books, its windows, its fireplace, and the tapestried
comfort of the walls, with the same perception of strangeness that had
haunted him throughout his walk from the forest-dell into the town,
and thitherward. Here he had studied and written; here, gone through
fast and vigil, and come forth half alive; here, striven to pray;
here, borne a hundred thousand agonies! There was the Bible, in its
rich old Hebrew, with Moses and the Prophets speaking to him, and
God’s voice through all! There, on the table, with the inky pen beside
it, was an unfinished sermon, with a sentence broken in the midst,
where his thoughts had ceased to gush out upon the page, two days
before. He knew that it was himself, the thin and white-cheeked
minister, who had done and suffered these things, and written thus far
into the Election Sermon! But he seemed to stand apart, and eye this
former self with scornful, pitying, but half-envious curiosity. That
self was gone. Another man had returned out of the forest; a wiser
one; with a knowledge of hidden mysteries which the simplicity of the
former never could have reached. A bitter kind of knowledge that!

While occupied with these reflections, a knock came at the door of the
study, and the minister said, “Come in!”—not wholly devoid of an idea
that he might behold an evil spirit. And so he did! It was old Roger
Chillingworth that entered. The minister stood, white and speechless,
with one hand on the Hebrew Scriptures, and the other spread upon his
breast.

“Welcome home, reverend Sir,” said the physician. “And how found you
that godly man, the Apostle Eliot? But methinks, dear Sir, you look
pale; as if the travel through the wilderness had been too sore for
you. Will not my aid be requisite to put you in heart and strength to
preach your Election Sermon?”

“Nay, I think not so,” rejoined the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. “My
journey, and the sight of the holy Apostle yonder, and the free air
which I have breathed, have done me good, after so long confinement in
my study. I think to need no more of your drugs, my kind physician,
good though they be, and administered by a friendly hand.”

All this time, Roger Chillingworth was looking at the minister with
the grave and intent regard of a physician towards his patient. But,
in spite of this outward show, the latter was almost convinced of the
old man’s knowledge, or, at least, his confident suspicion, with
respect to his own interview with Hester Prynne. The physician knew
then, that, in the minister’s regard, he was no longer a trusted
friend, but his bitterest enemy. So much being known, it would appear
natural that a part of it should be expressed. It is singular,
however, how long a time often passes before words embody things; and
with what security two persons, who choose to avoid a certain subject,
may approach its very verge, and retire without disturbing it. Thus,
the minister felt no apprehension that Roger Chillingworth would
touch, in express words, upon the real position which they sustained
towards one another. Yet did the physician, in his dark way, creep
frightfully near the secret.

“Were it not better,” said he, “that you use my poor skill to-night?
Verily, dear Sir, we must take pains to make you strong and vigorous
for this occasion of the Election discourse. The people look for great
things from you; apprehending that another year may come about, and
find their pastor gone.”

“Yea, to another world,” replied the minister, with pious resignation.
“Heaven grant it be a better one; for, in good sooth, I hardly think
to tarry with my flock through the flitting seasons of another year!
But, touching your medicine, kind Sir, in my present frame of body, I
need it not.”

“I joy to hear it,” answered the physician. “It may be that my
remedies, so long administered in vain, begin now to take due effect.
Happy man were I, and well deserving of New England’s gratitude, could
I achieve this cure!”

“I thank you from my heart, most watchful friend,” said the Reverend
Mr. Dimmesdale, with a solemn smile. “I thank you, and can but requite
your good deeds with my prayers.”

“A good man’s prayers are golden recompense!” rejoined old Roger
Chillingworth, as he took his leave. “Yea, they are the current gold
coin of the New Jerusalem, with the King’s own mint-mark on them!”

Left alone, the minister summoned a servant of the house, and
requested food, which, being set before him, he ate with ravenous
appetite. Then, flinging the already written pages of the Election
Sermon into the fire, he forthwith began another, which he wrote with
such an impulsive flow of thought and emotion, that he fancied himself
inspired; and only wondered that Heaven should see fit to transmit the
grand and solemn music of its oracles through so foul an organ-pipe as
he. However, leaving that mystery to solve itself, or go unsolved
forever, he drove his task onward, with earnest haste and ecstasy.
Thus the night fled away, as if it were a winged steed, and he
careering on it; morning came, and peeped, blushing, through the
curtains; and at last sunrise threw a golden beam into the study and
laid it right across the minister’s bedazzled eyes. There he was, with
the pen still between his fingers, and a vast, immeasurable tract of
written space behind him!




                            [Illustration]

                                 XXI.

                       THE NEW ENGLAND HOLIDAY.


Betimes in the morning of the day on which the new Governor was to
receive his office at the hands of the people, Hester Prynne and
little Pearl came into the market-place. It was already thronged with
the craftsmen and other plebeian inhabitants of the town, in
considerable numbers; among whom, likewise, were many rough figures,
whose attire of deer-skins marked them as belonging to some of the
forest settlements, which surrounded the little metropolis of the
colony.

On this public holiday, as on all other occasions, for seven years
past, Hester was clad in a garment of coarse gray cloth. Not more by
its hue than by some indescribable peculiarity in its fashion, it had
the effect of making her fade personally out of sight and outline;
while, again, the scarlet letter brought her back from this twilight
indistinctness, and revealed her under the moral aspect of its own
illumination. Her face, so long familiar to the towns-people, showed
the marble quietude which they were accustomed to behold there. It was
like a mask; or, rather, like the frozen calmness of a dead woman’s
features; owing this dreary resemblance to the fact that Hester was
actually dead, in respect to any claim of sympathy, and had departed
out of the world with which she still seemed to mingle.

It might be, on this one day, that there was an expression unseen
before, nor, indeed, vivid enough to be detected now; unless some
preternaturally gifted observer should have first read the heart, and
have afterwards sought a corresponding development in the countenance
and mien. Such a spiritual seer might have conceived, that, after
sustaining the gaze of the multitude through seven miserable years as
a necessity, a penance, and something which it was a stern religion to
endure, she now, for one last time more, encountered it freely and
voluntarily, in order to convert what had so long been agony into a
kind of triumph. “Look your last on the scarlet letter and its
wearer!”—the people’s victim and life-long bond-slave, as they
fancied her, might say to them. “Yet a little while, and she will be
beyond your reach! A few hours longer, and the deep, mysterious ocean
will quench and hide forever the symbol which ye have caused to burn
upon her bosom!” Nor were it an inconsistency too improbable to be
assigned to human nature, should we suppose a feeling of regret in
Hester’s mind, at the moment when she was about to win her freedom
from the pain which had been thus deeply incorporated with her being.
Might there not be an irresistible desire to quaff a last, long,
breathless draught of the cup of wormwood and aloes, with which nearly
all her years of womanhood had been perpetually flavored? The wine of
life, henceforth to be presented to her lips, must be indeed rich,
delicious, and exhilarating, in its chased and golden beaker; or else
leave an inevitable and weary languor, after the lees of bitterness
wherewith she had been drugged, as with a cordial of intensest
potency.

Pearl was decked out with airy gayety. It would have been impossible
to guess that this bright and sunny apparition owed its existence to
the shape of gloomy gray; or that a fancy, at once so gorgeous and so
delicate as must have been requisite to contrive the child’s apparel,
was the same that had achieved a task perhaps more difficult, in
imparting so distinct a peculiarity to Hester’s simple robe. The
dress, so proper was it to little Pearl, seemed an effluence, or
inevitable development and outward manifestation of her character, no
more to be separated from her than the many-hued brilliancy from a
butterfly’s wing, or the painted glory from the leaf of a bright
flower. As with these, so with the child; her garb was all of one idea
with her nature. On this eventful day, moreover, there was a certain
singular inquietude and excitement in her mood, resembling nothing so
much as the shimmer of a diamond, that sparkles and flashes with the
varied throbbings of the breast on which it is displayed. Children
have always a sympathy in the agitations of those connected with them;
always, especially, a sense of any trouble or impending revolution, of
whatever kind, in domestic circumstances; and therefore Pearl, who was
the gem on her mother’s unquiet bosom, betrayed, by the very dance of
her spirits, the emotions which none could detect in the marble
passiveness of Hester’s brow.

This effervescence made her flit with a bird-like movement, rather
than walk by her mother’s side. She broke continually into shouts of a
wild, inarticulate, and sometimes piercing music. When they reached
the market-place, she became still more restless, on perceiving the
stir and bustle that enlivened the spot; for it was usually more like
the broad and lonesome green before a village meeting-house, than the
centre of a town’s business.

“Why, what is this, mother?” cried she. “Wherefore have all the people
left their work to-day? Is it a play-day for the whole world? See,
there is the blacksmith! He has washed his sooty face, and put on his
Sabbath-day clothes, and looks as if he would gladly be merry, if any
kind body would only teach him how! And there is Master Brackett, the
old jailer, nodding and smiling at me. Why does he do so, mother?”

“He remembers thee a little babe, my child,” answered Hester.

“He should not nod and smile at me, for all that,—the black, grim,
ugly-eyed old man!” said Pearl. “He may nod at thee, if he will; for
thou art clad in gray, and wearest the scarlet letter. But see,
mother, how many faces of strange people, and Indians among them, and
sailors! What have they all come to do, here in the market-place?”

“They wait to see the procession pass,” said Hester. “For the Governor
and the magistrates are to go by, and the ministers, and all the great
people and good people, with the music and the soldiers marching
before them.”

“And will the minister be there?” asked Pearl. “And will he hold out
both his hands to me, as when thou ledst me to him from the
brook-side?”

“He will be there, child,” answered her mother. “But he will not greet
thee to-day; nor must thou greet him.”

“What a strange, sad man is he!” said the child, as if speaking partly
to herself. “In the dark night-time he calls us to him, and holds thy
hand and mine, as when we stood with him on the scaffold yonder. And
in the deep forest, where only the old trees can hear, and the strip
of sky see it, he talks with thee, sitting on a heap of moss! And he
kisses my forehead, too, so that the little brook would hardly wash it
off! But here, in the sunny day, and among all the people, he knows us
not; nor must we know him! A strange, sad man is he, with his hand
always over his heart!”

“Be quiet, Pearl! Thou understandest not these things,” said her
mother. “Think not now of the minister, but look about thee, and see
how cheery is everybody’s face to-day. The children have come from
their schools, and the grown people from their workshops and their
fields, on purpose to be happy. For, to-day, a new man is beginning to
rule over them; and so—as has been the custom of mankind ever since a
nation was first gathered—they make merry and rejoice; as if a good
and golden year were at length to pass over the poor old world!”

It was as Hester said, in regard to the unwonted jollity that
brightened the faces of the people. Into this festal season of the
year—as it already was, and continued to be during the greater part
of two centuries—the Puritans compressed whatever mirth and public
joy they deemed allowable to human infirmity; thereby so far
dispelling the customary cloud, that, for the space of a single
holiday, they appeared scarcely more grave than most other communities
at a period of general affliction.

But we perhaps exaggerate the gray or sable tinge, which undoubtedly
characterized the mood and manners of the age. The persons now in the
market-place of Boston had not been born to an inheritance of
Puritanic gloom. They were native Englishmen, whose fathers had lived
in the sunny richness of the Elizabethan epoch; a time when the life
of England, viewed as one great mass, would appear to have been as
stately, magnificent, and joyous, as the world has ever witnessed. Had
they followed their hereditary taste, the New England settlers would
have illustrated all events of public importance by bonfires,
banquets, pageantries, and processions. Nor would it have been
impracticable, in the observance of majestic ceremonies, to combine
mirthful recreation with solemnity, and give, as it were, a grotesque
and brilliant embroidery to the great robe of state, which a nation,
at such festivals, puts on. There was some shadow of an attempt of
this kind in the mode of celebrating the day on which the political
year of the colony commenced. The dim reflection of a remembered
splendor, a colorless and manifold diluted repetition of what they had
beheld in proud old London,—we will not say at a royal coronation,
but at a Lord Mayor’s show,—might be traced in the customs which our
forefathers instituted, with reference to the annual installation of
magistrates. The fathers and founders of the commonwealth—the
statesman, the priest, and the soldier—deemed it a duty then to
assume the outward state and majesty, which, in accordance with
antique style, was looked upon as the proper garb of public or social
eminence. All came forth, to move in procession before the people’s
eye, and thus impart a needed dignity to the simple framework of a
government so newly constructed.

Then, too, the people were countenanced, if not encouraged, in
relaxing the severe and close application to their various modes of
rugged industry, which, at all other times, seemed of the same piece
and material with their religion. Here, it is true, were none of the
applicances which popular merriment would so readily have found in the
England of Elizabeth’s time, or that of James;—no rude shows of a
theatrical kind; no minstrel, with his harp and legendary ballad, nor
gleeman, with an ape dancing to his music; no juggler, with his tricks
of mimic witchcraft; no Merry Andrew, to stir up the multitude with
jests, perhaps hundreds of years old, but still effective, by their
appeals to the very broadest sources of mirthful sympathy. All such
professors of the several branches of jocularity would have been
sternly repressed, not only by the rigid discipline of law, but by the
general sentiment which gives law its vitality. Not the less, however,
the great, honest face of the people smiled, grimly, perhaps, but
widely too. Nor were sports wanting, such as the colonists had
witnessed, and shared in, long ago, at the country fairs and on the
village-greens of England; and which it was thought well to keep alive
on this new soil, for the sake of the courage and manliness that were
essential in them. Wrestling-matches, in the different fashions of
Cornwall and Devonshire, were seen here and there about the
market-place; in one corner, there was a friendly bout at
quarterstaff; and—what attracted most interest of all—on the
platform of the pillory, already so noted in our pages, two masters of
defence were commencing an exhibition with the buckler and broadsword.
But, much to the disappointment of the crowd, this latter business was
broken off by the interposition of the town beadle, who had no idea of
permitting the majesty of the law to be violated by such an abuse of
one of its consecrated places.

It may not be too much to affirm, on the whole, (the people being then
in the first stages of joyless deportment, and the offspring of sires
who had known how to be merry, in their day,) that they would compare
favorably, in point of holiday keeping, with their descendants, even
at so long an interval as ourselves. Their immediate posterity, the
generation next to the early emigrants, wore the blackest shade of
Puritanism, and so darkened the national visage with it, that all the
subsequent years have not sufficed to clear it up. We have yet to
learn again the forgotten art of gayety.

The picture of human life in the market-place, though its general tint
was the sad gray, brown, or black of the English emigrants, was yet
enlivened by some diversity of hue. A party of Indians—in their
savage finery of curiously embroidered deer-skin robes, wampum-belts,
red and yellow ochre, and feathers, and armed with the bow and arrow
and stone-headed spear—stood apart, with countenances of inflexible
gravity, beyond what even the Puritan aspect could attain. Nor, wild
as were these painted barbarians, were they the wildest feature of the
scene. This distinction could more justly be claimed by some
mariners,—a part of the crew of the vessel from the Spanish
Main,—who had come ashore to see the humors of Election Day. They
were rough-looking desperadoes, with sun-blackened faces, and an
immensity of beard; their wide, short trousers were confined about the
waist by belts, often clasped with a rough plate of gold, and
sustaining always a long knife, and, in some instances, a sword. From
beneath their broad-brimmed hats of palm-leaf gleamed eyes which, even
in good-nature and merriment, had a kind of animal ferocity. They
transgressed, without fear or scruple, the rules of behavior that were
binding on all others; smoking tobacco under the beadle’s very nose,
although each whiff would have cost a townsman a shilling; and
quaffing, at their pleasure, draughts of wine or aqua-vitæ from
pocket-flasks, which they freely tendered to the gaping crowd around
them. It remarkably characterized the incomplete morality of the age,
rigid as we call it, that a license was allowed the seafaring class,
not merely for their freaks on shore, but for far more desperate deeds
on their proper element. The sailor of that day would go near to be
arraigned as a pirate in our own. There could be little doubt, for
instance, that this very ship’s crew, though no unfavorable specimens
of the nautical brotherhood, had been guilty, as we should phrase it,
of depredations on the Spanish commerce, such as would have perilled
all their necks in a modern court of justice.

But the sea, in those old times, heaved, swelled, and foamed, very
much at its own will, or subject only to the tempestuous wind, with
hardly any attempts at regulation by human law. The buccaneer on the
wave might relinquish his calling, and become at once, if he chose, a
man of probity and piety on land; nor, even in the full career of his
reckless life, was he regarded as a personage with whom it was
disreputable to traffic, or casually associate. Thus, the Puritan
elders, in their black cloaks, starched bands, and steeple-crowned
hats, smiled not unbenignantly at the clamor and rude deportment of
these jolly seafaring men; and it excited neither surprise nor
animadversion, when so reputable a citizen as old Roger Chillingworth,
the physician, was seen to enter the market-place, in close and
familiar talk with the commander of the questionable vessel.

The latter was by far the most showy and gallant figure, so far as
apparel went, anywhere to be seen among the multitude. He wore a
profusion of ribbons on his garment, and gold-lace on his hat, which
was also encircled by a gold chain, and surmounted with a feather.
There was a sword at his side, and a sword-cut on his forehead, which,
by the arrangement of his hair, he seemed anxious rather to display
than hide. A landsman could hardly have worn this garb and shown this
face, and worn and shown them both with such a galliard air, without
undergoing stern question before a magistrate, and probably incurring
fine or imprisonment, or perhaps an exhibition in the stocks. As
regarded the shipmaster, however, all was looked upon as pertaining to
the character, as to a fish his glistening scales.

After parting from the physician, the commander of the Bristol ship
strolled idly through the market-place; until, happening to approach
the spot where Hester Prynne was standing, he appeared to recognize,
and did not hesitate to address her. As was usually the case wherever
Hester stood, a small vacant area—a sort of magic circle—had formed
itself about her, into which, though the people were elbowing one
another at a little distance, none ventured, or felt disposed to
intrude. It was a forcible type of the moral solitude in which the
scarlet letter enveloped its fated wearer; partly by her own reserve,
and partly by the instinctive, though no longer so unkindly,
withdrawal of her fellow-creatures. Now, if never before, it answered
a good purpose, by enabling Hester and the seaman to speak together
without risk of being overheard; and so changed was Hester Prynne’s
repute before the public, that the matron in town most eminent for
rigid morality could not have held such intercourse with less result
of scandal than herself.

“So, mistress,” said the mariner, “I must bid the steward make ready
one more berth than you bargained for! No fear of scurvy or
ship-fever, this voyage! What with the ship’s surgeon and this other
doctor, our only danger will be from drug or pill; more by token, as
there is a lot of apothecary’s stuff aboard, which I traded for with a
Spanish vessel.”

“What mean you?” inquired Hester, startled more than she permitted to
appear. “Have you another passenger?”

“Why, know you not,” cried the shipmaster, “that this physician
here—Chillingworth, he calls himself—is minded to try my cabin-fare
with you? Ay, ay, you must have known it; for he tells me he is of
your party, and a close friend to the gentleman you spoke of,—he that
is in peril from these sour old Puritan rulers!”

[Illustration: Chillingworth,—“Smile with a sinister meaning”]

“They know each other well, indeed,” replied Hester, with a mien of
calmness, though in the utmost consternation. “They have long dwelt
together.”

Nothing further passed between the mariner and Hester Prynne. But, at
that instant, she beheld old Roger Chillingworth himself, standing in
the remotest corner of the market-place, and smiling on her; a smile
which—across the wide and bustling square, and through all the talk
and laughter, and various thoughts, moods, and interests of the
crowd—conveyed secret and fearful meaning.




                            [Illustration]

                                 XXII.

                            THE PROCESSION.


Before Hester Prynne could call together her thoughts, and consider
what was practicable to be done in this new and startling aspect of
affairs, the sound of military music was heard approaching along a
contiguous street. It denoted the advance of the procession of
magistrates and citizens, on its way towards the meeting-house; where,
in compliance with a custom thus early established, and ever since
observed, the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale was to deliver an Election
Sermon.

[Illustration: New England Worthies]

Soon the head of the procession showed itself, with a slow and stately
march, turning a corner, and making its way across the market-place.
First came the music. It comprised a variety of instruments, perhaps
imperfectly adapted to one another, and played with no great skill;
but yet attaining the great object for which the harmony of drum and
clarion addresses itself to the multitude,—that of imparting a higher
and more heroic air to the scene of life that passes before the eye.
Little Pearl at first clapped her hands, but then lost, for an
instant, the restless agitation that had kept her in a continual
effervescence throughout the morning; she gazed silently, and seemed
to be borne upward, like a floating sea-bird, on the long heaves and
swells of sound. But she was brought back to her former mood by the
shimmer of the sunshine on the weapons and bright armor of the
military company, which followed after the music, and formed the
honorary escort of the procession. This body of soldiery—which still
sustains a corporate existence, and marches down from past ages with
an ancient and honorable fame—was composed of no mercenary materials.
Its ranks were filled with gentlemen, who felt the stirrings of
martial impulse, and sought to establish a kind of College of Arms,
where, as in an association of Knights Templars, they might learn the
science, and, so far as peaceful exercise would teach them, the
practices of war. The high estimation then placed upon the military
character might be seen in the lofty port of each individual member
of the company. Some of them, indeed, by their services in the Low
Countries and on other fields of European warfare, had fairly won
their title to assume the name and pomp of soldiership. The entire
array, moreover, clad in burnished steel, and with plumage nodding
over their bright morions, had a brilliancy of effect which no modern
display can aspire to equal.

And yet the men of civil eminence, who came immediately behind the
military escort, were better worth a thoughtful observer’s eye. Even
in outward demeanor, they showed a stamp of majesty that made the
warrior’s haughty stride look vulgar, if not absurd. It was an age
when what we call talent had far less consideration than now, but the
massive materials which produce stability and dignity of character a
great deal more. The people possessed, by hereditary right, the
quality of reverence; which, in their descendants, if it survive at
all, exists in smaller proportion, and with a vastly diminished force,
in the selection and estimate of public men. The change may be for
good or ill, and is partly, perhaps, for both. In that old day, the
English settler on these rude shores—having left king, nobles, and
all degrees of awful rank behind, while still the faculty and
necessity of reverence were strong in him—bestowed it on the white
hair and venerable brow of age; on long-tried integrity; on solid
wisdom and sad-colored experience; on endowments of that grave and
weighty order which gives the idea of permanence, and comes under the
general definition of respectability. These primitive statesmen,
therefore,—Bradstreet, Endicott, Dudley, Bellingham, and their
compeers,—who were elevated to power by the early choice of the
people, seem to have been not often brilliant, but distinguished by a
ponderous sobriety, rather than activity of intellect. They had
fortitude and self-reliance, and, in time of difficulty or peril,
stood up for the welfare of the state like a line of cliffs against a
tempestuous tide. The traits of character here indicated were well
represented in the square cast of countenance and large physical
development of the new colonial magistrates. So far as a demeanor of
natural authority was concerned, the mother country need not have been
ashamed to see these foremost men of an actual democracy adopted into
the House of Peers, or made the Privy Council of the sovereign.

Next in order to the magistrates came the young and eminently
distinguished divine, from whose lips the religious discourse of the
anniversary was expected. His was the profession, at that era, in
which intellectual ability displayed itself far more than in political
life; for—leaving a higher motive out of the question—it offered
inducements powerful enough, in the almost worshipping respect of the
community, to win the most aspiring ambition into its service. Even
political power—as in the case of Increase Mather—was within the
grasp of a successful priest.

It was the observation of those who beheld him now, that never, since
Mr. Dimmesdale first set his foot on the New England shore, had he
exhibited such energy as was seen in the gait and air with which he
kept his pace in the procession. There was no feebleness of step, as
at other times; his frame was not bent; nor did his hand rest
ominously upon his heart. Yet, if the clergyman were rightly viewed,
his strength seemed not of the body. It might be spiritual, and
imparted to him by angelic ministrations. It might be the exhilaration
of that potent cordial, which is distilled only in the furnace-glow of
earnest and long-continued thought. Or, perchance, his sensitive
temperament was invigorated by the loud and piercing music, that
swelled heavenward, and uplifted him on its ascending wave.
Nevertheless, so abstracted was his look, it might be questioned
whether Mr. Dimmesdale even heard the music. There was his body,
moving onward, and with an unaccustomed force. But where was his mind?
Far and deep in its own region, busying itself, with preternatural
activity, to marshal a procession of stately thoughts that were soon
to issue thence; and so he saw nothing, heard nothing, knew nothing,
of what was around him; but the spiritual element took up the feeble
frame, and carried it along, unconscious of the burden, and converting
it to spirit like itself. Men of uncommon intellect, who have grown
morbid, possess this occasional power of mighty effort, into which
they throw the life of many days, and then are lifeless for as many
more.

Hester Prynne, gazing steadfastly at the clergyman, felt a dreary
influence come over her, but wherefore or whence she knew not; unless
that he seemed so remote from her own sphere, and utterly beyond her
reach. One glance of recognition, she had imagined, must needs pass
between them. She thought of the dim forest, with its little dell of
solitude, and love, and anguish, and the mossy tree-trunk, where,
sitting hand in hand, they had mingled their sad and passionate talk
with the melancholy murmur of the brook. How deeply had they known
each other then! And was this the man? She hardly knew him now! He,
moving proudly past, enveloped, as it were, in the rich music, with
the procession of majestic and venerable fathers; he, so unattainable
in his worldly position, and still more so in that far vista of his
unsympathizing thoughts, through which she now beheld him! Her spirit
sank with the idea that all must have been a delusion, and that,
vividly as she had dreamed it, there could be no real bond betwixt the
clergyman and herself. And thus much of woman was there in Hester,
that she could scarcely forgive him,—least of all now, when the heavy
footstep of their approaching Fate might be heard, nearer, nearer,
nearer!—for being able so completely to withdraw himself from their
mutual world; while she groped darkly, and stretched forth her cold
hands, and found him not.

Pearl either saw and responded to her mother’s feelings, or herself
felt the remoteness and intangibility that had fallen around the
minister. While the procession passed, the child was uneasy,
fluttering up and down, like a bird on the point of taking flight.
When the whole had gone by, she looked up into Hester’s face.

“Mother,” said she, “was that the same minister that kissed me by the
brook?”

“Hold thy peace, dear little Pearl!” whispered her mother. “We must
not always talk in the market-place of what happens to us in the
forest.”

“I could not be sure that it was he; so strange he looked,” continued
the child. “Else I would have run to him, and bid him kiss me now,
before all the people; even as he did yonder among the dark old trees.
What would the minister have said, mother? Would he have clapped his
hand over his heart, and scowled on me, and bid me be gone?”

“What should he say, Pearl,” answered Hester, “save that it was no
time to kiss, and that kisses are not to be given in the market-place?
Well for thee, foolish child, that thou didst not speak to him!”

Another shade of the same sentiment, in reference to Mr. Dimmesdale,
was expressed by a person whose eccentricities—or insanity, as we
should term it—led her to do what few of the towns-people would have
ventured on; to begin a conversation with the wearer of the scarlet
letter, in public. It was Mistress Hibbins, who, arrayed in great
magnificence, with a triple ruff, a broidered stomacher, a gown of
rich velvet, and a gold-headed cane, had come forth to see the
procession. As this ancient lady had the renown (which subsequently
cost her no less a price than her life) of being a principal actor in
all the works of necromancy that were continually going forward, the
crowd gave way before her, and seemed to fear the touch of her
garment, as if it carried the plague among its gorgeous folds. Seen in
conjunction with Hester Prynne,—kindly as so many now felt towards
the latter,—the dread inspired by Mistress Hibbins was doubled, and
caused a general movement from that part of the market-place in which
the two women stood.

“Now, what mortal imagination could conceive it!” whispered the old
lady, confidentially, to Hester. “Yonder divine man! That saint on
earth, as the people uphold him to be, and as—I must needs say—he
really looks! Who, now, that saw him pass in the procession, would
think how little while it is since he went forth out of his
study,—chewing a Hebrew text of Scripture in his mouth, I
warrant,—to take an airing in the forest! Aha! we know what that
means, Hester Prynne! But, truly, forsooth, I find it hard to believe
him the same man. Many a church-member saw I, walking behind the
music, that has danced in the same measure with me, when Somebody was
fiddler, and, it might be, an Indian powwow or a Lapland wizard
changing hands with us! That is but a trifle, when a woman knows the
world. But this minister! Couldst thou surely tell, Hester, whether he
was the same man that encountered thee on the forest-path?”

“Madam, I know not of what you speak,” answered Hester Prynne, feeling
Mistress Hibbins to be of infirm mind; yet strangely startled and
awe-stricken by the confidence with which she affirmed a personal
connection between so many persons (herself among them) and the Evil
One. “It is not for me to talk lightly of a learned and pious minister
of the Word, like the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale!”

“Fie, woman, fie!” cried the old lady, shaking her finger at Hester.
“Dost thou think I have been to the forest so many times, and have yet
no skill to judge who else has been there? Yea; though no leaf of the
wild garlands, which they wore while they danced, be left in their
hair! I know thee, Hester; for I behold the token. We may all see it
in the sunshine; and it glows like a red flame in the dark. Thou
wearest it openly; so there need be no question about that. But this
minister! Let me tell thee, in thine ear! When the Black Man sees one
of his own servants, signed and sealed, so shy of owning to the bond
as is the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, he hath a way of ordering matters
so that the mark shall be disclosed in open daylight to the eyes of
all the world! What is it that the minister seeks to hide, with his
hand always over his heart? Ha, Hester Prynne!”

“What is it, good Mistress Hibbins?” eagerly asked little Pearl. “Hast
thou seen it?”

“No matter, darling!” responded Mistress Hibbins, making Pearl a
profound reverence. “Thou thyself wilt see it, one time or another.
They say, child, thou art of the lineage of the Prince of the Air!
Wilt thou ride with me, some fine night, to see thy father? Then thou
shalt know wherefore the minister keeps his hand over his heart!”

Laughing so shrilly that all the market-place could hear her, the
weird old gentlewoman took her departure.

By this time the preliminary prayer had been offered in the
meeting-house, and the accents of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale were
heard commencing his discourse. An irresistible feeling kept Hester
near the spot. As the sacred edifice was too much thronged to admit
another auditor, she took up her position close beside the scaffold of
the pillory. It was in sufficient proximity to bring the whole sermon
to her ears, in the shape of an indistinct, but varied, murmur and
flow of the minister’s very peculiar voice.

This vocal organ was in itself a rich endowment; insomuch that a
listener, comprehending nothing of the language in which the preacher
spoke, might still have been swayed to and fro by the mere tone and
cadence. Like all other music, it breathed passion and pathos, and
emotions high or tender, in a tongue native to the human heart,
wherever educated. Muffled as the sound was by its passage through the
church-walls, Hester Prynne listened with such intentness, and
sympathized so intimately, that the sermon had throughout a meaning
for her, entirely apart from its indistinguishable words. These,
perhaps, if more distinctly heard, might have been only a grosser
medium, and have clogged the spiritual sense. Now she caught the low
undertone, as of the wind sinking down to repose itself; then ascended
with it, as it rose through progressive gradations of sweetness and
power, until its volume seemed to envelop her with an atmosphere of
awe and solemn grandeur. And yet, majestic as the voice sometimes
became, there was forever in it an essential character of
plaintiveness. A loud or low expression of anguish,—the whisper, or
the shriek, as it might be conceived, of suffering humanity, that
touched a sensibility in every bosom! At times this deep strain of
pathos was all that could be heard, and scarcely heard, sighing amid a
desolate silence. But even when the minister’s voice grew high and
commanding,—when it gushed irrepressibly upward,—when it assumed its
utmost breadth and power, so overfilling the church as to burst its
way through the solid walls, and diffuse itself in the open
air,—still, if the auditor listened intently, and for the purpose, he
could detect the same cry of pain. What was it? The complaint of a
human heart, sorrow-laden, perchance guilty, telling its secret,
whether of guilt or sorrow, to the great heart of mankind; beseeching
its sympathy or forgiveness,—at every moment,—in each accent,—and
never in vain! It was this profound and continual undertone that gave
the clergyman his most appropriate power.

During all this time, Hester stood, statue-like, at the foot of the
scaffold. If the minister’s voice had not kept her there, there would
nevertheless have been an inevitable magnetism in that spot, whence
she dated the first hour of her life of ignominy. There was a sense
within her,—too ill-defined to be made a thought, but weighing
heavily on her mind,—that her whole orb of life, both before and
after, was connected with this spot, as with the one point that gave
it unity.

Little Pearl, meanwhile, had quitted her mother’s side, and was
playing at her own will about the market-place. She made the sombre
crowd cheerful by her erratic and glistening ray; even as a bird of
bright plumage illuminates a whole tree of dusky foliage, by darting
to and fro, half seen and half concealed amid the twilight of the
clustering leaves. She had an undulating, but, oftentimes, a sharp and
irregular movement. It indicated the restless vivacity of her spirit,
which to-day was doubly indefatigable in its tiptoe dance, because it
was played upon and vibrated with her mother’s disquietude. Whenever
Pearl saw anything to excite her ever-active and wandering curiosity,
she flew thitherward and, as we might say, seized upon that man or
thing as her own property, so far as she desired it; but without
yielding the minutest degree of control over her motions in requital.
The Puritans looked on, and, if they smiled, were none the less
inclined to pronounce the child a demon offspring, from the
indescribable charm of beauty and eccentricity that shone through her
little figure, and sparkled with its activity. She ran and looked the
wild Indian in the face; and he grew conscious of a nature wilder than
his own. Thence, with native audacity, but still with a reserve as
characteristic, she flew into the midst of a group of mariners, the
swarthy-cheeked wild men of the ocean, as the Indians were of the
land; and they gazed wonderingly and admiringly at Pearl, as if a
flake of the sea-foam had taken the shape of a little maid, and were
gifted with a soul of the sea-fire, that flashes beneath the prow in
the night-time.

One of these seafaring men—the shipmaster, indeed, who had spoken to
Hester Prynne—was so smitten with Pearl’s aspect, that he attempted
to lay hands upon her, with purpose to snatch a kiss. Finding it as
impossible to touch her as to catch a humming-bird in the air, he took
from his hat the gold chain that was twisted about it, and threw it to
the child. Pearl immediately twined it around her neck and waist,
with such happy skill, that, once seen there, it became a part of her,
and it was difficult to imagine her without it.

“Thy mother is yonder woman with the scarlet letter,” said the seaman.
“Wilt thou carry her a message from me?”

“If the message pleases me, I will,” answered Pearl.

“Then tell her,” rejoined he, “that I spake again with the
black-a-visaged, hump-shouldered old doctor, and he engages to bring
his friend, the gentleman she wots of, aboard with him. So let thy
mother take no thought, save for herself and thee. Wilt thou tell her
this, thou witch-baby?”

“Mistress Hibbins says my father is the Prince of the Air!” cried
Pearl, with a naughty smile. “If thou callest me that ill name, I
shall tell him of thee; and he will chase thy ship with a tempest!”

Pursuing a zigzag course across the market-place, the child returned
to her mother, and communicated what the mariner had said. Hester’s
strong, calm, steadfastly enduring spirit almost sank, at last, on
beholding this dark and grim countenance of an inevitable doom,
which—at the moment when a passage seemed to open for the minister
and herself out of their labyrinth of misery—showed itself, with an
unrelenting smile, right in the midst of their path.

With her mind harassed by the terrible perplexity in which the
shipmaster’s intelligence involved her, she was also subjected to
another trial. There were many people present, from the country round
about, who had often heard of the scarlet letter, and to whom it had
been made terrific by a hundred false or exaggerated rumors, but who
had never beheld it with their own bodily eyes. These, after
exhausting other modes of amusement, now thronged about Hester Prynne
with rude and boorish intrusiveness. Unscrupulous as it was, however,
it could not bring them nearer than a circuit of several yards. At
that distance they accordingly stood, fixed there by the centrifugal
force of the repugnance which the mystic symbol inspired. The whole
gang of sailors, likewise, observing the press of spectators, and
learning the purport of the scarlet letter, came and thrust their
sunburnt and desperado-looking faces into the ring. Even the Indians
were affected by a sort of cold shadow of the white man’s curiosity,
and, gliding through the crowd, fastened their snake-like black eyes
on Hester’s bosom; conceiving, perhaps, that the wearer of this
brilliantly embroidered badge must needs be a personage of high
dignity among her people. Lastly the inhabitants of the town (their
own interest in this worn-out subject languidly reviving itself, by
sympathy with what they saw others feel) lounged idly to the same
quarter, and tormented Hester Prynne, perhaps more than all the rest,
with their cool, well-acquainted gaze at her familiar shame. Hester
saw and recognized the selfsame faces of that group of matrons, who
had awaited her forthcoming from the prison-door, seven years ago; all
save one, the youngest and only compassionate among them, whose
burial-robe she had since made. At the final hour, when she was so
soon to fling aside the burning letter, it had strangely become the
centre of more remark and excitement, and was thus made to sear her
breast more painfully, than at any time since the first day she put it
on.

While Hester stood in that magic circle of ignominy, where the cunning
cruelty of her sentence seemed to have fixed her forever, the
admirable preacher was looking down from the sacred pulpit upon an
audience whose very inmost spirits had yielded to his control. The
sainted minister in the church! The woman of the scarlet letter in the
market-place! What imagination would have been irreverent enough to
surmise that the same scorching stigma was on them both!

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                XXIII.

                 THE REVELATION OF THE SCARLET LETTER.


The eloquent voice, on which the souls of the listening audience had
been borne aloft as on the swelling waves of the sea, at length came
to a pause. There was a momentary silence, profound as what should
follow the utterance of oracles. Then ensued a murmur and half-hushed
tumult; as if the auditors, released from the high spell that had
transported them into the region of another’s mind, were returning
into themselves, with all their awe and wonder still heavy on them. In
a moment more, the crowd began to gush forth from the doors of the
church. Now that there was an end, they needed other breath, more fit
to support the gross and earthly life into which they relapsed, than
that atmosphere which the preacher had converted into words of flame,
and had burdened with the rich fragrance of his thought.

In the open air their rapture broke into speech. The street and the
market-place absolutely babbled, from side to side, with applauses of
the minister. His hearers could not rest until they had told one
another of what each knew better than he could tell or hear. According
to their united testimony, never had man spoken in so wise, so high,
and so holy a spirit, as he that spake this day; nor had inspiration
ever breathed through mortal lips more evidently than it did through
his. Its influence could be seen, as it were, descending upon him, and
possessing him, and continually lifting him out of the written
discourse that lay before him, and filling him with ideas that must
have been as marvellous to himself as to his audience. His subject, it
appeared, had been the relation between the Deity and the communities
of mankind, with a special reference to the New England which they
were here planting in the wilderness. And, as he drew towards the
close, a spirit as of prophecy had come upon him, constraining him to
its purpose as mightily as the old prophets of Israel were
constrained; only with this difference, that, whereas the Jewish seers
had denounced judgments and ruin on their country, it was his mission
to foretell a high and glorious destiny for the newly gathered people
of the Lord. But, throughout it all, and through the whole discourse,
there had been a certain deep, sad undertone of pathos, which could
not be interpreted otherwise than as the natural regret of one soon to
pass away. Yes; their minister whom they so loved—and who so loved
them all, that he could not depart heavenward without a sigh—had the
foreboding of untimely death upon him, and would soon leave them in
their tears! This idea of his transitory stay on earth gave the last
emphasis to the effect which the preacher had produced; it was as if
an angel, in his passage to the skies, had shaken his bright wings
over the people for an instant,—at once a shadow and a
splendor,—and had shed down a shower of golden truths upon them.

Thus, there had come to the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale—as to most men,
in their various spheres, though seldom recognized until they see it
far behind them—an epoch of life more brilliant and full of triumph
than any previous one, or than any which could hereafter be. He stood,
at this moment, on the very proudest eminence of superiority, to which
the gifts of intellect, rich lore, prevailing eloquence, and a
reputation of whitest sanctity, could exalt a clergyman in New
England’s earliest days, when the professional character was of itself
a lofty pedestal. Such was the position which the minister occupied,
as he bowed his head forward on the cushions of the pulpit, at the
close of his Election Sermon. Meanwhile Hester Prynne was standing
beside the scaffold of the pillory, with the scarlet letter still
burning on her breast!

Now was heard again the clangor of the music, and the measured tramp
of the military escort, issuing from the church-door. The procession
was to be marshalled thence to the town-hall, where a solemn banquet
would complete the ceremonies of the day.

Once more, therefore, the train of venerable and majestic fathers was
seen moving through a broad pathway of the people, who drew back
reverently, on either side, as the Governor and magistrates, the old
and wise men, the holy ministers, and all that were eminent and
renowned, advanced into the midst of them. When they were fairly in
the market-place, their presence was greeted by a shout. This—though
doubtless it might acquire additional force and volume from the
childlike loyalty which the age awarded to its rulers—was felt to be
an irrepressible outburst of enthusiasm kindled in the auditors by
that high strain of eloquence which was yet reverberating in their
ears. Each felt the impulse in himself, and, in the same breath,
caught it from his neighbor. Within the church, it had hardly been
kept down; beneath the sky, it pealed upward to the zenith. There were
human beings enough, and enough of highly wrought and symphonious
feeling, to produce that more impressive sound than the organ tones of
the blast, or the thunder, or the roar of the sea; even that mighty
swell of many voices, blended into one great voice by the universal
impulse which makes likewise one vast heart out of the many. Never,
from the soil of New England, had gone up such a shout! Never, on New
England soil, had stood the man so honored by his mortal brethren as
the preacher!

How fared it with him then? Were there not the brilliant particles of
a halo in the air about his head? So etherealized by spirit as he was,
and so apotheosized by worshipping admirers, did his footsteps, in the
procession, really tread upon the dust of earth?

As the ranks of military men and civil fathers moved onward, all eyes
were turned towards the point where the minister was seen to approach
among them. The shout died into a murmur, as one portion of the crowd
after another obtained a glimpse of him. How feeble and pale he
looked, amid all his triumph! The energy—or say, rather, the
inspiration which had held him up, until he should have delivered the
sacred message that brought its own strength along with it from
heaven—was withdrawn, now that it had so faithfully performed its
office. The glow, which they had just before beheld burning on his
cheek, was extinguished, like a flame that sinks down hopelessly
among the late-decaying embers. It seemed hardly the face of a man
alive, with such a death-like hue; it was hardly a man with life in
him, that tottered on his path so nervelessly, yet tottered, and did
not fall!

One of his clerical brethren,—it was the venerable John
Wilson,—observing the state in which Mr. Dimmesdale was left by the
retiring wave of intellect and sensibility, stepped forward hastily to
offer his support. The minister tremulously, but decidedly, repelled
the old man’s arm. He still walked onward, if that movement could be
so described, which rather resembled the wavering effort of an infant,
with its mother’s arms in view, outstretched to tempt him forward. And
now, almost imperceptible as were the latter steps of his progress, he
had come opposite the well-remembered and weather-darkened scaffold,
where, long since, with all that dreary lapse of time between, Hester
Prynne had encountered the world’s ignominious stare. There stood
Hester, holding little Pearl by the hand! And there was the scarlet
letter on her breast! The minister here made a pause; although the
music still played the stately and rejoicing march to which the
procession moved. It summoned him onward,—onward to the
festival!—but here he made a pause.

Bellingham, for the last few moments, had kept an anxious eye upon
him. He now left his own place in the procession, and advanced to give
assistance; judging, from Mr. Dimmesdale’s aspect, that he must
otherwise inevitably fall. But there was something in the latter’s
expression that warned back the magistrate, although a man not readily
obeying the vague intimations that pass from one spirit to another.
The crowd, meanwhile, looked on with awe and wonder. This earthly
faintness was, in their view, only another phase of the minister’s
celestial strength; nor would it have seemed a miracle too high to be
wrought for one so holy, had he ascended before their eyes, waxing
dimmer and brighter, and fading at last into the light of heaven.

He turned towards the scaffold, and stretched forth his arms.

“Hester,” said he, “come hither! Come, my little Pearl!”

It was a ghastly look with which he regarded them; but there was
something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it. The child,
with the bird-like motion which was one of her characteristics, flew
to him, and clasped her arms about his knees. Hester Prynne—slowly,
as if impelled by inevitable fate, and against her strongest
will—likewise drew near, but paused before she reached him. At this
instant, old Roger Chillingworth thrust himself through the
crowd,—or, perhaps, so dark, disturbed, and evil, was his look, he
rose up out of some nether region,—to snatch back his victim from
what he sought to do! Be that as it might, the old man rushed forward,
and caught the minister by the arm.

“Madman, hold! what is your purpose?” whispered he. “Wave back that
woman! Cast off this child! All shall be well! Do not blacken your
fame, and perish in dishonor! I can yet save you! Would you bring
infamy on your sacred profession?”

“Ha, tempter! Methinks thou art too late!” answered the minister,
encountering his eye, fearfully, but firmly. “Thy power is not what it
was! With God’s help, I shall escape thee now!”

He again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter.

“Hester Prynne,” cried he, with a piercing earnestness, “in the name
of Him, so terrible and so merciful, who gives me grace, at this last
moment, to do what—for my own heavy sin and miserable agony—I
withheld myself from doing seven years ago, come hither now, and twine
thy strength about me! Thy strength, Hester; but let it be guided by
the will which God hath granted me! This wretched and wronged old man
is opposing it with all his might!—with all his own might, and the
fiend’s! Come, Hester, come! Support me up yonder scaffold!”

The crowd was in a tumult. The men of rank and dignity, who stood more
immediately around the clergyman, were so taken by surprise, and so
perplexed as to the purport of what they saw,—unable to receive the
explanation which most readily presented itself, or to imagine any
other,—that they remained silent and inactive spectators of the
judgment which Providence seemed about to work. They beheld the
minister, leaning on Hester’s shoulder, and supported by her arm
around him, approach the scaffold, and ascend its steps; while still
the little hand of the sin-born child was clasped in his. Old Roger
Chillingworth followed, as one intimately connected with the drama of
guilt and sorrow in which they had all been actors, and well entitled,
therefore, to be present at its closing scene.

“Hadst thou sought the whole earth over,” said he, looking darkly at
the clergyman, “there was no one place so secret,—no high place nor
lowly place, where thou couldst have escaped me,—save on this very
scaffold!”

“Thanks be to Him who hath led me hither!” answered the minister.

Yet he trembled, and turned to Hester with an expression of doubt and
anxiety in his eyes, not the less evidently betrayed, that there was a
feeble smile upon his lips.

“Is not this better,” murmured he, “than what we dreamed of in the
forest?”

“I know not! I know not!” she hurriedly replied. “Better? Yea; so we
may both die, and little Pearl die with us!”

“For thee and Pearl, be it as God shall order,” said the minister;
“and God is merciful! Let me now do the will which he hath made plain
before my sight. For, Hester, I am a dying man. So let me make haste
to take my shame upon me!”

Partly supported by Hester Prynne, and holding one hand of little
Pearl’s, the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale turned to the dignified and
venerable rulers; to the holy ministers, who were his brethren; to the
people, whose great heart was thoroughly appalled, yet overflowing
with tearful sympathy, as knowing that some deep life-matter—which,
if full of sin, was full of anguish and repentance likewise—was now
to be laid open to them. The sun, but little past its meridian, shone
down upon the clergyman, and gave a distinctness to his figure, as he
stood out from all the earth, to put in his plea of guilty at the bar
of Eternal Justice.

“People of New England!” cried he, with a voice that rose over them,
high, solemn, and majestic,—yet had always a tremor through it, and
sometimes a shriek, struggling up out of a fathomless depth of remorse
and woe,—“ye, that have loved me!—ye, that have deemed me
holy!—behold me here, the one sinner of the world! At last!—at
last!—I stand upon the spot where, seven years since, I should have
stood; here, with this woman, whose arm, more than the little strength
wherewith I have crept hitherward, sustains me, at this dreadful
moment, from grovelling down upon my face! Lo, the scarlet letter
which Hester wears! Ye have all shuddered at it! Wherever her walk
hath been,—wherever, so miserably burdened, she may have hoped to
find repose,—it hath cast a lurid gleam of awe and horrible
repugnance round about her. But there stood one in the midst of you,
at whose brand of sin and infamy ye have not shuddered!”

It seemed, at this point, as if the minister must leave the remainder
of his secret undisclosed. But he fought back the bodily
weakness,—and, still more, the faintness of heart,—that was striving
for the mastery with him. He threw off all assistance, and stepped
passionately forward a pace before the woman and the child.

“It was on him!” he continued, with a kind of fierceness; so
determined was he to speak out the whole. “God’s eye beheld it! The
angels were forever pointing at it! The Devil knew it well, and
fretted it continually with the touch of his burning finger! But he
hid it cunningly from men, and walked among you with the mien of a
spirit, mournful, because so pure in a sinful world!—and sad, because
he missed his heavenly kindred! Now, at the death-hour, he stands up
before you! He bids you look again at Hester’s scarlet letter! He
tells you, that, with all its mysterious horror, it is but the shadow
of what he bears on his own breast, and that even this, his own red
stigma, is no more than the type of what has seared his inmost heart!
Stand any here that question God’s judgment on a sinner? Behold!
Behold a dreadful witness of it!”

[Illustration: “Shall we not meet again?”]

With a convulsive motion, he tore away the ministerial band from
before his breast. It was revealed! But it were irreverent to describe
that revelation. For an instant, the gaze of the horror-stricken
multitude was concentred on the ghastly miracle; while the minister
stood, with a flush of triumph in his face, as one who, in the
crisis of acutest pain, had won a victory. Then, down he sank upon the
scaffold! Hester partly raised him, and supported his head against her
bosom. Old Roger Chillingworth knelt down beside him, with a blank,
dull countenance, out of which the life seemed to have departed.

“Thou hast escaped me!” he repeated more than once. “Thou hast escaped
me!”

“May God forgive thee!” said the minister. “Thou, too, hast deeply
sinned!”

He withdrew his dying eyes from the old man, and fixed them on the
woman and the child.

“My little Pearl,” said he, feebly,—and there was a sweet and gentle
smile over his face, as of a spirit sinking into deep repose; nay, now
that the burden was removed, it seemed almost as if he would be
sportive with the child,—“dear little Pearl, wilt thou kiss me now?
Thou wouldst not, yonder, in the forest! But now thou wilt?”

Pearl kissed his lips. A spell was broken. The great scene of grief,
in which the wild infant bore a part, had developed all her
sympathies; and as her tears fell upon her father’s cheek, they were
the pledge that she would grow up amid human joy and sorrow, nor
forever do battle with the world, but be a woman in it. Towards her
mother, too, Pearl’s errand as a messenger of anguish was all
fulfilled.

“Hester,” said the clergyman, “farewell!”

“Shall we not meet again?” whispered she, bending her face down close
to his. “Shall we not spend our immortal life together? Surely,
surely, we have ransomed one another, with all this woe! Thou lookest
far into eternity, with those bright dying eyes! Then tell me what
thou seest?”

“Hush, Hester, hush!” said he, with tremulous solemnity. “The law we
broke!—the sin here so awfully revealed!—let these alone be in thy
thoughts! I fear! I fear! It may be, that, when we forgot our
God,—when we violated our reverence each for the other’s soul,—it
was thenceforth vain to hope that we could meet hereafter, in an
everlasting and pure reunion. God knows; and He is merciful! He hath
proved his mercy, most of all, in my afflictions. By giving me this
burning torture to bear upon my breast! By sending yonder dark and
terrible old man, to keep the torture always at red-heat! By bringing
me hither, to die this death of triumphant ignominy before the people!
Had either of these agonies been wanting, I had been lost forever!
Praised be his name! His will be done! Farewell!”

That final word came forth with the minister’s expiring breath. The
multitude, silent till then, broke out in a strange, deep voice of awe
and wonder, which could not as yet find utterance, save in this murmur
that rolled so heavily after the departed spirit.

[Illustration]




                            [Illustration]

                                 XXIV.

                              CONCLUSION.


After many days, when time sufficed for the people to arrange their
thoughts in reference to the foregoing scene, there was more than one
account of what had been witnessed on the scaffold.

Most of the spectators testified to having seen, on the breast of the
unhappy minister, a SCARLET LETTER—the very semblance of that worn by
Hester Prynne—imprinted in the flesh. As regarded its origin, there
were various explanations, all of which must necessarily have been
conjectural. Some affirmed that the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, on the
very day when Hester Prynne first wore her ignominious badge, had
begun a course of penance,—which he afterwards, in so many futile
methods, followed out,—by inflicting a hideous torture on himself.
Others contended that the stigma had not been produced until a long
time subsequent, when old Roger Chillingworth, being a potent
necromancer, had caused it to appear, through the agency of magic and
poisonous drugs. Others, again,—and those best able to appreciate
the minister’s peculiar sensibility, and the wonderful operation of
his spirit upon the body,—whispered their belief, that the awful
symbol was the effect of the ever-active tooth of remorse, gnawing
from the inmost heart outwardly, and at last manifesting Heaven’s
dreadful judgment by the visible presence of the letter. The reader
may choose among these theories. We have thrown all the light we could
acquire upon the portent, and would gladly, now that it has done its
office, erase its deep print out of our own brain; where long
meditation has fixed it in very undesirable distinctness.

It is singular, nevertheless, that certain persons, who were
spectators of the whole scene, and professed never once to have
removed their eyes from the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, denied that there
was any mark whatever on his breast, more than on a new-born infant’s.
Neither, by their report, had his dying words acknowledged, nor even
remotely implied, any, the slightest connection, on his part, with the
guilt for which Hester Prynne had so long worn the scarlet letter.
According to these highly respectable witnesses, the minister,
conscious that he was dying,—conscious, also, that the reverence of
the multitude placed him already among saints and angels,—had
desired, by yielding up his breath in the arms of that fallen woman,
to express to the world how utterly nugatory is the choicest of man’s
own righteousness. After exhausting life in his efforts for mankind’s
spiritual good, he had made the manner of his death a parable, in
order to impress on his admirers the mighty and mournful lesson, that,
in the view of Infinite Purity, we are sinners all alike. It was to
teach them, that the holiest among us has but attained so far above
his fellows as to discern more clearly the Mercy which looks down,
and repudiate more utterly the phantom of human merit, which would
look aspiringly upward. Without disputing a truth so momentous, we
must be allowed to consider this version of Mr. Dimmesdale’s story as
only an instance of that stubborn fidelity with which a man’s
friends—and especially a clergyman’s—will sometimes uphold his
character, when proofs, clear as the mid-day sunshine on the scarlet
letter, establish him a false and sin-stained creature of the dust.

The authority which we have chiefly followed,—a manuscript of old
date, drawn up from the verbal testimony of individuals, some of whom
had known Hester Prynne, while others had heard the tale from
contemporary witnesses,—fully confirms the view taken in the
foregoing pages. Among many morals which press upon us from the poor
minister’s miserable experience, we put only this into a
sentence:—“Be true! Be true! Be true! Show freely to the world, if
not your worst, yet some trait whereby the worst may be inferred!”

Nothing was more remarkable than the change which took place, almost
immediately after Mr. Dimmesdale’s death, in the appearance and
demeanor of the old man known as Roger Chillingworth. All his strength
and energy—all his vital and intellectual force—seemed at once to
desert him; insomuch that he positively withered up, shrivelled away,
and almost vanished from mortal sight, like an uprooted weed that lies
wilting in the sun. This unhappy man had made the very principle of
his life to consist in the pursuit and systematic exercise of revenge;
and when, by its completest triumph and consummation, that evil
principle was left with no further material to support it, when, in
short, there was no more Devil’s work on earth for him to do, it only
remained for the unhumanized mortal to betake himself whither his
Master would find him tasks enough, and pay him his wages duly. But,
to all these shadowy beings, so long our near acquaintances,—as well
Roger Chillingworth as his companions,—we would fain be merciful. It
is a curious subject of observation and inquiry, whether hatred and
love be not the same thing at bottom. Each, in its utmost development,
supposes a high degree of intimacy and heart-knowledge; each renders
one individual dependent for the food of his affections and spiritual
life upon another; each leaves the passionate lover, or the no less
passionate hater, forlorn and desolate by the withdrawal of his
subject. Philosophically considered, therefore, the two passions seem
essentially the same, except that one happens to be seen in a
celestial radiance, and the other in a dusky and lurid glow. In the
spiritual world, the old physician and the minister—mutual victims as
they have been—may, unawares, have found their earthly stock of
hatred and antipathy transmuted into golden love.

Leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business to
communicate to the reader. At old Roger Chillingworth’s decease,
(which took place within the year,) and by his last will and
testament, of which Governor Bellingham and the Reverend Mr. Wilson
were executors, he bequeathed a very considerable amount of property,
both here and in England, to little Pearl, the daughter of Hester
Prynne.

So Pearl—the elf-child,—the demon offspring, as some people, up to
that epoch, persisted in considering her,—became the richest heiress
of her day, in the New World. Not improbably, this circumstance
wrought a very material change in the public estimation; and, had the
mother and child remained here, little Pearl, at a marriageable period
of life, might have mingled her wild blood with the lineage of the
devoutest Puritan among them all. But, in no long time after the
physician’s death, the wearer of the scarlet letter disappeared, and
Pearl along with her. For many years, though a vague report would now
and then find its way across the sea,—like a shapeless piece of
drift-wood tost ashore, with the initials of a name upon it,—yet no
tidings of them unquestionably authentic were received. The story of
the scarlet letter grew into a legend. Its spell, however, was still
potent, and kept the scaffold awful where the poor minister had died,
and likewise the cottage by the sea-shore, where Hester Prynne had
dwelt. Near this latter spot, one afternoon, some children were at
play, when they beheld a tall woman, in a gray robe, approach the
cottage-door. In all those years it had never once been opened; but
either she unlocked it, or the decaying wood and iron yielded to her
hand, or she glided shadow-like through these impediments,—and, at
all events, went in.

On the threshold she paused,—turned partly round,—for, perchance,
the idea of entering all alone, and all so changed, the home of so
intense a former life, was more dreary and desolate than even she
could bear. But her hesitation was only for an instant, though long
enough to display a scarlet letter on her breast.

[Illustration: Hester’s Return]

And Hester Prynne had returned, and taken up her long-forsaken shame!
But where was little Pearl? If still alive, she must now have been in
the flush and bloom of early womanhood. None knew—nor ever learned,
with the fulness of perfect certainty—whether the elf-child had gone
thus untimely to a maiden grave; or whether her wild, rich nature had
been softened and subdued, and made capable of a woman’s gentle
happiness. But, through the remainder of Hester’s life, there were
indications that the recluse of the scarlet letter was the object of
love and interest with some inhabitant of another land. Letters came,
with armorial seals upon them, though of bearings unknown to English
heraldry. In the cottage there were articles of comfort and luxury
such as Hester never cared to use, but which only wealth could have
purchased, and affection have imagined for her. There were trifles,
too, little ornaments, beautiful tokens of a continual remembrance,
that must have been wrought by delicate fingers, at the impulse of a
fond heart. And, once, Hester was seen embroidering a baby-garment,
with such a lavish richness of golden fancy as would have raised a
public tumult, had any infant, thus apparelled, been shown to our
sober-hued community.

In fine, the gossips of that day believed,—and Mr. Surveyor Pue, who
made investigations a century later, believed,—and one of his recent
successors in office, moreover, faithfully believes,—that Pearl was
not only alive, but married, and happy, and mindful of her mother, and
that she would most joyfully have entertained that sad and lonely
mother at her fireside.

But there was a more real life for Hester Prynne here, in New England,
than in that unknown region where Pearl had found a home. Here had
been her sin; here, her sorrow; and here was yet to be her penitence.
She had returned, therefore, and resumed,—of her own free will, for
not the sternest magistrate of that iron period would have imposed
it,—resumed the symbol of which we have related so dark a tale. Never
afterwards did it quit her bosom. But, in the lapse of the toilsome,
thoughtful, and self-devoted years that made up Hester’s life, the
scarlet letter ceased to be a stigma which attracted the world’s scorn
and bitterness, and became a type of something to be sorrowed over,
and looked upon with awe, yet with reverence too. And, as Hester
Prynne had no selfish ends, nor lived in any measure for her own
profit and enjoyment, people brought all their sorrows and
perplexities, and besought her counsel, as one who had herself gone
through a mighty trouble. Women, more especially,—in the continually
recurring trials of wounded, wasted, wronged, misplaced, or erring and
sinful passion,—or with the dreary burden of a heart unyielded,
because unvalued and unsought,—came to Hester’s cottage, demanding
why they were so wretched, and what the remedy! Hester comforted and
counselled them as best she might. She assured them, too, of her firm
belief, that, at some brighter period, when the world should have
grown ripe for it, in Heaven’s own time, a new truth would be
revealed, in order to establish the whole relation between man and
woman on a surer ground of mutual happiness. Earlier in life, Hester
had vainly imagined that she herself might be the destined prophetess,
but had long since recognized the impossibility that any mission of
divine and mysterious truth should be confided to a woman stained with
sin, bowed down with shame, or even burdened with a life-long sorrow.
The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman,
indeed, but lofty, pure, and beautiful; and wise, moreover, not
through dusky grief, but the ethereal medium of joy; and showing how
sacred love should make us happy, by the truest test of a life
successful to such an end!

So said Hester Prynne, and glanced her sad eyes downward at the
scarlet letter. And, after many, many years, a new grave was delved,
near an old and sunken one, in that burial-ground beside which King’s
Chapel has since been built. It was near that old and sunken grave,
yet with a space between, as if the dust of the two sleepers had no
right to mingle. Yet one tombstone served for both. All around, there
were monuments carved with armorial bearings; and on this simple slab
of slate—as the curious investigator may still discern, and perplex
himself with the purport—there appeared the semblance of an engraved
escutcheon. It bore a device, a herald’s wording of which might serve
for a motto and brief description of our now concluded legend; so
sombre is it, and relieved only by one ever-glowing point of light
gloomier than the shadow:—

               “ON A FIELD, SABLE, THE LETTER A, GULES.”

                            [Illustration]


     Cambridge: Electrotyped and Printed by Welch, Bigelow, & Co.




                         TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

Obvious printer’s errors have been corrected; for the details, see
below. Most illustrations have been linked to the larger versions; to
see the larger version, click on the illustration.


                             Typos fixed:

    page 072—spelling normalized: changed ‘midday’ to ‘mid-day’
    page 132—inserted a missing closing quote after ‘a child of her age’
    page 137—spelling normalized: changed ‘careworn’ to ‘care-worn’
    page 147—typo fixed: changed ‘physican’ to ‘physician’
    page 171—typo fixed: changed ‘vocies’ to ‘voices’
    page 262—removed an extra closing quote after ‘scarlet letter too!’
    page 291—spelling normalized: changed ‘birdlike’ to ‘bird-like’
    page 300—typo fixed: changed ‘intruments’ to ‘instruments’
    page 306—spelling normalized: changed ‘deathlike’ to ‘death-like’






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARLET LETTER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cranford
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cranford

Author: Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell

Illustrator: C. E. Brock

Release date: January 1, 1996 [eBook #394]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2022

Language: English

Credits: David Price, Margaret Price and Richard Tonsing


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRANFORD ***





                 [Picture: “Oh, sir! can you be Peter?”]




                                 CRANFORD


                                   _by_
                       _Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell_

                  [Picture: Picture of lady pouring tea]

                _With twenty-five coloured illustrations_
                             _by C. E. Brock_

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                   1904

                      _London.    J. M. Dent & Co._
                    _New York.    E. P. Dutton & Co._




CONTENTS

  CHAPTER I. OUR SOCIETY
  CHAPTER II. THE CAPTAIN
  CHAPTER III. A LOVE AFFAIR OF LONG AGO
  CHAPTER IV. A VISIT TO AN OLD BACHELOR
  CHAPTER V. OLD LETTERS
  CHAPTER VI. POOR PETER
  CHAPTER VII. VISITING
  CHAPTER VIII. “YOUR LADYSHIP”
  CHAPTER IX. SIGNOR BRUNONI
  CHAPTER X. THE PANIC
  CHAPTER XI. SAMUEL BROWN
  CHAPTER XII. ENGAGED TO BE MARRIED
  CHAPTER XIII. STOPPED PAYMENT
  CHAPTER XIV. FRIENDS IN NEED
  CHAPTER XV. A HAPPY RETURN
  CHAPTER XVI. PEACE TO CRANFORD




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

“Oh, sir! Can you be Peter?”
A magnificent family red silk umbrella
Meekly going to her pasture
Endeavouring to beguile her into conversation
She brought the affrighted carter ... into the drawing-room
“With his arm round Miss Jessie’s waist!”
Mr Holbrook ... bade us good-bye
Now, what colour are ash-buds in March?
I made us of the time to think of many other things
“Confound the woman!”
The temptation of the comfortable arm-chair had been too much for her
Mr Mulliner
We gave her a tea-spoonful of currant jelly
Afraid of matrimonial reports
Asked him to take care of us
Slaughterous and indiscriminate directions
Would stretch out their little arms
“What do you think, Miss Matty?”
Standing over him like a bold dragoon
“You must give me your note, Mr Dobson, if you please”
“Please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off hand”
Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts
Smiling glory ... and becoming blushes
I went to call Miss Matty

                                * * * * *

_Most of the three-colour blocks used in this book have been made by the
Graphic Photo-Engraving Co._, _London_




CHAPTER I.
OUR SOCIETY


IN the first place, Cranford is in possession of the Amazons; all the
holders of houses above a certain rent are women.  If a married couple
come to settle in the town, somehow the gentleman disappears; he is
either fairly frightened to death by being the only man in the Cranford
evening parties, or he is accounted for by being with his regiment, his
ship, or closely engaged in business all the week in the great
neighbouring commercial town of Drumble, distant only twenty miles on a
railroad.  In short, whatever does become of the gentlemen, they are
not at Cranford.  What could they do if they were there?  The surgeon
has his round of thirty miles, and sleeps at Cranford; but every man
cannot be a surgeon.  For keeping the trim gardens full of choice
flowers without a weed to speck them; for frightening away little boys
who look wistfully at the said flowers through the railings; for rushing
out at the geese that occasionally venture in to the gardens if the
gates are left open; for deciding all questions of literature and
politics without troubling themselves with unnecessary reasons or
arguments; for obtaining clear and correct knowledge of everybody’s
affairs in the parish; for keeping their neat maid-servants in admirable
order; for kindness (somewhat dictatorial) to the poor, and real tender
good offices to each other whenever they are in distress, the ladies of
Cranford are quite sufficient.  “A man,” as one of them observed to me
once, “is _so_ in the way in the house!”  Although the ladies of
Cranford know all each other’s proceedings, they are exceedingly
indifferent to each other’s opinions. Indeed, as each has her own
individuality, not to say eccentricity, pretty strongly developed,
nothing is so easy as verbal retaliation; but, somehow, good-will
reigns among them to a considerable degree.

The Cranford ladies have only an occasional little quarrel, spirited out
in a few peppery words and angry jerks of the head; just enough to
prevent the even tenor of their lives from becoming too flat.  Their
dress is very independent of fashion; as they observe, “What does it
signify how we dress here at Cranford, where everybody knows us?”  And
if they go from home, their reason is equally cogent, “What does it
signify how we dress here, where nobody knows us?”  The materials of
their clothes are, in general, good and plain, and most of them are
nearly as scrupulous as Miss Tyler, of cleanly memory; but I will
answer for it, the last gigot, the last tight and scanty petticoat in
wear in England, was seen in Cranford—and seen without a smile.

            [Picture: A magnificent family red silk umbrella]

I can testify to a magnificent family red silk umbrella, under which a
gentle little spinster, left alone of many brothers and sisters, used to
patter to church on rainy days.  Have you any red silk umbrellas in
London?  We had a tradition of the first that had ever been seen in
Cranford; and the little boys mobbed it, and called it “a stick in
petticoats.”  It might have been the very red silk one I have described,
held by a strong father over a troop of little ones; the poor little
lady—the survivor of all—could scarcely carry it.

Then there were rules and regulations for visiting and calls; and they
were announced to any young people who might be staying in the town,
with all the solemnity with which the old Manx laws were read once a
year on the Tinwald Mount.

“Our friends have sent to inquire how you are after your journey
to-night, my dear” (fifteen miles in a gentleman’s carriage); “they will
give you some rest to-morrow, but the next day, I have no doubt, they
will call; so be at liberty after twelve—from twelve to three are our
calling hours.”

Then, after they had called—

“It is the third day; I dare say your mamma has told you, my dear, never
to let more than three days elapse between receiving a call and
returning it; and also, that you are never to stay longer than a quarter
of an hour.”

“But am I to look at my watch?  How am I to find out when a quarter of
an hour has passed?”

“You must keep thinking about the time, my dear, and not allow yourself
to forget it in conversation.”

As everybody had this rule in their minds, whether they received or paid
a call, of course no absorbing subject was ever spoken about.  We kept
ourselves to short sentences of small talk, and were punctual to our
time.

I imagine that a few of the gentlefolks of Cranford were poor, and had
some difficulty in making both ends meet; but they were like the
Spartans, and concealed their smart under a smiling face.  We none of us
spoke of money, because that subject savoured of commerce and trade, and
though some might be poor, we were all aristocratic.  The Cranfordians
had that kindly _esprit de corps_ which made them overlook all
deficiencies in success when some among them tried to conceal their
poverty.  When Mrs Forrester, for instance, gave a party in her
baby-house of a dwelling, and the little maiden disturbed the ladies on
the sofa by a request that she might get the tea-tray out from
underneath, everyone took this novel proceeding as the most natural
thing in the world, and talked on about household forms and ceremonies
as if we all believed that our hostess had a regular servants’ hall,
second table, with housekeeper and steward, instead of the one little
charity-school maiden, whose short ruddy arms could never have been
strong enough to carry the tray upstairs, if she had not been assisted
in private by her mistress, who now sat in state, pretending not to know
what cakes were sent up, though she knew, and we knew, and she knew that
we knew, and we knew that she knew that we knew, she had been busy all
the morning making tea-bread and sponge-cakes.

There were one or two consequences arising from this general but
unacknowledged poverty, and this very much acknowledged gentility, which
were not amiss, and which might be introduced into many circles of
society to their great improvement.  For instance, the inhabitants of
Cranford kept early hours, and clattered home in their pattens, under
the guidance of a lantern-bearer, about nine o’clock at night; and the
whole town was abed and asleep by half-past ten.  Moreover, it was
considered “vulgar” (a tremendous word in Cranford) to give anything
expensive, in the way of eatable or drinkable, at the evening
entertainments.  Wafer bread-and-butter and sponge-biscuits were all
that the Honourable Mrs Jamieson gave; and she was sister-in-law to the
late Earl of Glenmire, although she did practise such “elegant economy.”

“Elegant economy!”  How naturally one falls back into the phraseology of
Cranford!  There, economy was always “elegant,” and money-spending
always “vulgar and ostentatious”; a sort of sour-grapeism which made us
very peaceful and satisfied.  I never shall forget the dismay felt when
a certain Captain Brown came to live at Cranford, and openly spoke about
his being poor—not in a whisper to an intimate friend, the doors and
windows being previously closed, but in the public street! in a loud
military voice! alleging his poverty as a reason for not taking a
particular house.  The ladies of Cranford were already rather moaning
over the invasion of their territories by a man and a gentleman.  He was
a half-pay captain, and had obtained some situation on a neighbouring
railroad, which had been vehemently petitioned against by the little
town; and if, in addition to his masculine gender, and his connection
with the obnoxious railroad, he was so brazen as to talk of being
poor—why, then, indeed, he must be sent to Coventry.  Death was as true
and as common as poverty; yet people never spoke about that, loud out in
the streets.  It was a word not to be mentioned to ears polite.  We had
tacitly agreed to ignore that any with whom we associated on terms of
visiting equality could ever be prevented by poverty from doing anything
that they wished.  If we walked to or from a party, it was because the
night was _so_ fine, or the air _so_ refreshing, not because
sedan-chairs were expensive.  If we wore prints, instead of summer
silks, it was because we preferred a washing material; and so on, till
we blinded ourselves to the vulgar fact that we were, all of us, people
of very moderate means.  Of course, then, we did not know what to make
of a man who could speak of poverty as if it was not a disgrace.  Yet,
somehow, Captain Brown made himself respected in Cranford, and was
called upon, in spite of all resolutions to the contrary.  I was
surprised to hear his opinions quoted as authority at a visit which I
paid to Cranford about a year after he had settled in the town.  My own
friends had been among the bitterest opponents of any proposal to visit
the Captain and his daughters, only twelve months before; and now he was
even admitted in the tabooed hours before twelve.  True, it was to
discover the cause of a smoking chimney, before the fire was lighted;
but still Captain Brown walked upstairs, nothing daunted, spoke in a
voice too large for the room, and joked quite in the way of a tame man
about the house.  He had been blind to all the small slights, and
omissions of trivial ceremonies, with which he had been received.  He
had been friendly, though the Cranford ladies had been cool; he had
answered small sarcastic compliments in good faith; and with his manly
frankness had overpowered all the shrinking which met him as a man who
was not ashamed to be poor. And, at last, his excellent masculine common
sense, and his facility in devising expedients to overcome domestic
dilemmas, had gained him an extraordinary place as authority among the
Cranford ladies.  He himself went on in his course, as unaware of his
popularity as he had been of the reverse; and I am sure he was startled
one day when he found his advice so highly esteemed as to make some
counsel which he had given in jest to be taken in sober, serious
earnest.

It was on this subject: An old lady had an Alderney cow, which she
looked upon as a daughter.  You could not pay the short quarter of an
hour call without being told of the wonderful milk or wonderful
intelligence of this animal.  The whole town knew and kindly regarded
Miss Betsy Barker’s Alderney; therefore great was the sympathy and
regret when, in an unguarded moment, the poor cow tumbled into a
lime-pit.  She moaned so loudly that she was soon heard and rescued; but
meanwhile the poor beast had lost most of her hair, and came out looking
naked, cold, and miserable, in a bare skin.  Everybody pitied the
animal, though a few could not restrain their smiles at her droll
appearance.  Miss Betsy Barker absolutely cried with sorrow and dismay;
and it was said she thought of trying a bath of oil.  This remedy,
perhaps, was recommended by some one of the number whose advice she
asked; but the proposal, if ever it was made, was knocked on the head by
Captain Brown’s decided “Get her a flannel waistcoat and flannel
drawers, ma’am, if you wish to keep her alive.  But my advice is, kill
the poor creature at once.”

Miss Betsy Barker dried her eyes, and thanked the Captain heartily; she
set to work, and by-and-by all the town turned out to see the Alderney
meekly going to her pasture, clad in dark grey flannel.  I have watched
her myself many a time.  Do you ever see cows dressed in grey flannel in
London?

                  [Picture: Meekly going to her pasture]

Captain Brown had taken a small house on the outskirts of the town,
where he lived with his two daughters.  He must have been upwards of
sixty at the time of the first visit I paid to Cranford after I had left
it as a residence.  But he had a wiry, well-trained, elastic figure, a
stiff military throw-back of his head, and a springing step, which made
him appear much younger than he was.  His eldest daughter looked almost
as old as himself, and betrayed the fact that his real was more than his
apparent age.  Miss Brown must have been forty; she had a sickly,
pained, careworn expression on her face, and looked as if the gaiety of
youth had long faded out of sight.  Even when young she must have been
plain and hard-featured.  Miss Jessie Brown was ten years younger than
her sister, and twenty shades prettier.  Her face was round and dimpled.
 Miss Jenkyns once said, in a passion against Captain Brown (the cause
of which I will tell you presently), “that she thought it was time for
Miss Jessie to leave off her dimples, and not always to be trying to
look like a child.”  It was true there was something childlike in her
face; and there will be, I think, till she dies, though she should live
to a hundred. Her eyes were large blue wondering eyes, looking straight
at you; her nose was unformed and snub, and her lips were red and dewy;
she wore her hair, too, in little rows of curls, which heightened this
appearance.  I do not know whether she was pretty or not; but I liked
her face, and so did everybody, and I do not think she could help her
dimples.  She had something of her father’s jauntiness of gait and
manner; and any female observer might detect a slight difference in the
attire of the two sisters—that of Miss Jessie being about two pounds per
annum more expensive than Miss Brown’s.  Two pounds was a large sum in
Captain Brown’s annual disbursements.

Such was the impression made upon me by the Brown family when I first
saw them all together in Cranford Church.  The Captain I had met
before—on the occasion of the smoky chimney, which he had cured by some
simple alteration in the flue.  In church, he held his double eye-glass
to his eyes during the Morning Hymn, and then lifted up his head erect
and sang out loud and joyfully.  He made the responses louder than the
clerk—an old man with a piping feeble voice, who, I think, felt
aggrieved at the Captain’s sonorous bass, and quivered higher and higher
in consequence.

On coming out of church, the brisk Captain paid the most gallant
attention to his two daughters.  He nodded and smiled to his
acquaintances; but he shook hands with none until he had helped Miss
Brown to unfurl her umbrella, had relieved her of her prayer-book, and
had waited patiently till she, with trembling nervous hands, had taken
up her gown to walk through the wet roads.

I wonder what the Cranford ladies did with Captain Brown at their
parties.  We had often rejoiced, in former days, that there was no
gentleman to be attended to, and to find conversation for, at the
card-parties.  We had congratulated ourselves upon the snugness of the
evenings; and, in our love for gentility, and distaste of mankind, we
had almost persuaded ourselves that to be a man was to be “vulgar”; so
that when I found my friend and hostess, Miss Jenkyns, was going to have
a party in my honour, and that Captain and the Miss Browns were invited,
I wondered much what would be the course of the evening.  Card-tables,
with green baize tops, were set out by daylight, just as usual; it was
the third week in November, so the evenings closed in about four.
Candles, and clean packs of cards, were arranged on each table.  The
fire was made up; the neat maid-servant had received her last
directions; and there we stood, dressed in our best, each with a
candle-lighter in our hands, ready to dart at the candles as soon as the
first knock came.  Parties in Cranford were solemn festivities, making
the ladies feel gravely elated as they sat together in their best
dresses.  As soon as three had arrived, we sat down to “Preference,” I
being the unlucky fourth.  The next four comers were put down
immediately to another table; and presently the tea-trays, which I had
seen set out in the store-room as I passed in the morning, were placed
each on the middle of a card-table. The china was delicate egg-shell;
the old-fashioned silver glittered with polishing; but the eatables were
of the slightest description.  While the trays were yet on the tables,
Captain and the Miss Browns came in; and I could see that, somehow or
other, the Captain was a favourite with all the ladies present.  Ruffled
brows were smoothed, sharp voices lowered at his approach.  Miss Brown
looked ill, and depressed almost to gloom. Miss Jessie smiled as usual,
and seemed nearly as popular as her father. He immediately and quietly
assumed the man’s place in the room; attended to every one’s wants,
lessened the pretty maid-servant’s labour by waiting on empty cups and
bread-and-butterless ladies; and yet did it all in so easy and dignified
a manner, and so much as if it were a matter of course for the strong to
attend to the weak, that he was a true man throughout.  He played for
threepenny points with as grave an interest as if they had been pounds;
and yet, in all his attention to strangers, he had an eye on his
suffering daughter—for suffering I was sure she was, though to many eyes
she might only appear to be irritable.  Miss Jessie could not play
cards: but she talked to the sitters-out, who, before her coming, had
been rather inclined to be cross.  She sang, too, to an old cracked
piano, which I think had been a spinet in its youth.  Miss Jessie sang,
“Jock of Hazeldean” a little out of tune; but we were none of us
musical, though Miss Jenkyns beat time, out of time, by way of appearing
to be so.

It was very good of Miss Jenkyns to do this; for I had seen that, a
little before, she had been a good deal annoyed by Miss Jessie Brown’s
unguarded admission (_à propos_ of Shetland wool) that she had an uncle,
her mother’s brother, who was a shopkeeper in Edinburgh.  Miss Jenkyns
tried to drown this confession by a terrible cough—for the Honourable
Mrs Jamieson was sitting at a card-table nearest Miss Jessie, and what
would she say or think if she found out she was in the same room with a
shop-keeper’s niece!  But Miss Jessie Brown (who had no tact, as we all
agreed the next morning) _would_ repeat the information, and assure Miss
Pole she could easily get her the identical Shetland wool required,
“through my uncle, who has the best assortment of Shetland goods of any
one in Edinbro’.”  It was to take the taste of this out of our mouths,
and the sound of this out of our ears, that Miss Jenkyns proposed music;
so I say again, it was very good of her to beat time to the song.

When the trays re-appeared with biscuits and wine, punctually at a
quarter to nine, there was conversation, comparing of cards, and talking
over tricks; but by-and-by Captain Brown sported a bit of literature.

“Have you seen any numbers of ‘The Pickwick Papers’?” said he.  (They
were then publishing in parts.)  “Capital thing!”

Now Miss Jenkyns was daughter of a deceased rector of Cranford; and, on
the strength of a number of manuscript sermons, and a pretty good
library of divinity, considered herself literary, and looked upon any
conversation about books as a challenge to her.  So she answered and
said, “Yes, she had seen them; indeed, she might say she had read them.”

“And what do you think of them?” exclaimed Captain Brown.  “Aren’t they
famously good?”

So urged Miss Jenkyns could not but speak.

“I must say, I don’t think they are by any means equal to Dr Johnson.
Still, perhaps, the author is young.  Let him persevere, and who knows
what he may become if he will take the great Doctor for his model?”
This was evidently too much for Captain Brown to take placidly; and I
saw the words on the tip of his tongue before Miss Jenkyns had finished
her sentence.

“It is quite a different sort of thing, my dear madam,” he began.

“I am quite aware of that,” returned she.  “And I make allowances,
Captain Brown.”

“Just allow me to read you a scene out of this month’s number,” pleaded
he.  “I had it only this morning, and I don’t think the company can have
read it yet.”

“As you please,” said she, settling herself with an air of resignation.
He read the account of the “swarry” which Sam Weller gave at Bath.  Some
of us laughed heartily.  _I_ did not dare, because I was staying in the
house.  Miss Jenkyns sat in patient gravity.  When it was ended, she
turned to me, and said with mild dignity—

“Fetch me ‘Rasselas,’ my dear, out of the book-room.”

When I had brought it to her, she turned to Captain Brown—

“Now allow _me_ to read you a scene, and then the present company can
judge between your favourite, Mr Boz, and Dr Johnson.”

She read one of the conversations between Rasselas and Imlac, in a
high-pitched, majestic voice: and when she had ended, she said, “I
imagine I am now justified in my preference of Dr Johnson as a writer of
fiction.”  The Captain screwed his lips up, and drummed on the table,
but he did not speak.  She thought she would give him a finishing blow
or two.

         [Picture: Endeavouring to beguile her into conversation]

“I consider it vulgar, and below the dignity of literature, to publish
in numbers.”

“How was the _Rambler_ published, ma’am?” asked Captain Brown in a low
voice, which I think Miss Jenkyns could not have heard.

“Dr Johnson’s style is a model for young beginners.  My father
recommended it to me when I began to write letters—I have formed my own
style upon it; I recommended it to your favourite.”

“I should be very sorry for him to exchange his style for any such
pompous writing,” said Captain Brown.

Miss Jenkyns felt this as a personal affront, in a way of which the
Captain had not dreamed.  Epistolary writing she and her friends
considered as her _forte_.  Many a copy of many a letter have I seen
written and corrected on the slate, before she “seized the half-hour
just previous to post-time to assure” her friends of this or of that;
and Dr Johnson was, as she said, her model in these compositions.  She
drew herself up with dignity, and only replied to Captain Brown’s last
remark by saying, with marked emphasis on every syllable, “I prefer Dr
Johnson to Mr Boz.”

It is said—I won’t vouch for the fact—that Captain Brown was heard to
say, _sotto voce_, “D-n Dr Johnson!”  If he did, he was penitent
afterwards, as he showed by going to stand near Miss Jenkyns’ arm-chair,
and endeavouring to beguile her into conversation on some more pleasing
subject.  But she was inexorable.  The next day she made the remark I
have mentioned about Miss Jessie’s dimples.




CHAPTER II.
THE CAPTAIN


IT was impossible to live a month at Cranford and not know the daily
habits of each resident; and long before my visit was ended I knew much
concerning the whole Brown trio.  There was nothing new to be discovered
respecting their poverty; for they had spoken simply and openly about
that from the very first.  They made no mystery of the necessity for
their being economical.  All that remained to be discovered was the
Captain’s infinite kindness of heart, and the various modes in which,
unconsciously to himself, he manifested it.  Some little anecdotes were
talked about for some time after they occurred.  As we did not read
much, and as all the ladies were pretty well suited with servants, there
was a dearth of subjects for conversation.  We therefore discussed the
circumstance of the Captain taking a poor old woman’s dinner out of her
hands one very slippery Sunday.  He had met her returning from the
bakehouse as he came from church, and noticed her precarious footing;
and, with the grave dignity with which he did everything, he relieved
her of her burden, and steered along the street by her side, carrying
her baked mutton and potatoes safely home.  This was thought very
eccentric; and it was rather expected that he would pay a round of
calls, on the Monday morning, to explain and apologise to the Cranford
sense of propriety: but he did no such thing: and then it was decided
that he was ashamed, and was keeping out of sight.  In a kindly pity for
him, we began to say, “After all, the Sunday morning’s occurrence showed
great goodness of heart,” and it was resolved that he should be
comforted on his next appearance amongst us; but, lo! he came down upon
us, untouched by any sense of shame, speaking loud and bass as ever, his
head thrown back, his wig as jaunty and well-curled as usual, and we
were obliged to conclude he had forgotten all about Sunday.

Miss Pole and Miss Jessie Brown had set up a kind of intimacy on the
strength of the Shetland wool and the new knitting stitches; so it
happened that when I went to visit Miss Pole I saw more of the Browns
than I had done while staying with Miss Jenkyns, who had never got over
what she called Captain Brown’s disparaging remarks upon Dr Johnson as a
writer of light and agreeable fiction.  I found that Miss Brown was
seriously ill of some lingering, incurable complaint, the pain
occasioned by which gave the uneasy expression to her face that I had
taken for unmitigated crossness.  Cross, too, she was at times, when the
nervous irritability occasioned by her disease became past endurance.
Miss Jessie bore with her at these times, even more patiently than she
did with the bitter self-upbraidings by which they were invariably
succeeded. Miss Brown used to accuse herself, not merely of hasty and
irritable temper, but also of being the cause why her father and sister
were obliged to pinch, in order to allow her the small luxuries which
were necessaries in her condition.  She would so fain have made
sacrifices for them, and have lightened their cares, that the original
generosity of her disposition added acerbity to her temper.  All this
was borne by Miss Jessie and her father with more than placidity—with
absolute tenderness. I forgave Miss Jessie her singing out of tune, and
her juvenility of dress, when I saw her at home.  I came to perceive
that Captain Brown’s dark Brutus wig and padded coat (alas! too often
threadbare) were remnants of the military smartness of his youth, which
he now wore unconsciously.  He was a man of infinite resources, gained
in his barrack experience.  As he confessed, no one could black his
boots to please him except himself; but, indeed, he was not above saving
the little maid-servant’s labours in every way—knowing, most likely,
that his daughter’s illness made the place a hard one.

He endeavoured to make peace with Miss Jenkyns soon after the memorable
dispute I have named, by a present of a wooden fire-shovel (his own
making), having heard her say how much the grating of an iron one
annoyed her.  She received the present with cool gratitude, and thanked
him formally.  When he was gone, she bade me put it away in the
lumber-room; feeling, probably, that no present from a man who preferred
Mr Boz to Dr Johnson could be less jarring than an iron fire-shovel.

Such was the state of things when I left Cranford and went to Drumble.
I had, however, several correspondents, who kept me _au fait_ as to the
proceedings of the dear little town.  There was Miss Pole, who was
becoming as much absorbed in crochet as she had been once in knitting,
and the burden of whose letter was something like, “But don’t you forget
the white worsted at Flint’s” of the old song; for at the end of every
sentence of news came a fresh direction as to some crochet commission
which I was to execute for her.  Miss Matilda Jenkyns (who did not mind
being called Miss Matty, when Miss Jenkyns was not by) wrote nice, kind,
rambling letters, now and then venturing into an opinion of her own; but
suddenly pulling herself up, and either begging me not to name what she
had said, as Deborah thought differently, and _she_ knew, or else
putting in a postscript to the effect that, since writing the above, she
had been talking over the subject with Deborah, and was quite convinced
that, etc.—(here probably followed a recantation of every opinion she
had given in the letter).  Then came Miss Jenkyns—Deborah, as she liked
Miss Matty to call her, her father having once said that the Hebrew name
ought to be so pronounced.  I secretly think she took the Hebrew
prophetess for a model in character; and, indeed, she was not unlike the
stern prophetess in some ways, making allowance, of course, for modern
customs and difference in dress.  Miss Jenkyns wore a cravat, and a
little bonnet like a jockey-cap, and altogether had the appearance of a
strong-minded woman; although she would have despised the modern idea of
women being equal to men.  Equal, indeed! she knew they were superior.
But to return to her letters.  Everything in them was stately and grand
like herself. I have been looking them over (dear Miss Jenkyns, how I
honoured her!) and I will give an extract, more especially because it
relates to our friend Captain Brown:—

“The Honourable Mrs Jamieson has only just quitted me; and, in the
course of conversation, she communicated to me the intelligence that she
had yesterday received a call from her revered husband’s quondam friend,
Lord Mauleverer.  You will not easily conjecture what brought his
lordship within the precincts of our little town.  It was to see Captain
Brown, with whom, it appears, his lordship was acquainted in the ‘plumed
wars,’ and who had the privilege of averting destruction from his
lordship’s head when some great peril was impending over it, off the
misnomered Cape of Good Hope.  You know our friend the Honourable Mrs
Jamieson’s deficiency in the spirit of innocent curiosity, and you will
therefore not be so much surprised when I tell you she was quite unable
to disclose to me the exact nature of the peril in question.  I was
anxious, I confess, to ascertain in what manner Captain Brown, with his
limited establishment, could receive so distinguished a guest; and I
discovered that his lordship retired to rest, and, let us hope, to
refreshing slumbers, at the Angel Hotel; but shared the Brunonian meals
during the two days that he honoured Cranford with his august presence.
Mrs Johnson, our civil butcher’s wife, informs me that Miss Jessie
purchased a leg of lamb; but, besides this, I can hear of no preparation
whatever to give a suitable reception to so distinguished a visitor.
Perhaps they entertained him with ‘the feast of reason and the flow of
soul’; and to us, who are acquainted with Captain Brown’s sad want of
relish for ‘the pure wells of English undefiled,’ it may be matter for
congratulation that he has had the opportunity of improving his taste by
holding converse with an elegant and refined member of the British
aristocracy. But from some mundane failings who is altogether free?”

Miss Pole and Miss Matty wrote to me by the same post.  Such a piece of
news as Lord Mauleverer’s visit was not to be lost on the Cranford
letter-writers: they made the most of it.  Miss Matty humbly apologised
for writing at the same time as her sister, who was so much more capable
than she to describe the honour done to Cranford; but in spite of a
little bad spelling, Miss Matty’s account gave me the best idea of the
commotion occasioned by his lordship’s visit, after it had occurred;
for, except the people at the Angel, the Browns, Mrs Jamieson, and a
little lad his lordship had sworn at for driving a dirty hoop against
the aristocratic legs, I could not hear of any one with whom his
lordship had held conversation.

My next visit to Cranford was in the summer.  There had been neither
births, deaths, nor marriages since I was there last.  Everybody lived
in the same house, and wore pretty nearly the same well-preserved,
old-fashioned clothes.  The greatest event was, that Miss Jenkyns had
purchased a new carpet for the drawing-room.  Oh, the busy work Miss
Matty and I had in chasing the sunbeams, as they fell in an afternoon
right down on this carpet through the blindless window!  We spread
newspapers over the places and sat down to our book or our work; and,
lo! in a quarter of an hour the sun had moved, and was blazing away on a
fresh spot; and down again we went on our knees to alter the position of
the newspapers.  We were very busy, too, one whole morning, before Miss
Jenkyns gave her party, in following her directions, and in cutting out
and stitching together pieces of newspaper so as to form little paths to
every chair set for the expected visitors, lest their shoes might dirty
or defile the purity of the carpet.  Do you make paper paths for every
guest to walk upon in London?

Captain Brown and Miss Jenkyns were not very cordial to each other.  The
literary dispute, of which I had seen the beginning, was a “raw,” the
slightest touch on which made them wince.  It was the only difference of
opinion they had ever had; but that difference was enough.  Miss Jenkyns
could not refrain from talking at Captain Brown; and, though he did not
reply, he drummed with his fingers, which action she felt and resented
as very disparaging to Dr Johnson.  He was rather ostentatious in his
preference of the writings of Mr Boz; would walk through the streets so
absorbed in them that he all but ran against Miss Jenkyns; and though
his apologies were earnest and sincere, and though he did not, in fact,
do more than startle her and himself, she owned to me she had rather he
had knocked her down, if he had only been reading a higher style of
literature.  The poor, brave Captain! he looked older, and more worn,
and his clothes were very threadbare.  But he seemed as bright and
cheerful as ever, unless he was asked about his daughter’s health.

“She suffers a great deal, and she must suffer more: we do what we can
to alleviate her pain;—God’s will be done!”  He took off his hat at
these last words.  I found, from Miss Matty, that everything had been
done, in fact.  A medical man, of high repute in that country
neighbourhood, had been sent for, and every injunction he had given was
attended to, regardless of expense.  Miss Matty was sure they denied
themselves many things in order to make the invalid comfortable; but
they never spoke about it; and as for Miss Jessie!—“I really think she’s
an angel,” said poor Miss Matty, quite overcome.  “To see her way of
bearing with Miss Brown’s crossness, and the bright face she puts on
after she’s been sitting up a whole night and scolded above half of it,
is quite beautiful.  Yet she looks as neat and as ready to welcome the
Captain at breakfast-time as if she had been asleep in the Queen’s bed
all night. My dear! you could never laugh at her prim little curls or
her pink bows again if you saw her as I have done.”  I could only feel
very penitent, and greet Miss Jessie with double respect when I met her
next.  She looked faded and pinched; and her lips began to quiver, as if
she was very weak, when she spoke of her sister.  But she brightened,
and sent back the tears that were glittering in her pretty eyes, as she
said—

“But, to be sure, what a town Cranford is for kindness!  I don’t suppose
any one has a better dinner than usual cooked but the best part of all
comes in a little covered basin for my sister.  The poor people will
leave their earliest vegetables at our door for her.  They speak short
and gruff, as if they were ashamed of it: but I am sure it often goes to
my heart to see their thoughtfulness.”  The tears now came back and
overflowed; but after a minute or two she began to scold herself, and
ended by going away the same cheerful Miss Jessie as ever.

“But why does not this Lord Mauleverer do something for the man who
saved his life?” said I.

“Why, you see, unless Captain Brown has some reason for it, he never
speaks about being poor; and he walked along by his lordship looking as
happy and cheerful as a prince; and as they never called attention to
their dinner by apologies, and as Miss Brown was better that day, and
all seemed bright, I daresay his lordship never knew how much care there
was in the background.  He did send game in the winter pretty often, but
now he is gone abroad.”

I had often occasion to notice the use that was made of fragments and
small opportunities in Cranford; the rose-leaves that were gathered ere
they fell to make into a potpourri for someone who had no garden; the
little bundles of lavender flowers sent to strew the drawers of some
town-dweller, or to burn in the chamber of some invalid.  Things that
many would despise, and actions which it seemed scarcely worth while to
perform, were all attended to in Cranford.  Miss Jenkyns stuck an apple
full of cloves, to be heated and smell pleasantly in Miss Brown’s room;
and as she put in each clove she uttered a Johnsonian sentence.  Indeed,
she never could think of the Browns without talking Johnson; and, as
they were seldom absent from her thoughts just then, I heard many a
rolling, three-piled sentence.

Captain Brown called one day to thank Miss Jenkyns for many little
kindnesses, which I did not know until then that she had rendered.  He
had suddenly become like an old man; his deep bass voice had a quavering
in it, his eyes looked dim, and the lines on his face were deep.  He did
not—could not—speak cheerfully of his daughter’s state, but he talked
with manly, pious resignation, and not much.  Twice over he said, “What
Jessie has been to us, God only knows!” and after the second time, he
got up hastily, shook hands all round without speaking, and left the
room.

That afternoon we perceived little groups in the street, all listening
with faces aghast to some tale or other.  Miss Jenkyns wondered what
could be the matter for some time before she took the undignified step
of sending Jenny out to inquire.

Jenny came back with a white face of terror.  “Oh, ma’am!  Oh, Miss
Jenkyns, ma’am!  Captain Brown is killed by them nasty cruel railroads!”
and she burst into tears.  She, along with many others, had experienced
the poor Captain’s kindness.

“How?—where—where?  Good God!  Jenny, don’t waste time in crying, but
tell us something.”  Miss Matty rushed out into the street at once, and
collared the man who was telling the tale.

 [Picture: She brought the affrighted carter ... into the
drawing-room]

“Come in—come to my sister at once, Miss Jenkyns, the rector’s daughter.
Oh, man, man! say it is not true,” she cried, as she brought the
affrighted carter, sleeking down his hair, into the drawing-room, where
he stood with his wet boots on the new carpet, and no one regarded it.

“Please, mum, it is true.  I seed it myself,” and he shuddered at the
recollection.  “The Captain was a-reading some new book as he was deep
in, a-waiting for the down train; and there was a little lass as wanted
to come to its mammy, and gave its sister the slip, and came toddling
across the line.  And he looked up sudden, at the sound of the train
coming, and seed the child, and he darted on the line and cotched it up,
and his foot slipped, and the train came over him in no time.  O Lord,
Lord!  Mum, it’s quite true, and they’ve come over to tell his
daughters. The child’s safe, though, with only a bang on its shoulder as
he threw it to its mammy.  Poor Captain would be glad of that, mum,
wouldn’t he?  God bless him!”  The great rough carter puckered up his
manly face, and turned away to hide his tears.  I turned to Miss
Jenkyns.  She looked very ill, as if she were going to faint, and signed
to me to open the window.

“Matilda, bring me my bonnet.  I must go to those girls.  God pardon me,
if ever I have spoken contemptuously to the Captain!”

Miss Jenkyns arrayed herself to go out, telling Miss Matilda to give the
man a glass of wine.  While she was away, Miss Matty and I huddled over
the fire, talking in a low and awestruck voice.  I know we cried quietly
all the time.

Miss Jenkyns came home in a silent mood, and we durst not ask her many
questions.  She told us that Miss Jessie had fainted, and that she and
Miss Pole had had some difficulty in bringing her round; but that, as
soon as she recovered, she begged one of them to go and sit with her
sister.

“Mr Hoggins says she cannot live many days, and she shall be spared this
shock,” said Miss Jessie, shivering with feelings to which she dared not
give way.

“But how can you manage, my dear?” asked Miss Jenkyns; “you cannot bear
up, she must see your tears.”

“God will help me—I will not give way—she was asleep when the news came;
she may be asleep yet.  She would be so utterly miserable, not merely at
my father’s death, but to think of what would become of me; she is so
good to me.”  She looked up earnestly in their faces with her soft true
eyes, and Miss Pole told Miss Jenkyns afterwards she could hardly bear
it, knowing, as she did, how Miss Brown treated her sister.

However, it was settled according to Miss Jessie’s wish.  Miss Brown was
to be told her father had been summoned to take a short journey on
railway business.  They had managed it in some way—Miss Jenkyns could
not exactly say how.  Miss Pole was to stop with Miss Jessie.  Mrs
Jamieson had sent to inquire.  And this was all we heard that night; and
a sorrowful night it was.  The next day a full account of the fatal
accident was in the county paper which Miss Jenkyns took in.  Her eyes
were very weak, she said, and she asked me to read it.  When I came to
the “gallant gentleman was deeply engaged in the perusal of a number of
‘Pickwick,’ which he had just received,” Miss Jenkyns shook her head
long and solemnly, and then sighed out, “Poor, dear, infatuated man!”

The corpse was to be taken from the station to the parish church, there
to be interred.  Miss Jessie had set her heart on following it to the
grave; and no dissuasives could alter her resolve.  Her restraint upon
herself made her almost obstinate; she resisted all Miss Pole’s
entreaties and Miss Jenkyns’ advice.  At last Miss Jenkyns gave up the
point; and after a silence, which I feared portended some deep
displeasure against Miss Jessie, Miss Jenkyns said she should accompany
the latter to the funeral.

“It is not fit for you to go alone.  It would be against both propriety
and humanity were I to allow it.”

Miss Jessie seemed as if she did not half like this arrangement; but her
obstinacy, if she had any, had been exhausted in her determination to go
to the interment.  She longed, poor thing, I have no doubt, to cry alone
over the grave of the dear father to whom she had been all in all, and
to give way, for one little half-hour, uninterrupted by sympathy and
unobserved by friendship.  But it was not to be.  That afternoon Miss
Jenkyns sent out for a yard of black crape, and employed herself busily
in trimming the little black silk bonnet I have spoken about.  When it
was finished she put it on, and looked at us for approbation—admiration
she despised.  I was full of sorrow, but, by one of those whimsical
thoughts which come unbidden into our heads, in times of deepest grief,
I no sooner saw the bonnet than I was reminded of a helmet; and in that
hybrid bonnet, half helmet, half jockey-cap, did Miss Jenkyns attend
Captain Brown’s funeral, and, I believe, supported Miss Jessie with a
tender, indulgent firmness which was invaluable, allowing her to weep
her passionate fill before they left.

Miss Pole, Miss Matty, and I, meanwhile attended to Miss Brown: and hard
work we found it to relieve her querulous and never-ending complaints.
But if we were so weary and dispirited, what must Miss Jessie have been!
Yet she came back almost calm as if she had gained a new strength.  She
put off her mourning dress, and came in, looking pale and gentle,
thanking us each with a soft long pressure of the hand.  She could even
smile—a faint, sweet, wintry smile—as if to reassure us of her power to
endure; but her look made our eyes fill suddenly with tears, more than
if she had cried outright.

It was settled that Miss Pole was to remain with her all the watching
livelong night; and that Miss Matty and I were to return in the morning
to relieve them, and give Miss Jessie the opportunity for a few hours of
sleep.  But when the morning came, Miss Jenkyns appeared at the
breakfast-table, equipped in her helmet-bonnet, and ordered Miss Matty
to stay at home, as she meant to go and help to nurse.  She was
evidently in a state of great friendly excitement, which she showed by
eating her breakfast standing, and scolding the household all round.

No nursing—no energetic strong-minded woman could help Miss Brown now.
There was that in the room as we entered which was stronger than us all,
and made us shrink into solemn awestruck helplessness.  Miss Brown was
dying.  We hardly knew her voice, it was so devoid of the complaining
tone we had always associated with it.  Miss Jessie told me afterwards
that it, and her face too, were just what they had been formerly, when
her mother’s death left her the young anxious head of the family, of
whom only Miss Jessie survived.

She was conscious of her sister’s presence, though not, I think, of
ours. We stood a little behind the curtain: Miss Jessie knelt with her
face near her sister’s, in order to catch the last soft awful whispers.

“Oh, Jessie!  Jessie!  How selfish I have been!  God forgive me for
letting you sacrifice yourself for me as you did!  I have so loved
you—and yet I have thought only of myself.  God forgive me!”

“Hush, love! hush!” said Miss Jessie, sobbing.

“And my father, my dear, dear father!  I will not complain now, if God
will give me strength to be patient.  But, oh, Jessie! tell my father
how I longed and yearned to see him at last, and to ask his forgiveness.
 He can never know now how I loved him—oh! if I might but tell him,
before I die!  What a life of sorrow his has been, and I have done so
little to cheer him!”

A light came into Miss Jessie’s face.  “Would it comfort you, dearest,
to think that he does know?—would it comfort you, love, to know that his
cares, his sorrows”—Her voice quivered, but she steadied it into
calmness—“Mary! he has gone before you to the place where the weary are
at rest.  He knows now how you loved him.”

A strange look, which was not distress, came over Miss Brown’s face.
She did not speak for some time, but then we saw her lips form the
words, rather than heard the sound—“Father, mother, Harry, Archy;”—then,
as if it were a new idea throwing a filmy shadow over her darkened
mind—“But you will be alone, Jessie!”

Miss Jessie had been feeling this all during the silence, I think; for
the tears rolled down her cheeks like rain, at these words, and she
could not answer at first.  Then she put her hands together tight, and
lifted them up, and said—but not to us—“Though He slay me, yet will I
trust in Him.”

In a few moments more Miss Brown lay calm and still—never to sorrow or
murmur more.

After this second funeral, Miss Jenkyns insisted that Miss Jessie should
come to stay with her rather than go back to the desolate house, which,
in fact, we learned from Miss Jessie, must now be given up, as she had
not wherewithal to maintain it.  She had something above twenty pounds a
year, besides the interest of the money for which the furniture would
sell; but she could not live upon that: and so we talked over her
qualifications for earning money.

“I can sew neatly,” said she, “and I like nursing.  I think, too, I
could manage a house, if any one would try me as housekeeper; or I would
go into a shop as saleswoman, if they would have patience with me at
first.”

Miss Jenkyns declared, in an angry voice, that she should do no such
thing; and talked to herself about “some people having no idea of their
rank as a captain’s daughter,” nearly an hour afterwards, when she
brought Miss Jessie up a basin of delicately-made arrowroot, and stood
over her like a dragoon until the last spoonful was finished: then she
disappeared.  Miss Jessie began to tell me some more of the plans which
had suggested themselves to her, and insensibly fell into talking of the
days that were past and gone, and interested me so much I neither knew
nor heeded how time passed.  We were both startled when Miss Jenkyns
reappeared, and caught us crying.  I was afraid lest she would be
displeased, as she often said that crying hindered digestion, and I knew
she wanted Miss Jessie to get strong; but, instead, she looked queer and
excited, and fidgeted round us without saying anything.  At last she
spoke.

“I have been so much startled—no, I’ve not been at all startled—don’t
mind me, my dear Miss Jessie—I’ve been very much surprised—in fact, I’ve
had a caller, whom you knew once, my dear Miss Jessie”—

Miss Jessie went very white, then flushed scarlet, and looked eagerly at
Miss Jenkyns.

“A gentleman, my dear, who wants to know if you would see him.”

“Is it?—it is not”—stammered out Miss Jessie—and got no farther.

“This is his card,” said Miss Jenkyns, giving it to Miss Jessie; and
while her head was bent over it, Miss Jenkyns went through a series of
winks and odd faces to me, and formed her lips into a long sentence, of
which, of course, I could not understand a word.

“May he come up?” asked Miss Jenkyns at last.

“Oh, yes! certainly!” said Miss Jessie, as much as to say, this is your
house, you may show any visitor where you like.  She took up some
knitting of Miss Matty’s and began to be very busy, though I could see
how she trembled all over.

Miss Jenkyns rang the bell, and told the servant who answered it to show
Major Gordon upstairs; and, presently, in walked a tall, fine,
frank-looking man of forty or upwards.  He shook hands with Miss Jessie;
but he could not see her eyes, she kept them so fixed on the ground.
Miss Jenkyns asked me if I would come and help her to tie up the
preserves in the store-room; and though Miss Jessie plucked at my gown,
and even looked up at me with begging eye, I durst not refuse to go
where Miss Jenkyns asked.  Instead of tying up preserves in the
store-room, however, we went to talk in the dining-room; and there Miss
Jenkyns told me what Major Gordon had told her; how he had served in the
same regiment with Captain Brown, and had become acquainted with Miss
Jessie, then a sweet-looking, blooming girl of eighteen; how the
acquaintance had grown into love on his part, though it had been some
years before he had spoken; how, on becoming possessed, through the will
of an uncle, of a good estate in Scotland, he had offered and been
refused, though with so much agitation and evident distress that he was
sure she was not indifferent to him; and how he had discovered that the
obstacle was the fell disease which was, even then, too surely
threatening her sister. She had mentioned that the surgeons foretold
intense suffering; and there was no one but herself to nurse her poor
Mary, or cheer and comfort her father during the time of illness.  They
had had long discussions; and on her refusal to pledge herself to him as
his wife when all should be over, he had grown angry, and broken off
entirely, and gone abroad, believing that she was a cold-hearted person
whom he would do well to forget.  He had been travelling in the East,
and was on his return home when, at Rome, he saw the account of Captain
Brown’s death in _Galignani_.

Just then Miss Matty, who had been out all the morning, and had only
lately returned to the house, burst in with a face of dismay and
outraged propriety.

“Oh, goodness me!” she said.  “Deborah, there’s a gentleman sitting in
the drawing-room with his arm round Miss Jessie’s waist!”  Miss Matty’s
eyes looked large with terror.

          [Picture: “With his arm around Miss Jessie’s waist!”]

Miss Jenkyns snubbed her down in an instant.

“The most proper place in the world for his arm to be in.  Go away,
Matilda, and mind your own business.”  This from her sister, who had
hitherto been a model of feminine decorum, was a blow for poor Miss
Matty, and with a double shock she left the room.

The last time I ever saw poor Miss Jenkyns was many years after this.
Mrs Gordon had kept up a warm and affectionate intercourse with all at
Cranford.  Miss Jenkyns, Miss Matty, and Miss Pole had all been to visit
her, and returned with wonderful accounts of her house, her husband, her
dress, and her looks.  For, with happiness, something of her early bloom
returned; she had been a year or two younger than we had taken her for.
Her eyes were always lovely, and, as Mrs Gordon, her dimples were not
out of place.  At the time to which I have referred, when I last saw
Miss Jenkyns, that lady was old and feeble, and had lost something of
her strong mind.  Little Flora Gordon was staying with the Misses
Jenkyns, and when I came in she was reading aloud to Miss Jenkyns, who
lay feeble and changed on the sofa.  Flora put down the _Rambler_ when I
came in.

“Ah!” said Miss Jenkyns, “you find me changed, my dear.  I can’t see as
I used to do.  If Flora were not here to read to me, I hardly know how I
should get through the day.  Did you ever read the _Rambler_?  It’s a
wonderful book—wonderful! and the most improving reading for Flora”
(which I daresay it would have been, if she could have read half the
words without spelling, and could have understood the meaning of a
third), “better than that strange old book, with the queer name, poor
Captain Brown was killed for reading—that book by Mr Boz, you know—‘Old
Poz’; when I was a girl—but that’s a long time ago—I acted Lucy in ‘Old
Poz.’”  She babbled on long enough for Flora to get a good long spell at
the “Christmas Carol,” which Miss Matty had left on the table.




CHAPTER III.
A LOVE AFFAIR OF LONG AGO


I THOUGHT that probably my connection with Cranford would cease after
Miss Jenkyns’s death; at least, that it would have to be kept up by
correspondence, which bears much the same relation to personal
intercourse that the books of dried plants I sometimes see (“Hortus
Siccus,” I think they call the thing) do to the living and fresh flowers
in the lanes and meadows.  I was pleasantly surprised, therefore, by
receiving a letter from Miss Pole (who had always come in for a
supplementary week after my annual visit to Miss Jenkyns) proposing that
I should go and stay with her; and then, in a couple of days after my
acceptance, came a note from Miss Matty, in which, in a rather
circuitous and very humble manner, she told me how much pleasure I
should confer if I could spend a week or two with her, either before or
after I had been at Miss Pole’s; “for,” she said, “since my dear
sister’s death I am well aware I have no attractions to offer; it is
only to the kindness of my friends that I can owe their company.”

Of course I promised to come to dear Miss Matty as soon as I had ended
my visit to Miss Pole; and the day after my arrival at Cranford I went
to see her, much wondering what the house would be like without Miss
Jenkyns, and rather dreading the changed aspect of things.  Miss Matty
began to cry as soon as she saw me.  She was evidently nervous from
having anticipated my call.  I comforted her as well as I could; and I
found the best consolation I could give was the honest praise that came
from my heart as I spoke of the deceased.  Miss Matty slowly shook her
head over each virtue as it was named and attributed to her sister; and
at last she could not restrain the tears which had long been silently
flowing, but hid her face behind her handkerchief and sobbed aloud.

“Dear Miss Matty,” said I, taking her hand—for indeed I did not know in
what way to tell her how sorry I was for her, left deserted in the
world. She put down her handkerchief and said—

“My dear, I’d rather you did not call me Matty.  She did not like it;
but I did many a thing she did not like, I’m afraid—and now she’s gone!
If you please, my love, will you call me Matilda?”

I promised faithfully, and began to practise the new name with Miss Pole
that very day; and, by degrees, Miss Matilda’s feeling on the subject
was known through Cranford, and we all tried to drop the more familiar
name, but with so little success that by-and-by we gave up the attempt.

My visit to Miss Pole was very quiet.  Miss Jenkyns had so long taken
the lead in Cranford that now she was gone, they hardly knew how to give
a party.  The Honourable Mrs Jamieson, to whom Miss Jenkyns herself had
always yielded the post of honour, was fat and inert, and very much at
the mercy of her old servants.  If they chose that she should give a
party, they reminded her of the necessity for so doing: if not, she let
it alone.  There was all the more time for me to hear old-world stories
from Miss Pole, while she sat knitting, and I making my father’s shirts.
I always took a quantity of plain sewing to Cranford; for, as we did not
read much, or walk much, I found it a capital time to get through my
work.  One of Miss Pole’s stories related to a shadow of a love affair
that was dimly perceived or suspected long years before.

Presently, the time arrived when I was to remove to Miss Matilda’s
house. I found her timid and anxious about the arrangements for my
comfort. Many a time, while I was unpacking, did she come backwards and
forwards to stir the fire which burned all the worse for being so
frequently poked.

“Have you drawers enough, dear?” asked she.  “I don’t know exactly how
my sister used to arrange them.  She had capital methods.  I am sure she
would have trained a servant in a week to make a better fire than this,
and Fanny has been with me four months.”

This subject of servants was a standing grievance, and I could not
wonder much at it; for if gentlemen were scarce, and almost unheard of
in the “genteel society” of Cranford, they or their
counterparts—handsome young men—abounded in the lower classes.  The
pretty neat servant-maids had their choice of desirable “followers”; and
their mistresses, without having the sort of mysterious dread of men and
matrimony that Miss Matilda had, might well feel a little anxious lest
the heads of their comely maids should be turned by the joiner, or the
butcher, or the gardener, who were obliged, by their callings, to come
to the house, and who, as ill-luck would have it, were generally
handsome and unmarried. Fanny’s lovers, if she had any—and Miss Matilda
suspected her of so many flirtations that, if she had not been very
pretty, I should have doubted her having one—were a constant anxiety to
her mistress.  She was forbidden, by the articles of her engagement, to
have “followers”; and though she had answered, innocently enough,
doubling up the hem of her apron as she spoke, “Please, ma’am, I never
had more than one at a time,” Miss Matty prohibited that one.  But a
vision of a man seemed to haunt the kitchen.  Fanny assured me that it
was all fancy, or else I should have said myself that I had seen a man’s
coat-tails whisk into the scullery once, when I went on an errand into
the store-room at night; and another evening, when, our watches having
stopped, I went to look at the clock, there was a very odd appearance,
singularly like a young man squeezed up between the clock and the back
of the open kitchen door: and I thought Fanny snatched up the candle
very hastily, so as to throw the shadow on the clock face, while she
very positively told me the time half-an-hour too early, as we found out
afterwards by the church clock. But I did not add to Miss Matty’s
anxieties by naming my suspicions, especially as Fanny said to me, the
next day, that it was such a queer kitchen for having odd shadows about
it, she really was almost afraid to stay; “for you know, miss,” she
added, “I don’t see a creature from six o’clock tea, till Missus rings
the bell for prayers at ten.”

However, it so fell out that Fanny had to leave and Miss Matilda begged
me to stay and “settle her” with the new maid; to which I consented,
after I had heard from my father that he did not want me at home.  The
new servant was a rough, honest-looking, country girl, who had only
lived in a farm place before; but I liked her looks when she came to be
hired; and I promised Miss Matilda to put her in the ways of the house.
The said ways were religiously such as Miss Matilda thought her sister
would approve.  Many a domestic rule and regulation had been a subject
of plaintive whispered murmur to me during Miss Jenkyns’s life; but now
that she was gone, I do not think that even I, who was a favourite,
durst have suggested an alteration.  To give an instance: we constantly
adhered to the forms which were observed, at meal-times, in “my father,
the rector’s house.”  Accordingly, we had always wine and dessert; but
the decanters were only filled when there was a party, and what remained
was seldom touched, though we had two wine-glasses apiece every day
after dinner, until the next festive occasion arrived, when the state of
the remainder wine was examined into in a family council.  The dregs
were often given to the poor: but occasionally, when a good deal had
been left at the last party (five months ago, it might be), it was added
to some of a fresh bottle, brought up from the cellar.  I fancy poor
Captain Brown did not much like wine, for I noticed he never finished
his first glass, and most military men take several.  Then, as to our
dessert, Miss Jenkyns used to gather currants and gooseberries for it
herself, which I sometimes thought would have tasted better fresh from
the trees; but then, as Miss Jenkyns observed, there would have been
nothing for dessert in summer-time.  As it was, we felt very genteel
with our two glasses apiece, and a dish of gooseberries at the top, of
currants and biscuits at the sides, and two decanters at the bottom.
When oranges came in, a curious proceeding was gone through.  Miss
Jenkyns did not like to cut the fruit; for, as she observed, the juice
all ran out nobody knew where; sucking (only I think she used some more
recondite word) was in fact the only way of enjoying oranges; but then
there was the unpleasant association with a ceremony frequently gone
through by little babies; and so, after dessert, in orange season, Miss
Jenkyns and Miss Matty used to rise up, possess themselves each of an
orange in silence, and withdraw to the privacy of their own rooms to
indulge in sucking oranges.

I had once or twice tried, on such occasions, to prevail on Miss Matty
to stay, and had succeeded in her sister’s lifetime.  I held up a
screen, and did not look, and, as she said, she tried not to make the
noise very offensive; but now that she was left alone, she seemed quite
horrified when I begged her to remain with me in the warm
dining-parlour, and enjoy her orange as she liked best.  And so it was
in everything.  Miss Jenkyns’s rules were made more stringent than ever,
because the framer of them was gone where there could be no appeal.  In
all things else Miss Matilda was meek and undecided to a fault.  I have
heard Fanny turn her round twenty times in a morning about dinner, just
as the little hussy chose; and I sometimes fancied she worked on Miss
Matilda’s weakness in order to bewilder her, and to make her feel more
in the power of her clever servant.  I determined that I would not leave
her till I had seen what sort of a person Martha was; and, if I found
her trustworthy, I would tell her not to trouble her mistress with every
little decision.

Martha was blunt and plain-spoken to a fault; otherwise she was a brisk,
well-meaning, but very ignorant girl.  She had not been with us a week
before Miss Matilda and I were astounded one morning by the receipt of a
letter from a cousin of hers, who had been twenty or thirty years in
India, and who had lately, as we had seen by the “Army List,” returned
to England, bringing with him an invalid wife who had never been
introduced to her English relations.  Major Jenkyns wrote to propose
that he and his wife should spend a night at Cranford, on his way to
Scotland—at the inn, if it did not suit Miss Matilda to receive them
into her house; in which case they should hope to be with her as much as
possible during the day. Of course it _must_ suit her, as she said; for
all Cranford knew that she had her sister’s bedroom at liberty; but I am
sure she wished the Major had stopped in India and forgotten his cousins
out and out.

“Oh! how must I manage?” asked she helplessly.  “If Deborah had been
alive she would have known what to do with a gentleman-visitor.  Must I
put razors in his dressing-room?  Dear! dear! and I’ve got none.
Deborah would have had them.  And slippers, and coat-brushes?”  I
suggested that probably he would bring all these things with him.  “And
after dinner, how am I to know when to get up and leave him to his wine?
 Deborah would have done it so well; she would have been quite in her
element.  Will he want coffee, do you think?”  I undertook the
management of the coffee, and told her I would instruct Martha in the
art of waiting—in which it must be owned she was terribly deficient—and
that I had no doubt Major and Mrs Jenkyns would understand the quiet
mode in which a lady lived by herself in a country town.  But she was
sadly fluttered.  I made her empty her decanters and bring up two fresh
bottles of wine.  I wished I could have prevented her from being present
at my instructions to Martha, for she frequently cut in with some fresh
direction, muddling the poor girl’s mind as she stood open-mouthed,
listening to us both.

“Hand the vegetables round,” said I (foolishly, I see now—for it was
aiming at more than we could accomplish with quietness and simplicity);
and then, seeing her look bewildered, I added, “take the vegetables
round to people, and let them help themselves.”

“And mind you go first to the ladies,” put in Miss Matilda.  “Always go
to the ladies before gentlemen when you are waiting.”

“I’ll do it as you tell me, ma’am,” said Martha; “but I like lads best.”

We felt very uncomfortable and shocked at this speech of Martha’s, yet I
don’t think she meant any harm; and, on the whole, she attended very
well to our directions, except that she “nudged” the Major when he did
not help himself as soon as she expected to the potatoes, while she was
handing them round.

The major and his wife were quiet unpretending people enough when they
did come; languid, as all East Indians are, I suppose.  We were rather
dismayed at their bringing two servants with them, a Hindoo body-servant
for the Major, and a steady elderly maid for his wife; but they slept at
the inn, and took off a good deal of the responsibility by attending
carefully to their master’s and mistress’s comfort.  Martha, to be sure,
had never ended her staring at the East Indian’s white turban and brown
complexion, and I saw that Miss Matilda shrunk away from him a little as
he waited at dinner.  Indeed, she asked me, when they were gone, if he
did not remind me of Blue Beard?  On the whole, the visit was most
satisfactory, and is a subject of conversation even now with Miss
Matilda; at the time it greatly excited Cranford, and even stirred up
the apathetic and Honourable Mrs Jamieson to some expression of
interest, when I went to call and thank her for the kind answers she had
vouchsafed to Miss Matilda’s inquiries as to the arrangement of a
gentleman’s dressing-room—answers which I must confess she had given in
the wearied manner of the Scandinavian prophetess—

                       “Leave me, leave me to repose.”

And _now_ I come to the love affair.

It seems that Miss Pole had a cousin, once or twice removed, who had
offered to Miss Matty long ago.  Now this cousin lived four or five
miles from Cranford on his own estate; but his property was not large
enough to entitle him to rank higher than a yeoman; or rather, with
something of the “pride which apes humility,” he had refused to push
himself on, as so many of his class had done, into the ranks of the
squires.  He would not allow himself to be called Thomas Holbrook,
_Esq._; he even sent back letters with this address, telling the
post-mistress at Cranford that his name was _Mr_ Thomas Holbrook,
yeoman.  He rejected all domestic innovations; he would have the house
door stand open in summer and shut in winter, without knocker or bell to
summon a servant.  The closed fist or the knob of a stick did this
office for him if he found the door locked.  He despised every
refinement which had not its root deep down in humanity.  If people were
not ill, he saw no necessity for moderating his voice.  He spoke the
dialect of the country in perfection, and constantly used it in
conversation; although Miss Pole (who gave me these particulars) added,
that he read aloud more beautifully and with more feeling than any one
she had ever heard, except the late rector.

“And how came Miss Matilda not to marry him?” asked I.

“Oh, I don’t know.  She was willing enough, I think; but you know Cousin
Thomas would not have been enough of a gentleman for the rector and Miss
Jenkyns.”

“Well! but they were not to marry him,” said I, impatiently.

“No; but they did not like Miss Matty to marry below her rank.  You know
she was the rector’s daughter, and somehow they are related to Sir Peter
Arley: Miss Jenkyns thought a deal of that.”

“Poor Miss Matty!” said I.

“Nay, now, I don’t know anything more than that he offered and was
refused.  Miss Matty might not like him—and Miss Jenkyns might never
have said a word—it is only a guess of mine.”

“Has she never seen him since?” I inquired.

“No, I think not.  You see Woodley, Cousin Thomas’s house, lies half-way
between Cranford and Misselton; and I know he made Misselton his
market-town very soon after he had offered to Miss Matty; and I don’t
think he has been into Cranford above once or twice since—once, when I
was walking with Miss Matty, in High Street, and suddenly she darted
from me, and went up Shire Lane.  A few minutes after I was startled by
meeting Cousin Thomas.”

“How old is he?” I asked, after a pause of castle-building.

“He must be about seventy, I think, my dear,” said Miss Pole, blowing up
my castle, as if by gun-powder, into small fragments.

Very soon after—at least during my long visit to Miss Matilda—I had the
opportunity of seeing Mr Holbrook; seeing, too, his first encounter with
his former love, after thirty or forty years’ separation.  I was helping
to decide whether any of the new assortment of coloured silks which they
had just received at the shop would do to match a grey and black
mousseline-delaine that wanted a new breadth, when a tall, thin, Don
Quixote-looking old man came into the shop for some woollen gloves.  I
had never seen the person (who was rather striking) before, and I
watched him rather attentively while Miss Matty listened to the shopman.
 The stranger wore a blue coat with brass buttons, drab breeches, and
gaiters, and drummed with his fingers on the counter until he was
attended to. When he answered the shop-boy’s question, “What can I have
the pleasure of showing you to-day, sir?” I saw Miss Matilda start, and
then suddenly sit down; and instantly I guessed who it was.  She had
made some inquiry which had to be carried round to the other shopman.

“Miss Jenkyns wants the black sarsenet two-and-twopence the yard”; and
Mr Holbrook had caught the name, and was across the shop in two strides.

“Matty—Miss Matilda—Miss Jenkyns!  God bless my soul!  I should not have
known you.  How are you? how are you?”  He kept shaking her hand in a
way which proved the warmth of his friendship; but he repeated so often,
as if to himself, “I should not have known you!” that any sentimental
romance which I might be inclined to build was quite done away with by
his manner.

However, he kept talking to us all the time we were in the shop; and
then waving the shopman with the unpurchased gloves on one side, with
“Another time, sir! another time!” he walked home with us.  I am happy
to say my client, Miss Matilda, also left the shop in an equally
bewildered state, not having purchased either green or red silk.  Mr
Holbrook was evidently full with honest loud-spoken joy at meeting his
old love again; he touched on the changes that had taken place; he even
spoke of Miss Jenkyns as “Your poor sister!  Well, well! we have all our
faults”; and bade us good-bye with many a hope that he should soon see
Miss Matty again.  She went straight to her room, and never came back
till our early tea-time, when I thought she looked as if she had been
crying.

              [Picture: Mr Holbrook ... bade us good-bye]




CHAPTER IV.
A VISIT TO AN OLD BACHELOR


A FEW days after, a note came from Mr Holbrook, asking us—impartially
asking both of us—in a formal, old-fashioned style, to spend a day at
his house—a long June day—for it was June now.  He named that he had
also invited his cousin, Miss Pole; so that we might join in a fly,
which could be put up at his house.

I expected Miss Matty to jump at this invitation; but, no!  Miss Pole
and I had the greatest difficulty in persuading her to go.  She thought
it was improper; and was even half annoyed when we utterly ignored the
idea of any impropriety in her going with two other ladies to see her
old lover.  Then came a more serious difficulty.  She did not think
Deborah would have liked her to go.  This took us half a day’s good hard
talking to get over; but, at the first sentence of relenting, I seized
the opportunity, and wrote and despatched an acceptance in her
name—fixing day and hour, that all might be decided and done with.

The next morning she asked me if I would go down to the shop with her;
and there, after much hesitation, we chose out three caps to be sent
home and tried on, that the most becoming might be selected to take with
us on Thursday.

She was in a state of silent agitation all the way to Woodley.  She had
evidently never been there before; and, although she little dreamt I
knew anything of her early story, I could perceive she was in a tremor
at the thought of seeing the place which might have been her home, and
round which it is probable that many of her innocent girlish
imaginations had clustered.  It was a long drive there, through paved
jolting lanes.  Miss Matilda sat bolt upright, and looked wistfully out
of the windows as we drew near the end of our journey.  The aspect of
the country was quiet and pastoral.  Woodley stood among fields; and
there was an old-fashioned garden where roses and currant-bushes touched
each other, and where the feathery asparagus formed a pretty background
to the pinks and gilly-flowers; there was no drive up to the door.  We
got out at a little gate, and walked up a straight box-edged path.

“My cousin might make a drive, I think,” said Miss Pole, who was afraid
of ear-ache, and had only her cap on.

“I think it is very pretty,” said Miss Matty, with a soft plaintiveness
in her voice, and almost in a whisper, for just then Mr Holbrook
appeared at the door, rubbing his hands in very effervescence of
hospitality.  He looked more like my idea of Don Quixote than ever, and
yet the likeness was only external.  His respectable housekeeper stood
modestly at the door to bid us welcome; and, while she led the elder
ladies upstairs to a bedroom, I begged to look about the garden.  My
request evidently pleased the old gentleman, who took me all round the
place and showed me his six-and-twenty cows, named after the different
letters of the alphabet. As we went along, he surprised me occasionally
by repeating apt and beautiful quotations from the poets, ranging easily
from Shakespeare and George Herbert to those of our own day.  He did
this as naturally as if he were thinking aloud, and their true and
beautiful words were the best expression he could find for what he was
thinking or feeling.  To be sure he called Byron “my Lord Byrron,” and
pronounced the name of Goethe strictly in accordance with the English
sound of the letters—“As Goethe says, ‘Ye ever-verdant palaces,’” &c.
Altogether, I never met with a man, before or since, who had spent so
long a life in a secluded and not impressive country, with
ever-increasing delight in the daily and yearly change of season and
beauty.

When he and I went in, we found that dinner was nearly ready in the
kitchen—for so I suppose the room ought to be called, as there were oak
dressers and cupboards all round, all over by the side of the fireplace,
and only a small Turkey carpet in the middle of the flag-floor.  The
room might have been easily made into a handsome dark oak dining-parlour
by removing the oven and a few other appurtenances of a kitchen, which
were evidently never used, the real cooking-place being at some
distance.  The room in which we were expected to sit was a
stiffly-furnished, ugly apartment; but that in which we did sit was what
Mr Holbrook called the counting-house, where he paid his labourers their
weekly wages at a great desk near the door.  The rest of the pretty
sitting-room—looking into the orchard, and all covered over with dancing
tree-shadows—was filled with books.  They lay on the ground, they
covered the walls, they strewed the table.  He was evidently half
ashamed and half proud of his extravagance in this respect.  They were
of all kinds—poetry and wild weird tales prevailing.  He evidently chose
his books in accordance with his own tastes, not because such and such
were classical or established favourites.

“Ah!” he said, “we farmers ought not to have much time for reading; yet
somehow one can’t help it.”

“What a pretty room!” said Miss Matty, _sotto voce_.

“What a pleasant place!” said I, aloud, almost simultaneously.

“Nay! if you like it,” replied he; “but can you sit on these great,
black leather, three-cornered chairs?  I like it better than the best
parlour; but I thought ladies would take that for the smarter place.”

It was the smarter place, but, like most smart things, not at all
pretty, or pleasant, or home-like; so, while we were at dinner, the
servant-girl dusted and scrubbed the counting-house chairs, and we sat
there all the rest of the day.

We had pudding before meat; and I thought Mr Holbrook was going to make
some apology for his old-fashioned ways, for he began—

“I don’t know whether you like newfangled ways.”

“Oh, not at all!” said Miss Matty.

“No more do I,” said he.  “My housekeeper _will_ have these in her new
fashion; or else I tell her that, when I was a young man, we used to
keep strictly to my father’s rule, ‘No broth, no ball; no ball, no
beef’; and always began dinner with broth.  Then we had suet puddings,
boiled in the broth with the beef: and then the meat itself.  If we did
not sup our broth, we had no ball, which we liked a deal better; and the
beef came last of all, and only those had it who had done justice to the
broth and the ball.  Now folks begin with sweet things, and turn their
dinners topsy-turvy.”

When the ducks and green peas came, we looked at each other in dismay;
we had only two-pronged, black-handled forks.  It is true the steel was
as bright as silver; but what were we to do?  Miss Matty picked up her
peas, one by one, on the point of the prongs, much as Aminé ate her
grains of rice after her previous feast with the Ghoul.  Miss Pole
sighed over her delicate young peas as she left them on one side of her
plate untasted, for they _would_ drop between the prongs.  I looked at
my host: the peas were going wholesale into his capacious mouth,
shovelled up by his large round-ended knife.  I saw, I imitated, I
survived!  My friends, in spite of my precedent, could not muster up
courage enough to do an ungenteel thing; and, if Mr Holbrook had not
been so heartily hungry, he would probably have seen that the good peas
went away almost untouched.

After dinner, a clay pipe was brought in, and a spittoon; and, asking us
to retire to another room, where he would soon join us, if we disliked
tobacco-smoke, he presented his pipe to Miss Matty, and requested her to
fill the bowl.  This was a compliment to a lady in his youth; but it was
rather inappropriate to propose it as an honour to Miss Matty, who had
been trained by her sister to hold smoking of every kind in utter
abhorrence.  But if it was a shock to her refinement, it was also a
gratification to her feelings to be thus selected; so she daintily
stuffed the strong tobacco into the pipe, and then we withdrew.

“It is very pleasant dining with a bachelor,” said Miss Matty softly, as
we settled ourselves in the counting-house.  “I only hope it is not
improper; so many pleasant things are!”

“What a number of books he has!” said Miss Pole, looking round the room.
“And how dusty they are!”

“I think it must be like one of the great Dr Johnson’s rooms,” said Miss
Matty.  “What a superior man your cousin must be!”

“Yes!” said Miss Pole, “he’s a great reader; but I am afraid he has got
into very uncouth habits with living alone.”

“Oh! uncouth is too hard a word.  I should call him eccentric; very
clever people always are!” replied Miss Matty.

            [Picture: Now, what colour are ash-buds in March]

When Mr Holbrook returned, he proposed a walk in the fields; but the two
elder ladies were afraid of damp, and dirt, and had only very unbecoming
calashes to put on over their caps; so they declined, and I was again
his companion in a turn which he said he was obliged to take to see
after his men.  He strode along, either wholly forgetting my existence,
or soothed into silence by his pipe—and yet it was not silence exactly.
He walked before me with a stooping gait, his hands clasped behind him;
and, as some tree or cloud, or glimpse of distant upland pastures,
struck him, he quoted poetry to himself, saying it out loud in a grand
sonorous voice, with just the emphasis that true feeling and
appreciation give.  We came upon an old cedar tree, which stood at one
end of the house—

    “The cedar spreads his dark-green layers of shade.”

“Capital term—‘layers!’  Wonderful man!”  I did not know whether he was
speaking to me or not; but I put in an assenting “wonderful,” although I
knew nothing about it, just because I was tired of being forgotten, and
of being consequently silent.

He turned sharp round.  “Ay! you may say ‘wonderful.’  Why, when I saw
the review of his poems in _Blackwood_, I set off within an hour, and
walked seven miles to Misselton (for the horses were not in the way) and
ordered them.  Now, what colour are ash-buds in March?”

Is the man going mad? thought I.  He is very like Don Quixote.

“What colour are they, I say?” repeated he vehemently.

“I am sure I don’t know, sir,” said I, with the meekness of ignorance.

“I knew you didn’t.  No more did I—an old fool that I am!—till this
young man comes and tells me.  Black as ash-buds in March.  And I’ve
lived all my life in the country; more shame for me not to know.  Black:
they are jet-black, madam.”  And he went off again, swinging along to
the music of some rhyme he had got hold of.

When we came back, nothing would serve him but he must read us the poems
he had been speaking of; and Miss Pole encouraged him in his proposal, I
thought, because she wished me to hear his beautiful reading, of which
she had boasted; but she afterwards said it was because she had got to a
difficult part of her crochet, and wanted to count her stitches without
having to talk.  Whatever he had proposed would have been right to Miss
Matty; although she did fall sound asleep within five minutes after he
had begun a long poem, called “Locksley Hall,” and had a comfortable
nap, unobserved, till he ended; when the cessation of his voice wakened
her up, and she said, feeling that something was expected, and that Miss
Pole was counting—

“What a pretty book!”

“Pretty, madam! it’s beautiful!  Pretty, indeed!”

“Oh yes!  I meant beautiful!” said she, fluttered at his disapproval of
her word.  “It is so like that beautiful poem of Dr Johnson’s my sister
used to read—I forget the name of it; what was it, my dear?” turning to
me.

“Which do you mean, ma’am?  What was it about?”

“I don’t remember what it was about, and I’ve quite forgotten what the
name of it was; but it was written by Dr Johnson, and was very
beautiful, and very like what Mr Holbrook has just been reading.”

“I don’t remember it,” said he reflectively.  “But I don’t know Dr
Johnson’s poems well.  I must read them.”

As we were getting into the fly to return, I heard Mr Holbrook say he
should call on the ladies soon, and inquire how they got home; and this
evidently pleased and fluttered Miss Matty at the time he said it; but
after we had lost sight of the old house among the trees her sentiments
towards the master of it were gradually absorbed into a distressing
wonder as to whether Martha had broken her word, and seized on the
opportunity of her mistress’s absence to have a “follower.”  Martha
looked good, and steady, and composed enough, as she came to help us
out; she was always careful of Miss Matty, and to-night she made use of
this unlucky speech—

“Eh! dear ma’am, to think of your going out in an evening in such a thin
shawl!  It’s no better than muslin.  At your age, ma’am, you should be
careful.”

“My age!” said Miss Matty, almost speaking crossly, for her, for she was
usually gentle—“My age!  Why, how old do you think I am, that you talk
about my age?”

“Well, ma’am, I should say you were not far short of sixty: but folks’
looks is often against them—and I’m sure I meant no harm.”

“Martha, I’m not yet fifty-two!” said Miss Matty, with grave emphasis;
for probably the remembrance of her youth had come very vividly before
her this day, and she was annoyed at finding that golden time so far
away in the past.

But she never spoke of any former and more intimate acquaintance with Mr
Holbrook.  She had probably met with so little sympathy in her early
love, that she had shut it up close in her heart; and it was only by a
sort of watching, which I could hardly avoid since Miss Pole’s
confidence, that I saw how faithful her poor heart had been in its
sorrow and its silence.

She gave me some good reason for wearing her best cap every day, and sat
near the window, in spite of her rheumatism, in order to see, without
being seen, down into the street.

He came.  He put his open palms upon his knees, which were far apart, as
he sat with his head bent down, whistling, after we had replied to his
inquiries about our safe return.  Suddenly he jumped up—

“Well, madam! have you any commands for Paris?  I am going there in a
week or two.”

“To Paris!” we both exclaimed.

“Yes, madam!  I’ve never been there, and always had a wish to go; and I
think if I don’t go soon, I mayn’t go at all; so as soon as the hay is
got in I shall go, before harvest time.”

We were so much astonished that we had no commissions.

Just as he was going out of the room, he turned back, with his favourite
exclamation—

“God bless my soul, madam! but I nearly forgot half my errand.  Here are
the poems for you you admired so much the other evening at my house.”
He tugged away at a parcel in his coat-pocket.  “Good-bye, miss,” said
he; “good-bye, Matty! take care of yourself.”  And he was gone.  But he
had given her a book, and he had called her Matty, just as he used to do
thirty years ago.

“I wish he would not go to Paris,” said Miss Matilda anxiously.  “I
don’t believe frogs will agree with him; he used to have to be very
careful what he ate, which was curious in so strong-looking a young
man.”

Soon after this I took my leave, giving many an injunction to Martha to
look after her mistress, and to let me know if she thought that Miss
Matilda was not so well; in which case I would volunteer a visit to my
old friend, without noticing Martha’s intelligence to her.

Accordingly I received a line or two from Martha every now and then;
and, about November I had a note to say her mistress was “very low and
sadly off her food”; and the account made me so uneasy that, although
Martha did not decidedly summon me, I packed up my things and went.

I received a warm welcome, in spite of the little flurry produced by my
impromptu visit, for I had only been able to give a day’s notice.  Miss
Matilda looked miserably ill; and I prepared to comfort and cosset her.

I went down to have a private talk with Martha.

“How long has your mistress been so poorly?” I asked, as I stood by the
kitchen fire.

“Well!  I think it’s better than a fortnight; it is, I know; it was one
Tuesday, after Miss Pole had been, that she went into this moping way.
I thought she was tired, and it would go off with a night’s rest; but
no! she has gone on and on ever since, till I thought it my duty to
write to you, ma’am.”

“You did quite right, Martha.  It is a comfort to think she has so
faithful a servant about her.  And I hope you find your place
comfortable?”

“Well, ma’am, missus is very kind, and there’s plenty to eat and drink,
and no more work but what I can do easily—but—” Martha hesitated.

“But what, Martha?”

“Why, it seems so hard of missus not to let me have any followers;
there’s such lots of young fellows in the town; and many a one has as
much as offered to keep company with me; and I may never be in such a
likely place again, and it’s like wasting an opportunity.  Many a girl
as I know would have ’em unbeknownst to missus; but I’ve given my word,
and I’ll stick to it; or else this is just the house for missus never to
be the wiser if they did come: and it’s such a capable kitchen—there’s
such dark corners in it—I’d be bound to hide any one.  I counted up last
Sunday night—for I’ll not deny I was crying because I had to shut the
door in Jem Hearn’s face, and he’s a steady young man, fit for any girl;
only I had given missus my word.”  Martha was all but crying again; and
I had little comfort to give her, for I knew, from old experience, of
the horror with which both the Miss Jenkynses looked upon “followers”;
and in Miss Matty’s present nervous state this dread was not likely to
be lessened.

I went to see Miss Pole the next day, and took her completely by
surprise, for she had not been to see Miss Matilda for two days.

“And now I must go back with you, my dear, for I promised to let her
know how Thomas Holbrook went on; and, I’m sorry to say, his housekeeper
has sent me word to-day that he hasn’t long to live.  Poor Thomas! that
journey to Paris was quite too much for him.  His housekeeper says he
has hardly ever been round his fields since, but just sits with his
hands on his knees in the counting-house, not reading or anything, but
only saying what a wonderful city Paris was!  Paris has much to answer
for if it’s killed my cousin Thomas, for a better man never lived.”

“Does Miss Matilda know of his illness?” asked I—a new light as to the
cause of her indisposition dawning upon me.

“Dear! to be sure, yes!  Has not she told you?  I let her know a
fortnight ago, or more, when first I heard of it.  How odd she shouldn’t
have told you!”

Not at all, I thought; but I did not say anything.  I felt almost guilty
of having spied too curiously into that tender heart, and I was not
going to speak of its secrets—hidden, Miss Matty believed, from all the
world. I ushered Miss Pole into Miss Matilda’s little drawing-room, and
then left them alone.  But I was not surprised when Martha came to my
bedroom door, to ask me to go down to dinner alone, for that missus had
one of her bad headaches.  She came into the drawing-room at tea-time,
but it was evidently an effort to her; and, as if to make up for some
reproachful feeling against her late sister, Miss Jenkyns, which had
been troubling her all the afternoon, and for which she now felt
penitent, she kept telling me how good and how clever Deborah was in her
youth; how she used to settle what gowns they were to wear at all the
parties (faint, ghostly ideas of grim parties, far away in the distance,
when Miss Matty and Miss Pole were young!); and how Deborah and her
mother had started the benefit society for the poor, and taught girls
cooking and plain sewing; and how Deborah had once danced with a lord;
and how she used to visit at Sir Peter Arley’s, and tried to remodel the
quiet rectory establishment on the plans of Arley Hall, where they kept
thirty servants; and how she had nursed Miss Matty through a long, long
illness, of which I had never heard before, but which I now dated in my
own mind as following the dismissal of the suit of Mr Holbrook.  So we
talked softly and quietly of old times through the long November
evening.

The next day Miss Pole brought us word that Mr Holbrook was dead.  Miss
Matty heard the news in silence; in fact, from the account of the
previous day, it was only what we had to expect.  Miss Pole kept calling
upon us for some expression of regret, by asking if it was not sad that
he was gone, and saying—

“To think of that pleasant day last June, when he seemed so well!  And
he might have lived this dozen years if he had not gone to that wicked
Paris, where they are always having revolutions.”

She paused for some demonstration on our part.  I saw Miss Matty could
not speak, she was trembling so nervously; so I said what I really felt;
and after a call of some duration—all the time of which I have no doubt
Miss Pole thought Miss Matty received the news very calmly—our visitor
took her leave.

Miss Matty made a strong effort to conceal her feelings—a concealment
she practised even with me, for she has never alluded to Mr Holbrook
again, although the book he gave her lies with her Bible on the little
table by her bedside.  She did not think I heard her when she asked the
little milliner of Cranford to make her caps something like the
Honourable Mrs Jamieson’s, or that I noticed the reply—

“But she wears widows’ caps, ma’am?”

“Oh!  I only meant something in that style; not widows’, of course, but
rather like Mrs Jamieson’s.”

This effort at concealment was the beginning of the tremulous motion of
head and hands which I have seen ever since in Miss Matty.

The evening of the day on which we heard of Mr Holbrook’s death, Miss
Matilda was very silent and thoughtful; after prayers she called Martha
back and then she stood uncertain what to say.

“Martha!” she said, at last, “you are young”—and then she made so long a
pause that Martha, to remind her of her half-finished sentence, dropped
a curtsey, and said—

“Yes, please, ma’am; two-and-twenty last third of October, please,
ma’am.”

“And, perhaps, Martha, you may some time meet with a young man you like,
and who likes you.  I did say you were not to have followers; but if
you meet with such a young man, and tell me, and I find he is
respectable, I have no objection to his coming to see you once a week.
God forbid!” said she in a low voice, “that I should grieve any young
hearts.”  She spoke as if she were providing for some distant
contingency, and was rather startled when Martha made her ready eager
answer—

“Please, ma’am, there’s Jem Hearn, and he’s a joiner making
three-and-sixpence a-day, and six foot one in his stocking-feet, please,
ma’am; and if you’ll ask about him to-morrow morning, every one will
give him a character for steadiness; and he’ll be glad enough to come
to-morrow night, I’ll be bound.”

Though Miss Matty was startled, she submitted to Fate and Love.




CHAPTER V.
OLD LETTERS


I HAVE often noticed that almost every one has his own individual small
economies—careful habits of saving fractions of pennies in some one
peculiar direction—any disturbance of which annoys him more than
spending shillings or pounds on some real extravagance.  An old
gentleman of my acquaintance, who took the intelligence of the failure
of a Joint-Stock Bank, in which some of his money was invested, with
stoical mildness, worried his family all through a long summer’s day
because one of them had torn (instead of cutting) out the written leaves
of his now useless bank-book; of course, the corresponding pages at the
other end came out as well, and this little unnecessary waste of paper
(his private economy) chafed him more than all the loss of his money.
Envelopes fretted his soul terribly when they first came in; the only
way in which he could reconcile himself to such waste of his cherished
article was by patiently turning inside out all that were sent to him,
and so making them serve again.  Even now, though tamed by age, I see
him casting wistful glances at his daughters when they send a whole
inside of a half-sheet of note paper, with the three lines of acceptance
to an invitation, written on only one of the sides.  I am not above
owning that I have this human weakness myself.  String is my foible.  My
pockets get full of little hanks of it, picked up and twisted together,
ready for uses that never come.  I am seriously annoyed if any one cuts
the string of a parcel instead of patiently and faithfully undoing it
fold by fold.  How people can bring themselves to use india-rubber
rings, which are a sort of deification of string, as lightly as they do,
I cannot imagine.  To me an india-rubber ring is a precious treasure.  I
have one which is not new—one that I picked up off the floor nearly six
years ago.  I have really tried to use it, but my heart failed me, and I
could not commit the extravagance.

Small pieces of butter grieve others.  They cannot attend to
conversation because of the annoyance occasioned by the habit which some
people have of invariably taking more butter than they want.  Have you
not seen the anxious look (almost mesmeric) which such persons fix on
the article? They would feel it a relief if they might bury it out of
their sight by popping it into their own mouths and swallowing it down;
and they are really made happy if the person on whose plate it lies
unused suddenly breaks off a piece of toast (which he does not want at
all) and eats up his butter.  They think that this is not waste.

Now Miss Matty Jenkyns was chary of candles.  We had many devices to use
as few as possible.  In the winter afternoons she would sit knitting for
two or three hours—she could do this in the dark, or by firelight—and
when I asked if I might not ring for candles to finish stitching my
wristbands, she told me to “keep blind man’s holiday.”  They were
usually brought in with tea; but we only burnt one at a time.  As we
lived in constant preparation for a friend who might come in any evening
(but who never did), it required some contrivance to keep our two
candles of the same length, ready to be lighted, and to look as if we
burnt two always. The candles took it in turns; and, whatever we might
be talking about or doing, Miss Matty’s eyes were habitually fixed upon
the candle, ready to jump up and extinguish it and to light the other
before they had become too uneven in length to be restored to equality
in the course of the evening.

One night, I remember this candle economy particularly annoyed me.  I
had been very much tired of my compulsory “blind man’s holiday,”
especially as Miss Matty had fallen asleep, and I did not like to stir
the fire and run the risk of awakening her; so I could not even sit on
the rug, and scorch myself with sewing by firelight, according to my
usual custom.  I fancied Miss Matty must be dreaming of her early life;
for she spoke one or two words in her uneasy sleep bearing reference to
persons who were dead long before.  When Martha brought in the lighted
candle and tea, Miss Matty started into wakefulness, with a strange,
bewildered look around, as if we were not the people she expected to see
about her. There was a little sad expression that shadowed her face as
she recognised me; but immediately afterwards she tried to give me her
usual smile.  All through tea-time her talk ran upon the days of her
childhood and youth.  Perhaps this reminded her of the desirableness of
looking over all the old family letters, and destroying such as ought
not to be allowed to fall into the hands of strangers; for she had often
spoken of the necessity of this task, but had always shrunk from it,
with a timid dread of something painful.  To-night, however, she rose up
after tea and went for them—in the dark; for she piqued herself on the
precise neatness of all her chamber arrangements, and used to look
uneasily at me when I lighted a bed-candle to go to another room for
anything.  When she returned there was a faint, pleasant smell of
Tonquin beans in the room. I had always noticed this scent about any of
the things which had belonged to her mother; and many of the letters
were addressed to her—yellow bundles of love-letters, sixty or seventy
years old.

Miss Matty undid the packet with a sigh; but she stifled it directly, as
if it were hardly right to regret the flight of time, or of life either.
We agreed to look them over separately, each taking a different letter
out of the same bundle and describing its contents to the other before
destroying it.  I never knew what sad work the reading of old letters
was before that evening, though I could hardly tell why.  The letters
were as happy as letters could be—at least those early letters were.
There was in them a vivid and intense sense of the present time, which
seemed so strong and full, as if it could never pass away, and as if the
warm, living hearts that so expressed themselves could never die, and be
as nothing to the sunny earth.  I should have felt less melancholy, I
believe, if the letters had been more so.  I saw the tears stealing down
the well-worn furrows of Miss Matty’s cheeks, and her spectacles often
wanted wiping.  I trusted at last that she would light the other candle,
for my own eyes were rather dim, and I wanted more light to see the
pale, faded ink; but no, even through her tears, she saw and remembered
her little economical ways.

The earliest set of letters were two bundles tied together, and ticketed
(in Miss Jenkyns’s handwriting) “Letters interchanged between my
ever-honoured father and my dearly-beloved mother, prior to their
marriage, in July 1774.”  I should guess that the rector of Cranford was
about twenty-seven years of age when he wrote those letters; and Miss
Matty told me that her mother was just eighteen at the time of her
wedding.  With my idea of the rector derived from a picture in the
dining-parlour, stiff and stately, in a huge full-bottomed wig, with
gown, cassock, and bands, and his hand upon a copy of the only sermon he
ever published—it was strange to read these letters.  They were full of
eager, passionate ardour; short homely sentences, right fresh from the
heart (very different from the grand Latinised, Johnsonian style of the
printed sermon preached before some judge at assize time).  His letters
were a curious contrast to those of his girl-bride.  She was evidently
rather annoyed at his demands upon her for expressions of love, and
could not quite understand what he meant by repeating the same thing
over in so many different ways; but what she was quite clear about was a
longing for a white “Paduasoy”—whatever that might be; and six or seven
letters were principally occupied in asking her lover to use his
influence with her parents (who evidently kept her in good order) to
obtain this or that article of dress, more especially the white
“Paduasoy.”  He cared nothing how she was dressed; she was always lovely
enough for him, as he took pains to assure her, when she begged him to
express in his answers a predilection for particular pieces of finery,
in order that she might show what he said to her parents.  But at length
he seemed to find out that she would not be married till she had a
“trousseau” to her mind; and then he sent her a letter, which had
evidently accompanied a whole box full of finery, and in which he
requested that she might be dressed in everything her heart desired.
This was the first letter, ticketed in a frail, delicate hand, “From my
dearest John.”  Shortly afterwards they were married, I suppose, from
the intermission in their correspondence.

“We must burn them, I think,” said Miss Matty, looking doubtfully at me.
“No one will care for them when I am gone.”  And one by one she dropped
them into the middle of the fire, watching each blaze up, die out, and
rise away, in faint, white, ghostly semblance, up the chimney, before
she gave another to the same fate.  The room was light enough now; but
I, like her, was fascinated into watching the destruction of those
letters, into which the honest warmth of a manly heart had been poured
forth.

The next letter, likewise docketed by Miss Jenkyns, was endorsed,
“Letter of pious congratulation and exhortation from my venerable
grandfather to my beloved mother, on occasion of my own birth.  Also
some practical remarks on the desirability of keeping warm the
extremities of infants, from my excellent grandmother.”

The first part was, indeed, a severe and forcible picture of the
responsibilities of mothers, and a warning against the evils that were
in the world, and lying in ghastly wait for the little baby of two days
old. His wife did not write, said the old gentleman, because he had
forbidden it, she being indisposed with a sprained ankle, which (he
said) quite incapacitated her from holding a pen.  However, at the foot
of the page was a small “T.O.,” and on turning it over, sure enough,
there was a letter to “my dear, dearest Molly,” begging her, when she
left her room, whatever she did, to go _up_ stairs before going _down_:
and telling her to wrap her baby’s feet up in flannel, and keep it warm
by the fire, although it was summer, for babies were so tender.

It was pretty to see from the letters, which were evidently exchanged
with some frequency between the young mother and the grandmother, how
the girlish vanity was being weeded out of her heart by love for her
baby. The white “Paduasoy” figured again in the letters, with almost as
much vigour as before.  In one, it was being made into a christening
cloak for the baby.  It decked it when it went with its parents to
spend a day or two at Arley Hall.  It added to its charms, when it was
“the prettiest little baby that ever was seen.  Dear mother, I wish you
could see her! Without any pershality, I do think she will grow up a
regular bewty!”  I thought of Miss Jenkyns, grey, withered, and
wrinkled, and I wondered if her mother had known her in the courts of
heaven: and then I knew that she had, and that they stood there in
angelic guise.

There was a great gap before any of the rector’s letters appeared.  And
then his wife had changed her mode of her endorsement.  It was no longer
from, “My dearest John;” it was from “My Honoured Husband.”  The letters
were written on occasion of the publication of the same sermon which was
represented in the picture.  The preaching before “My Lord Judge,” and
the “publishing by request,” was evidently the culminating point—the
event of his life.  It had been necessary for him to go up to London to
superintend it through the press.  Many friends had to be called upon
and consulted before he could decide on any printer fit for so onerous a
task; and at length it was arranged that J. and J. Rivingtons were to
have the honourable responsibility.  The worthy rector seemed to be
strung up by the occasion to a high literary pitch, for he could hardly
write a letter to his wife without cropping out into Latin.  I remember
the end of one of his letters ran thus: “I shall ever hold the virtuous
qualities of my Molly in remembrance, _dum memor ipse mei_, _dum
spiritus regit artus_,” which, considering that the English of his
correspondent was sometimes at fault in grammar, and often in spelling,
might be taken as a proof of how much he “idealised his Molly;” and, as
Miss Jenkyns used to say, “People talk a great deal about idealising
now-a-days, whatever that may mean.”  But this was nothing to a fit of
writing classical poetry which soon seized him, in which his Molly
figured away as “Maria.”  The letter containing the _carmen_ was
endorsed by her, “Hebrew verses sent me by my honoured husband.  I thowt
to have had a letter about killing the pig, but must wait.  Mem., to
send the poetry to Sir Peter Arley, as my husband desires.”  And in a
post-scriptum note in his handwriting it was stated that the Ode had
appeared in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_, December 1782.

Her letters back to her husband (treasured as fondly by him as if they
had been _M. T. Ciceronis Epistolæ_) were more satisfactory to an absent
husband and father than his could ever have been to her.  She told him
how Deborah sewed her seam very neatly every day, and read to her in the
books he had set her; how she was a very “forrard,” good child, but
would ask questions her mother could not answer, but how she did not let
herself down by saying she did not know, but took to stirring the fire,
or sending the “forrard” child on an errand.  Matty was now the mother’s
darling, and promised (like her sister at her age), to be a great
beauty. I was reading this aloud to Miss Matty, who smiled and sighed a
little at the hope, so fondly expressed, that “little Matty might not be
vain, even if she were a bewty.”

“I had very pretty hair, my dear,” said Miss Matilda; “and not a bad
mouth.”  And I saw her soon afterwards adjust her cap and draw herself
up.

But to return to Mrs Jenkyns’s letters.  She told her husband about the
poor in the parish; what homely domestic medicines she had administered;
what kitchen physic she had sent.  She had evidently held his
displeasure as a rod in pickle over the heads of all the ne’er-do-wells.
 She asked for his directions about the cows and pigs; and did not
always obtain them, as I have shown before.

The kind old grandmother was dead when a little boy was born, soon after
the publication of the sermon; but there was another letter of
exhortation from the grandfather, more stringent and admonitory than
ever, now that there was a boy to be guarded from the snares of the
world.  He described all the various sins into which men might fall,
until I wondered how any man ever came to a natural death.  The gallows
seemed as if it must have been the termination of the lives of most of
the grandfather’s friends and acquaintance; and I was not surprised at
the way in which he spoke of this life being “a vale of tears.”

It seemed curious that I should never have heard of this brother before;
but I concluded that he had died young, or else surely his name would
have been alluded to by his sisters.

By-and-by we came to packets of Miss Jenkyns’s letters.  These Miss
Matty did regret to burn.  She said all the others had been only
interesting to those who loved the writers, and that it seemed as if it
would have hurt her to allow them to fall into the hands of strangers,
who had not known her dear mother, and how good she was, although she
did not always spell, quite in the modern fashion; but Deborah’s letters
were so very superior! Any one might profit by reading them.  It was a
long time since she had read Mrs Chapone, but she knew she used to think
that Deborah could have said the same things quite as well; and as for
Mrs Carter! people thought a deal of her letters, just because she had
written “Epictetus,” but she was quite sure Deborah would never have
made use of such a common expression as “I canna be fashed!”

     [Picture: I made use of the time to think of many other things]

Miss Matty did grudge burning these letters, it was evident.  She would
not let them be carelessly passed over with any quiet reading, and
skipping, to myself.  She took them from me, and even lighted the second
candle in order to read them aloud with a proper emphasis, and without
stumbling over the big words.  Oh dear! how I wanted facts instead of
reflections, before those letters were concluded!  They lasted us two
nights; and I won’t deny that I made use of the time to think of many
other things, and yet I was always at my post at the end of each
sentence.

The rector’s letters, and those of his wife and mother-in-law, had all
been tolerably short and pithy, written in a straight hand, with the
lines very close together.  Sometimes the whole letter was contained on
a mere scrap of paper.  The paper was very yellow, and the ink very
brown; some of the sheets were (as Miss Matty made me observe) the old
original post, with the stamp in the corner representing a post-boy
riding for life and twanging his horn.  The letters of Mrs Jenkyns and
her mother were fastened with a great round red wafer; for it was before
Miss Edgeworth’s “patronage” had banished wafers from polite society.
It was evident, from the tenor of what was said, that franks were in
great request, and were even used as a means of paying debts by needy
members of Parliament.  The rector sealed his epistles with an immense
coat of arms, and showed by the care with which he had performed this
ceremony that he expected they should be cut open, not broken by any
thoughtless or impatient hand.  Now, Miss Jenkyns’s letters were of a
later date in form and writing.  She wrote on the square sheet which we
have learned to call old-fashioned.  Her hand was admirably calculated,
together with her use of many-syllabled words, to fill up a sheet, and
then came the pride and delight of crossing.  Poor Miss Matty got sadly
puzzled with this, for the words gathered size like snowballs, and
towards the end of her letter Miss Jenkyns used to become quite
sesquipedalian.  In one to her father, slightly theological and
controversial in its tone, she had spoken of Herod, Tetrarch of Idumea.
Miss Matty read it “Herod Petrarch of Etruria,” and was just as well
pleased as if she had been right.

I can’t quite remember the date, but I think it was in 1805 that Miss
Jenkyns wrote the longest series of letters—on occasion of her absence
on a visit to some friends near Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  These friends were
intimate with the commandant of the garrison there, and heard from him
of all the preparations that were being made to repel the invasion of
Buonaparte, which some people imagined might take place at the mouth of
the Tyne.  Miss Jenkyns was evidently very much alarmed; and the first
part of her letters was often written in pretty intelligible English,
conveying particulars of the preparations which were made in the family
with whom she was residing against the dreaded event; the bundles of
clothes that were packed up ready for a flight to Alston Moor (a wild
hilly piece of ground between Northumberland and Cumberland); the signal
that was to be given for this flight, and for the simultaneous turning
out of the volunteers under arms—which said signal was to consist (if I
remember rightly) in ringing the church bells in a particular and
ominous manner.  One day, when Miss Jenkyns and her hosts were at a
dinner-party in Newcastle, this warning summons was actually given (not
a very wise proceeding, if there be any truth in the moral attached to
the fable of the Boy and the Wolf; but so it was), and Miss Jenkyns,
hardly recovered from her fright, wrote the next day to describe the
sound, the breathless shock, the hurry and alarm; and then, taking
breath, she added, “How trivial, my dear father, do all our
apprehensions of the last evening appear, at the present moment, to calm
and enquiring minds!”  And here Miss Matty broke in with—

“But, indeed, my dear, they were not at all trivial or trifling at the
time.  I know I used to wake up in the night many a time and think I
heard the tramp of the French entering Cranford.  Many people talked of
hiding themselves in the salt mines—and meat would have kept capitally
down there, only perhaps we should have been thirsty.  And my father
preached a whole set of sermons on the occasion; one set in the
mornings, all about David and Goliath, to spirit up the people to
fighting with spades or bricks, if need were; and the other set in the
afternoons, proving that Napoleon (that was another name for Bony, as we
used to call him) was all the same as an Apollyon and Abaddon.  I
remember my father rather thought he should be asked to print this last
set; but the parish had, perhaps, had enough of them with hearing.”

Peter Marmaduke Arley Jenkyns (“poor Peter!” as Miss Matty began to call
him) was at school at Shrewsbury by this time.  The rector took up his
pen, and rubbed up his Latin once more, to correspond with his boy.  It
was very clear that the lad’s were what are called show letters.  They
were of a highly mental description, giving an account of his studies,
and his intellectual hopes of various kinds, with an occasional
quotation from the classics; but, now and then, the animal nature broke
out in such a little sentence as this, evidently written in a trembling
hurry, after the letter had been inspected: “Mother dear, do send me a
cake, and put plenty of citron in.”  The “mother dear” probably answered
her boy in the form of cakes and “goody,” for there were none of her
letters among this set; but a whole collection of the rector’s, to whom
the Latin in his boy’s letters was like a trumpet to the old war-horse.
I do not know much about Latin, certainly, and it is, perhaps, an
ornamental language, but not very useful, I think—at least to judge from
the bits I remember out of the rector’s letters.  One was, “You have not
got that town in your map of Ireland; but _Bonus Bernardus non videt
omnia_, as the Proverbia say.”  Presently it became very evident that
“poor Peter” got himself into many scrapes.  There were letters of
stilted penitence to his father, for some wrong-doing; and among them
all was a badly-written, badly-sealed, badly-directed, blotted note:—“My
dear, dear, dear, dearest mother, I will be a better boy; I will,
indeed; but don’t, please, be ill for me; I am not worth it; but I will
be good, darling mother.”

Miss Matty could not speak for crying, after she had read this note.
She gave it to me in silence, and then got up and took it to her sacred
recesses in her own room, for fear, by any chance, it might get burnt.
“Poor Peter!” she said; “he was always in scrapes; he was too easy.
They led him wrong, and then left him in the lurch.  But he was too fond
of mischief.  He could never resist a joke.  Poor Peter!”




CHAPTER VI.
POOR PETER


POOR Peter’s career lay before him rather pleasantly mapped out by kind
friends, but _Bonus Bernardus non videt omnia_, in this map too.  He was
to win honours at the Shrewsbury School, and carry them thick to
Cambridge, and after that, a living awaited him, the gift of his
godfather, Sir Peter Arley.  Poor Peter! his lot in life was very
different to what his friends had hoped and planned.  Miss Matty told me
all about it, and I think it was a relief when she had done so.

He was the darling of his mother, who seemed to dote on all her
children, though she was, perhaps, a little afraid of Deborah’s superior
acquirements.  Deborah was the favourite of her father, and when Peter
disappointed him, she became his pride.  The sole honour Peter brought
away from Shrewsbury was the reputation of being the best good fellow
that ever was, and of being the captain of the school in the art of
practical joking.  His father was disappointed, but set about remedying
the matter in a manly way.  He could not afford to send Peter to read
with any tutor, but he could read with him himself; and Miss Matty told
me much of the awful preparations in the way of dictionaries and
lexicons that were made in her father’s study the morning Peter began.

“My poor mother!” said she.  “I remember how she used to stand in the
hall, just near enough the study-door, to catch the tone of my father’s
voice.  I could tell in a moment if all was going right, by her face.
And it did go right for a long time.”

“What went wrong at last?” said I.  “That tiresome Latin, I dare say.”

“No! it was not the Latin.  Peter was in high favour with my father, for
he worked up well for him.  But he seemed to think that the Cranford
people might be joked about, and made fun of, and they did not like it;
nobody does.  He was always hoaxing them; ‘hoaxing’ is not a pretty
word, my dear, and I hope you won’t tell your father I used it, for I
should not like him to think that I was not choice in my language, after
living with such a woman as Deborah.  And be sure you never use it
yourself.  I don’t know how it slipped out of my mouth, except it was
that I was thinking of poor Peter and it was always his expression.  But
he was a very gentlemanly boy in many things.  He was like dear Captain
Brown in always being ready to help any old person or a child.  Still,
he did like joking and making fun; and he seemed to think the old ladies
in Cranford would believe anything.  There were many old ladies living
here then; we are principally ladies now, I know, but we are not so old
as the ladies used to be when I was a girl.  I could laugh to think of
some of Peter’s jokes.  No, my dear, I won’t tell you of them, because
they might not shock you as they ought to do, and they were very
shocking.  He even took in my father once, by dressing himself up as a
lady that was passing through the town and wished to see the Rector of
Cranford, ‘who had published that admirable Assize Sermon.’  Peter said
he was awfully frightened himself when he saw how my father took it all
in, and even offered to copy out all his Napoleon Buonaparte sermons for
her—him, I mean—no, her, for Peter was a lady then.  He told me he was
more terrified than he ever was before, all the time my father was
speaking. He did not think my father would have believed him; and yet if
he had not, it would have been a sad thing for Peter.  As it was, he was
none so glad of it, for my father kept him hard at work copying out all
those twelve Buonaparte sermons for the lady—that was for Peter himself,
you know.  He was the lady.  And once when he wanted to go fishing,
Peter said, ‘Confound the woman!’—very bad language, my dear, but Peter
was not always so guarded as he should have been; my father was so angry
with him, it nearly frightened me out of my wits: and yet I could hardly
keep from laughing at the little curtseys Peter kept making, quite
slyly, whenever my father spoke of the lady’s excellent taste and sound
discrimination.”

                      [Picture: Confound the woman]

“Did Miss Jenkyns know of these tricks?” said I.

“Oh, no!  Deborah would have been too much shocked.  No, no one knew but
me.  I wish I had always known of Peter’s plans; but sometimes he did
not tell me.  He used to say the old ladies in the town wanted something
to talk about; but I don’t think they did.  They had the _St James’s
Chronicle_ three times a week, just as we have now, and we have plenty
to say; and I remember the clacking noise there always was when some of
the ladies got together.  But, probably, schoolboys talk more than
ladies. At last there was a terrible, sad thing happened.”  Miss Matty
got up, went to the door, and opened it; no one was there.  She rang the
bell for Martha, and when Martha came, her mistress told her to go for
eggs to a farm at the other end of the town.

“I will lock the door after you, Martha.  You are not afraid to go, are
you?”

“No, ma’am, not at all; Jem Hearn will be only too proud to go with me.”

Miss Matty drew herself up, and as soon as we were alone, she wished
that Martha had more maidenly reserve.

“We’ll put out the candle, my dear.  We can talk just as well by
firelight, you know.  There!  Well, you see, Deborah had gone from home
for a fortnight or so; it was a very still, quiet day, I remember,
overhead; and the lilacs were all in flower, so I suppose it was spring.
My father had gone out to see some sick people in the parish; I
recollect seeing him leave the house with his wig and shovel-hat and
cane.  What possessed our poor Peter I don’t know; he had the sweetest
temper, and yet he always seemed to like to plague Deborah.  She never
laughed at his jokes, and thought him ungenteel, and not careful enough
about improving his mind; and that vexed him.

“Well! he went to her room, it seems, and dressed himself in her old
gown, and shawl, and bonnet; just the things she used to wear in
Cranford, and was known by everywhere; and he made the pillow into a
little—you are sure you locked the door, my dear, for I should not like
anyone to hear—into—into a little baby, with white long clothes.  It was
only, as he told me afterwards, to make something to talk about in the
town; he never thought of it as affecting Deborah.  And he went and
walked up and down in the Filbert walk—just half-hidden by the rails,
and half-seen; and he cuddled his pillow, just like a baby, and talked
to it all the nonsense people do.  Oh dear! and my father came stepping
stately up the street, as he always did; and what should he see but a
little black crowd of people—I daresay as many as twenty—all peeping
through his garden rails.  So he thought, at first, they were only
looking at a new rhododendron that was in full bloom, and that he was
very proud of; and he walked slower, that they might have more time to
admire.  And he wondered if he could make out a sermon from the
occasion, and thought, perhaps, there was some relation between the
rhododendrons and the lilies of the field.  My poor father!  When he
came nearer, he began to wonder that they did not see him; but their
heads were all so close together, peeping and peeping!  My father was
amongst them, meaning, he said, to ask them to walk into the garden with
him, and admire the beautiful vegetable production, when—oh, my dear, I
tremble to think of it—he looked through the rails himself, and saw—I
don’t know what he thought he saw, but old Clare told me his face went
quite grey-white with anger, and his eyes blazed out under his frowning
black brows; and he spoke out—oh, so terribly!—and bade them all stop
where they were—not one of them to go, not one of them to stir a step;
and, swift as light, he was in at the garden door, and down the Filbert
walk, and seized hold of poor Peter, and tore his clothes off his
back—bonnet, shawl, gown, and all—and threw the pillow among the people
over the railings: and then he was very, very angry indeed, and before
all the people he lifted up his cane and flogged Peter!

“My dear, that boy’s trick, on that sunny day, when all seemed going
straight and well, broke my mother’s heart, and changed my father for
life.  It did, indeed.  Old Clare said, Peter looked as white as my
father; and stood as still as a statue to be flogged; and my father
struck hard!  When my father stopped to take breath, Peter said, ‘Have
you done enough, sir?’ quite hoarsely, and still standing quite quiet.
I don’t know what my father said—or if he said anything.  But old Clare
said, Peter turned to where the people outside the railing were, and
made them a low bow, as grand and as grave as any gentleman; and then
walked slowly into the house.  I was in the store-room helping my mother
to make cowslip wine.  I cannot abide the wine now, nor the scent of the
flowers; they turn me sick and faint, as they did that day, when Peter
came in, looking as haughty as any man—indeed, looking like a man, not
like a boy. ‘Mother!’ he said, ‘I am come to say, God bless you for
ever.’  I saw his lips quiver as he spoke; and I think he durst not say
anything more loving, for the purpose that was in his heart.  She
looked at him rather frightened, and wondering, and asked him what was
to do.  He did not smile or speak, but put his arms round her and kissed
her as if he did not know how to leave off; and before she could speak
again, he was gone. We talked it over, and could not understand it, and
she bade me go and seek my father, and ask what it was all about.  I
found him walking up and down, looking very highly displeased.

“‘Tell your mother I have flogged Peter, and that he richly deserved
it.’

“I durst not ask any more questions.  When I told my mother, she sat
down, quite faint, for a minute.  I remember, a few days after, I saw
the poor, withered cowslip flowers thrown out to the leaf heap, to decay
and die there.  There was no making of cowslip wine that year at the
rectory—nor, indeed, ever after.

“Presently my mother went to my father.  I know I thought of Queen
Esther and King Ahasuerus; for my mother was very pretty and
delicate-looking, and my father looked as terrible as King Ahasuerus.
Some time after they came out together; and then my mother told me what
had happened, and that she was going up to Peter’s room at my father’s
desire—though she was not to tell Peter this—to talk the matter over
with him.  But no Peter was there.  We looked over the house; no Peter
was there!  Even my father, who had not liked to join in the search at
first, helped us before long. The rectory was a very old house—steps up
into a room, steps down into a room, all through.  At first, my mother
went calling low and soft, as if to reassure the poor boy, ‘Peter!
Peter, dear! it’s only me;’ but, by-and-by, as the servants came back
from the errands my father had sent them, in different directions, to
find where Peter was—as we found he was not in the garden, nor the
hayloft, nor anywhere about—my mother’s cry grew louder and wilder,
‘Peter!  Peter, my darling! where are you?’ for then she felt and
understood that that long kiss meant some sad kind of ‘good-bye.’  The
afternoon went on—my mother never resting, but seeking again and again
in every possible place that had been looked into twenty times before,
nay, that she had looked into over and over again herself. My father sat
with his head in his hands, not speaking except when his messengers came
in, bringing no tidings; then he lifted up his face, so strong and sad,
and told them to go again in some new direction.  My mother kept passing
from room to room, in and out of the house, moving noiselessly, but
never ceasing.  Neither she nor my father durst leave the house, which
was the meeting-place for all the messengers.  At last (and it was
nearly dark), my father rose up.  He took hold of my mother’s arm as she
came with wild, sad pace through one door, and quickly towards another.
She started at the touch of his hand, for she had forgotten all in the
world but Peter.

“‘Molly!’ said he, ‘I did not think all this would happen.’  He looked
into her face for comfort—her poor face all wild and white; for neither
she nor my father had dared to acknowledge—much less act upon—the terror
that was in their hearts, lest Peter should have made away with himself.
My father saw no conscious look in his wife’s hot, dreary eyes, and he
missed the sympathy that she had always been ready to give him—strong
man as he was, and at the dumb despair in her face his tears began to
flow. But when she saw this, a gentle sorrow came over her countenance,
and she said, ‘Dearest John! don’t cry; come with me, and we’ll find
him,’ almost as cheerfully as if she knew where he was.  And she took my
father’s great hand in her little soft one, and led him along, the tears
dropping as he walked on that same unceasing, weary walk, from room to
room, through house and garden.

“Oh, how I wished for Deborah!  I had no time for crying, for now all
seemed to depend on me.  I wrote for Deborah to come home.  I sent a
message privately to that same Mr Holbrook’s house—poor Mr Holbrook;—you
know who I mean.  I don’t mean I sent a message to him, but I sent one
that I could trust to know if Peter was at his house.  For at one time
Mr Holbrook was an occasional visitor at the rectory—you know he was
Miss Pole’s cousin—and he had been very kind to Peter, and taught him
how to fish—he was very kind to everybody, and I thought Peter might
have gone off there.  But Mr Holbrook was from home, and Peter had never
been seen. It was night now; but the doors were all wide open, and my
father and mother walked on and on; it was more than an hour since he
had joined her, and I don’t believe they had ever spoken all that time.
I was getting the parlour fire lighted, and one of the servants was
preparing tea, for I wanted them to have something to eat and drink and
warm them, when old Clare asked to speak to me.

“‘I have borrowed the nets from the weir, Miss Matty.  Shall we drag the
ponds to-night, or wait for the morning?’

“I remember staring in his face to gather his meaning; and when I did, I
laughed out loud.  The horror of that new thought—our bright, darling
Peter, cold, and stark, and dead!  I remember the ring of my own laugh
now.

“The next day Deborah was at home before I was myself again.  She would
not have been so weak as to give way as I had done; but my screams (my
horrible laughter had ended in crying) had roused my sweet dear mother,
whose poor wandering wits were called back and collected as soon as a
child needed her care.  She and Deborah sat by my bedside; I knew by the
looks of each that there had been no news of Peter—no awful, ghastly
news, which was what I most had dreaded in my dull state between
sleeping and waking.

“The same result of all the searching had brought something of the same
relief to my mother, to whom, I am sure, the thought that Peter might
even then be hanging dead in some of the familiar home places had caused
that never-ending walk of yesterday.  Her soft eyes never were the same
again after that; they had always a restless, craving look, as if
seeking for what they could not find.  Oh! it was an awful time; coming
down like a thunder-bolt on the still sunny day when the lilacs were all
in bloom.”

“Where was Mr Peter?” said I.

“He had made his way to Liverpool; and there was war then; and some of
the king’s ships lay off the mouth of the Mersey; and they were only too
glad to have a fine likely boy such as him (five foot nine he was), come
to offer himself.  The captain wrote to my father, and Peter wrote to my
mother.  Stay! those letters will be somewhere here.”

We lighted the candle, and found the captain’s letter and Peter’s too.
And we also found a little simple begging letter from Mrs Jenkyns to
Peter, addressed to him at the house of an old schoolfellow whither she
fancied he might have gone.  They had returned it unopened; and unopened
it had remained ever since, having been inadvertently put by among the
other letters of that time.  This is it:—

    “MY DEAREST PETER,—You did not think we should be so sorry as we
    are, I know, or you would never have gone away.  You are too good.
    Your father sits and sighs till my heart aches to hear him.  He
    cannot hold up his head for grief; and yet he only did what he
    thought was right.  Perhaps he has been too severe, and perhaps
    I have not been kind enough; but God knows how we love you, my
    dear only boy.  Don looks so sorry you are gone.  Come back, and
    make us happy, who love you so much.  I know you will come back.”

But Peter did not come back.  That spring day was the last time he ever
saw his mother’s face.  The writer of the letter—the last—the only
person who had ever seen what was written in it, was dead long ago; and
I, a stranger, not born at the time when this occurrence took place, was
the one to open it.

The captain’s letter summoned the father and mother to Liverpool
instantly, if they wished to see their boy; and, by some of the wild
chances of life, the captain’s letter had been detained somewhere,
somehow.

Miss Matty went on, “And it was racetime, and all the post-horses at
Cranford were gone to the races; but my father and mother set off in our
own gig—and oh! my dear, they were too late—the ship was gone!  And now
read Peter’s letter to my mother!”

It was full of love, and sorrow, and pride in his new profession, and a
sore sense of his disgrace in the eyes of the people at Cranford; but
ending with a passionate entreaty that she would come and see him before
he left the Mersey: “Mother; we may go into battle.  I hope we shall,
and lick those French: but I must see you again before that time.”

“And she was too late,” said Miss Matty; “too late!”

We sat in silence, pondering on the full meaning of those sad, sad
words. At length I asked Miss Matty to tell me how her mother bore it.

“Oh!” she said, “she was patience itself.  She had never been strong,
and this weakened her terribly.  My father used to sit looking at her:
far more sad than she was.  He seemed as if he could look at nothing
else when she was by; and he was so humble—so very gentle now.  He
would, perhaps, speak in his old way—laying down the law, as it were—and
then, in a minute or two, he would come round and put his hand on our
shoulders, and ask us in a low voice, if he had said anything to hurt
us. I did not wonder at his speaking so to Deborah, for she was so
clever; but I could not bear to hear him talking so to me.

“But, you see, he saw what we did not—that it was killing my mother.
Yes! killing her (put out the candle, my dear; I can talk better in the
dark), for she was but a frail woman, and ill-fitted to stand the fright
and shock she had gone through; and she would smile at him and comfort
him, not in words, but in her looks and tones, which were always
cheerful when he was there.  And she would speak of how she thought
Peter stood a good chance of being admiral very soon—he was so brave and
clever; and how she thought of seeing him in his navy uniform, and what
sort of hats admirals wore; and how much more fit he was to be a sailor
than a clergyman; and all in that way, just to make my father think she
was quite glad of what came of that unlucky morning’s work, and the
flogging which was always in his mind, as we all knew.  But oh, my dear!
the bitter, bitter crying she had when she was alone; and at last, as
she grew weaker, she could not keep her tears in when Deborah or me was
by, and would give us message after message for Peter (his ship had gone
to the Mediterranean, or somewhere down there, and then he was ordered
off to India, and there was no overland route then); but she still said
that no one knew where their death lay in wait, and that we were not to
think hers was near.  We did not think it, but we knew it, as we saw her
fading away.

“Well, my dear, it’s very foolish of me, I know, when in all likelihood
I am so near seeing her again.

“And only think, love! the very day after her death—for she did not live
quite a twelvemonth after Peter went away—the very day after—came a
parcel for her from India—from her poor boy.  It was a large, soft,
white Indian shawl, with just a little narrow border all round; just
what my mother would have liked.

“We thought it might rouse my father, for he had sat with her hand in
his all night long; so Deborah took it in to him, and Peter’s letter to
her, and all.  At first, he took no notice; and we tried to make a kind
of light careless talk about the shawl, opening it out and admiring it.
Then, suddenly, he got up, and spoke: ‘She shall be buried in it,’ he
said; ‘Peter shall have that comfort; and she would have liked it.’

“Well, perhaps it was not reasonable, but what could we do or say?  One
gives people in grief their own way.  He took it up and felt it: ‘It is
just such a shawl as she wished for when she was married, and her mother
did not give it her.  I did not know of it till after, or she should
have had it—she should; but she shall have it now.’

“My mother looked so lovely in her death!  She was always pretty, and
now she looked fair, and waxen, and young—younger than Deborah, as she
stood trembling and shivering by her.  We decked her in the long soft
folds; she lay smiling, as if pleased; and people came—all Cranford
came—to beg to see her, for they had loved her dearly, as well they
might; and the countrywomen brought posies; old Clare’s wife brought
some white violets and begged they might lie on her breast.

“Deborah said to me, the day of my mother’s funeral, that if she had a
hundred offers she never would marry and leave my father.  It was not
very likely she would have so many—I don’t know that she had one; but it
was not less to her credit to say so.  She was such a daughter to my
father as I think there never was before or since.  His eyes failed him,
and she read book after book, and wrote, and copied, and was always at
his service in any parish business.  She could do many more things than
my poor mother could; she even once wrote a letter to the bishop for my
father.  But he missed my mother sorely; the whole parish noticed it.
Not that he was less active; I think he was more so, and more patient in
helping every one.  I did all I could to set Deborah at liberty to be
with him; for I knew I was good for little, and that my best work in the
world was to do odd jobs quietly, and set others at liberty.  But my
father was a changed man.”

“Did Mr Peter ever come home?”

“Yes, once.  He came home a lieutenant; he did not get to be admiral.
And he and my father were such friends!  My father took him into every
house in the parish, he was so proud of him.  He never walked out
without Peter’s arm to lean upon.  Deborah used to smile (I don’t think
we ever laughed again after my mother’s death), and say she was quite
put in a corner.  Not but what my father always wanted her when there
was letter-writing or reading to be done, or anything to be settled.”

“And then?” said I, after a pause.

“Then Peter went to sea again; and, by-and-by, my father died, blessing
us both, and thanking Deborah for all she had been to him; and, of
course, our circumstances were changed; and, instead of living at the
rectory, and keeping three maids and a man, we had to come to this small
house, and be content with a servant-of-all-work; but, as Deborah used
to say, we have always lived genteelly, even if circumstances have
compelled us to simplicity.  Poor Deborah!”

“And Mr Peter?” asked I.

“Oh, there was some great war in India—I forget what they call it—and we
have never heard of Peter since then.  I believe he is dead myself; and
it sometimes fidgets me that we have never put on mourning for him.  And
then again, when I sit by myself, and all the house is still, I think I
hear his step coming up the street, and my heart begins to flutter and
beat; but the sound always goes past—and Peter never comes.

“That’s Martha back?  No!  _I’ll_ go, my dear; I can always find my way
in the dark, you know.  And a blow of fresh air at the door will do my
head good, and it’s rather got a trick of aching.”

So she pattered off.  I had lighted the candle, to give the room a
cheerful appearance against her return.

“Was it Martha?” asked I.

“Yes.  And I am rather uncomfortable, for I heard such a strange noise,
just as I was opening the door.”

“Where?” I asked, for her eyes were round with affright.

“In the street—just outside—it sounded like”—

“Talking?” I put in, as she hesitated a little.

“No! kissing”—




CHAPTER VII.
VISITING


ONE morning, as Miss Matty and I sat at our work—it was before twelve
o’clock, and Miss Matty had not changed the cap with yellow ribbons that
had been Miss Jenkyns’s best, and which Miss Matty was now wearing out
in private, putting on the one made in imitation of Mrs Jamieson’s at
all times when she expected to be seen—Martha came up, and asked if Miss
Betty Barker might speak to her mistress.  Miss Matty assented, and
quickly disappeared to change the yellow ribbons, while Miss Barker came
upstairs; but, as she had forgotten her spectacles, and was rather
flurried by the unusual time of the visit, I was not surprised to see
her return with one cap on the top of the other.  She was quite
unconscious of it herself, and looked at us, with bland satisfaction.
Nor do I think Miss Barker perceived it; for, putting aside the little
circumstance that she was not so young as she had been, she was very
much absorbed in her errand, which she delivered herself of with an
oppressive modesty that found vent in endless apologies.

Miss Betty Barker was the daughter of the old clerk at Cranford who had
officiated in Mr Jenkyns’s time.  She and her sister had had pretty good
situations as ladies’ maids, and had saved money enough to set up a
milliner’s shop, which had been patronised by the ladies in the
neighbourhood.  Lady Arley, for instance, would occasionally give Miss
Barkers the pattern of an old cap of hers, which they immediately copied
and circulated among the _élite_ of Cranford.  I say the _élite_, for
Miss Barkers had caught the trick of the place, and piqued themselves
upon their “aristocratic connection.”  They would not sell their caps
and ribbons to anyone without a pedigree.  Many a farmer’s wife or
daughter turned away huffed from Miss Barkers’ select millinery, and
went rather to the universal shop, where the profits of brown soap and
moist sugar enabled the proprietor to go straight to (Paris, he said,
until he found his customers too patriotic and John Bullish to wear what
the Mounseers wore) London, where, as he often told his customers, Queen
Adelaide had appeared, only the very week before, in a cap exactly like
the one he showed them, trimmed with yellow and blue ribbons, and had
been complimented by King William on the becoming nature of her
head-dress.

Miss Barkers, who confined themselves to truth, and did not approve of
miscellaneous customers, throve notwithstanding.  They were
self-denying, good people.  Many a time have I seen the eldest of them
(she that had been maid to Mrs Jamieson) carrying out some delicate mess
to a poor person.  They only aped their betters in having “nothing to
do” with the class immediately below theirs.  And when Miss Barker died,
their profits and income were found to be such that Miss Betty was
justified in shutting up shop and retiring from business.  She also (as
I think I have before said) set up her cow; a mark of respectability in
Cranford almost as decided as setting up a gig is among some people.
She dressed finer than any lady in Cranford; and we did not wonder at
it; for it was understood that she was wearing out all the bonnets and
caps and outrageous ribbons which had once formed her stock-in-trade.
It was five or six years since she had given up shop, so in any other
place than Cranford her dress might have been considered _passée_.

And now Miss Betty Barker had called to invite Miss Matty to tea at her
house on the following Tuesday.  She gave me also an impromptu
invitation, as I happened to be a visitor—though I could see she had a
little fear lest, since my father had gone to live in Drumble, he might
have engaged in that “horrid cotton trade,” and so dragged his family
down out of “aristocratic society.”  She prefaced this invitation with
so many apologies that she quite excited my curiosity.  “Her
presumption” was to be excused.  What had she been doing?  She seemed so
overpowered by it I could only think that she had been writing to Queen
Adelaide to ask for a receipt for washing lace; but the act which she so
characterised was only an invitation she had carried to her sister’s
former mistress, Mrs Jamieson.  “Her former occupation considered, could
Miss Matty excuse the liberty?”  Ah! thought I, she has found out that
double cap, and is going to rectify Miss Matty’s head-dress.  No! it was
simply to extend her invitation to Miss Matty and to me.  Miss Matty
bowed acceptance; and I wondered that, in the graceful action, she did
not feel the unusual weight and extraordinary height of her head-dress.
But I do not think she did, for she recovered her balance, and went on
talking to Miss Betty in a kind, condescending manner, very different
from the fidgety way she would have had if she had suspected how
singular her appearance was.  “Mrs Jamieson is coming, I think you
said?” asked Miss Matty.

“Yes.  Mrs Jamieson most kindly and condescendingly said she would be
happy to come.  One little stipulation she made, that she should bring
Carlo.  I told her that if I had a weakness, it was for dogs.”

“And Miss Pole?” questioned Miss Matty, who was thinking of her pool at
Preference, in which Carlo would not be available as a partner.

“I am going to ask Miss Pole.  Of course, I could not think of asking
her until I had asked you, madam—the rector’s daughter, madam.  Believe
me, I do not forget the situation my father held under yours.”

“And Mrs Forrester, of course?”

“And Mrs Forrester.  I thought, in fact, of going to her before I went
to Miss Pole.  Although her circumstances are changed, madam, she was
born at Tyrrell, and we can never forget her alliance to the Bigges, of
Bigelow Hall.”

Miss Matty cared much more for the little circumstance of her being a
very good card-player.

“Mrs Fitz-Adam—I suppose”—

“No, madam.  I must draw a line somewhere.  Mrs Jamieson would not, I
think, like to meet Mrs Fitz-Adam.  I have the greatest respect for Mrs
Fitz-Adam—but I cannot think her fit society for such ladies as Mrs
Jamieson and Miss Matilda Jenkyns.”

Miss Betty Barker bowed low to Miss Matty, and pursed up her mouth.  She
looked at me with sidelong dignity, as much as to say, although a
retired milliner, she was no democrat, and understood the difference of
ranks.

“May I beg you to come as near half-past six to my little dwelling, as
possible, Miss Matilda?  Mrs Jamieson dines at five, but has kindly
promised not to delay her visit beyond that time—half-past six.”  And
with a swimming curtsey Miss Betty Barker took her leave.

My prophetic soul foretold a visit that afternoon from Miss Pole, who
usually came to call on Miss Matilda after any event—or indeed in sight
of any event—to talk it over with her.

“Miss Betty told me it was to be a choice and select few,” said Miss
Pole, as she and Miss Matty compared notes.

“Yes, so she said.  Not even Mrs Fitz-Adam.”

Now Mrs Fitz-Adam was the widowed sister of the Cranford surgeon, whom I
have named before.  Their parents were respectable farmers, content with
their station.  The name of these good people was Hoggins.  Mr Hoggins
was the Cranford doctor now; we disliked the name and considered it
coarse; but, as Miss Jenkyns said, if he changed it to Piggins it would
not be much better.  We had hoped to discover a relationship between him
and that Marchioness of Exeter whose name was Molly Hoggins; but the
man, careless of his own interests, utterly ignored and denied any such
relationship, although, as dear Miss Jenkyns had said, he had a sister
called Mary, and the same Christian names were very apt to run in
families.

Soon after Miss Mary Hoggins married Mr Fitz-Adam, she disappeared from
the neighbourhood for many years.  She did not move in a sphere in
Cranford society sufficiently high to make any of us care to know what
Mr Fitz-Adam was.  He died and was gathered to his fathers without our
ever having thought about him at all.  And then Mrs Fitz-Adam reappeared
in Cranford (“as bold as a lion,” Miss Pole said), a well-to-do widow,
dressed in rustling black silk, so soon after her husband’s death that
poor Miss Jenkyns was justified in the remark she made, that “bombazine
would have shown a deeper sense of her loss.”

I remember the convocation of ladies who assembled to decide whether or
not Mrs Fitz-Adam should be called upon by the old blue-blooded
inhabitants of Cranford.  She had taken a large rambling house, which
had been usually considered to confer a patent of gentility upon its
tenant, because, once upon a time, seventy or eighty years before, the
spinster daughter of an earl had resided in it.  I am not sure if the
inhabiting this house was not also believed to convey some unusual power
of intellect; for the earl’s daughter, Lady Jane, had a sister, Lady
Anne, who had married a general officer in the time of the American war,
and this general officer had written one or two comedies, which were
still acted on the London boards, and which, when we saw them
advertised, made us all draw up, and feel that Drury Lane was paying a
very pretty compliment to Cranford.  Still, it was not at all a settled
thing that Mrs Fitz-Adam was to be visited, when dear Miss Jenkyns died;
and, with her, something of the clear knowledge of the strict code of
gentility went out too.  As Miss Pole observed, “As most of the ladies
of good family in Cranford were elderly spinsters, or widows without
children, if we did not relax a little, and become less exclusive,
by-and-by we should have no society at all.”

Mrs Forrester continued on the same side.

“She had always understood that Fitz meant something aristocratic; there
was Fitz-Roy—she thought that some of the King’s children had been
called Fitz-Roy; and there was Fitz-Clarence, now—they were the children
of dear good King William the Fourth.  Fitz-Adam!—it was a pretty name,
and she thought it very probably meant ‘Child of Adam.’  No one, who had
not some good blood in their veins, would dare to be called Fitz; there
was a deal in a name—she had had a cousin who spelt his name with two
little ffs—ffoulkes—and he always looked down upon capital letters and
said they belonged to lately-invented families.  She had been afraid he
would die a bachelor, he was so very choice.  When he met with a Mrs
ffarringdon, at a watering-place, he took to her immediately; and a very
pretty genteel woman she was—a widow, with a very good fortune; and ‘my
cousin,’ Mr ffoulkes, married her; and it was all owing to her two
little ffs.”

Mrs Fitz-Adam did not stand a chance of meeting with a Mr Fitz-anything
in Cranford, so that could not have been her motive for settling there.
Miss Matty thought it might have been the hope of being admitted into
the society of the place, which would certainly be a very agreeable rise
for _ci-devant_ Miss Hoggins; and if this had been her hope it would be
cruel to disappoint her.

So everybody called upon Mrs Fitz-Adam—everybody but Mrs Jamieson, who
used to show how honourable she was by never seeing Mrs Fitz-Adam when
they met at the Cranford parties.  There would be only eight or ten
ladies in the room, and Mrs Fitz-Adam was the largest of all, and she
invariably used to stand up when Mrs Jamieson came in, and curtsey very
low to her whenever she turned in her direction—so low, in fact, that I
think Mrs Jamieson must have looked at the wall above her, for she never
moved a muscle of her face, no more than if she had not seen her.  Still
Mrs Fitz-Adam persevered.

The spring evenings were getting bright and long when three or four
ladies in calashes met at Miss Barker’s door.  Do you know what a
calash is?  It is a covering worn over caps, not unlike the heads
fastened on old-fashioned gigs; but sometimes it is not quite so large.
This kind of head-gear always made an awful impression on the children
in Cranford; and now two or three left off their play in the quiet
sunny little street, and gathered in wondering silence round Miss Pole,
Miss Matty, and myself.  We were silent too, so that we could hear
loud, suppressed whispers inside Miss Barker’s house: “Wait, Peggy! wait
till I’ve run upstairs and washed my hands.  When I cough, open the
door; I’ll not be a minute.”

And, true enough it was not a minute before we heard a noise, between a
sneeze and a crow; on which the door flew open.  Behind it stood a
round-eyed maiden, all aghast at the honourable company of calashes, who
marched in without a word.  She recovered presence of mind enough to
usher us into a small room, which had been the shop, but was now
converted into a temporary dressing-room.  There we unpinned and shook
ourselves, and arranged our features before the glass into a sweet and
gracious company-face; and then, bowing backwards with “After you,
ma’am,” we allowed Mrs Forrester to take precedence up the narrow
staircase that led to Miss Barker’s drawing-room.  There she sat, as
stately and composed as though we had never heard that odd-sounding
cough, from which her throat must have been even then sore and rough.
Kind, gentle, shabbily-dressed Mrs Forrester was immediately conducted
to the second place of honour—a seat arranged something like Prince
Albert’s near the Queen’s—good, but not so good.  The place of
pre-eminence was, of course, reserved for the Honourable Mrs Jamieson,
who presently came panting up the stairs—Carlo rushing round her on her
progress, as if he meant to trip her up.

And now Miss Betty Barker was a proud and happy woman!  She stirred the
fire, and shut the door, and sat as near to it as she could, quite on
the edge of her chair.  When Peggy came in, tottering under the weight
of the tea-tray, I noticed that Miss Barker was sadly afraid lest Peggy
should not keep her distance sufficiently.  She and her mistress were on
very familiar terms in their every-day intercourse, and Peggy wanted now
to make several little confidences to her, which Miss Barker was on
thorns to hear, but which she thought it her duty, as a lady, to
repress.  So she turned away from all Peggy’s asides and signs; but she
made one or two very malapropos answers to what was said; and at last,
seized with a bright idea, she exclaimed, “Poor, sweet Carlo!  I’m
forgetting him. Come downstairs with me, poor ittie doggie, and it shall
have its tea, it shall!”

In a few minutes she returned, bland and benignant as before; but I
thought she had forgotten to give the “poor ittie doggie” anything to
eat, judging by the avidity with which he swallowed down chance pieces
of cake.  The tea-tray was abundantly loaded—I was pleased to see it, I
was so hungry; but I was afraid the ladies present might think it
vulgarly heaped up.  I know they would have done at their own houses;
but somehow the heaps disappeared here.  I saw Mrs Jamieson eating
seed-cake, slowly and considerately, as she did everything; and I was
rather surprised, for I knew she had told us, on the occasion of her
last party, that she never had it in her house, it reminded her so much
of scented soap.  She always gave us Savoy biscuits.  However, Mrs
Jamieson was kindly indulgent to Miss Barker’s want of knowledge of the
customs of high life; and, to spare her feelings, ate three large pieces
of seed-cake, with a placid, ruminating expression of countenance, not
unlike a cow’s.

After tea there was some little demur and difficulty.  We were six in
number; four could play at Preference, and for the other two there was
Cribbage.  But all, except myself (I was rather afraid of the Cranford
ladies at cards, for it was the most earnest and serious business they
ever engaged in), were anxious to be of the “pool.”  Even Miss Barker,
while declaring she did not know Spadille from Manille, was evidently
hankering to take a hand.  The dilemma was soon put an end to by a
singular kind of noise.  If a baron’s daughter-in-law could ever be
supposed to snore, I should have said Mrs Jamieson did so then; for,
overcome by the heat of the room, and inclined to doze by nature, the
temptation of that very comfortable arm-chair had been too much for her,
and Mrs Jamieson was nodding.  Once or twice she opened her eyes with an
effort, and calmly but unconsciously smiled upon us; but by-and-by, even
her benevolence was not equal to this exertion, and she was sound
asleep.

 [Picture: The temptation of the comfortable arm-chair had been too much
                                 for her]

“It is very gratifying to me,” whispered Miss Barker at the card-table
to her three opponents, whom, notwithstanding her ignorance of the game,
she was “basting” most unmercifully—“very gratifying indeed, to see how
completely Mrs Jamieson feels at home in my poor little dwelling; she
could not have paid me a greater compliment.”

Miss Barker provided me with some literature in the shape of three or
four handsomely-bound fashion-books ten or twelve years old, observing,
as she put a little table and a candle for my especial benefit, that she
knew young people liked to look at pictures.  Carlo lay and snorted, and
started at his mistress’s feet.  He, too, was quite at home.

The card-table was an animated scene to watch; four ladies’ heads, with
niddle-noddling caps, all nearly meeting over the middle of the table in
their eagerness to whisper quick enough and loud enough: and every now
and then came Miss Barker’s “Hush, ladies! if you please, hush!  Mrs
Jamieson is asleep.”

It was very difficult to steer clear between Mrs Forrester’s deafness
and Mrs Jamieson’s sleepiness.  But Miss Barker managed her arduous task
well.  She repeated the whisper to Mrs Forrester, distorting her face
considerably, in order to show, by the motions of her lips, what was
said; and then she smiled kindly all round at us, and murmured to
herself, “Very gratifying, indeed; I wish my poor sister had been alive
to see this day.”

Presently the door was thrown wide open; Carlo started to his feet, with
a loud snapping bark, and Mrs Jamieson awoke: or, perhaps, she had not
been asleep—as she said almost directly, the room had been so light she
had been glad to keep her eyes shut, but had been listening with great
interest to all our amusing and agreeable conversation.  Peggy came in
once more, red with importance.  Another tray!  “Oh, gentility!” thought
I, “can you endure this last shock?”  For Miss Barker had ordered (nay,
I doubt not, prepared, although she did say, “Why, Peggy, what have you
brought us?” and looked pleasantly surprised at the unexpected pleasure)
all sorts of good things for supper—scalloped oysters, potted lobsters,
jelly, a dish called “little Cupids” (which was in great favour with the
Cranford ladies, although too expensive to be given, except on solemn
and state occasions—macaroons sopped in brandy, I should have called it,
if I had not known its more refined and classical name).  In short, we
were evidently to be feasted with all that was sweetest and best; and
we thought it better to submit graciously, even at the cost of our
gentility—which never ate suppers in general, but which, like most
non-supper-eaters, was particularly hungry on all special occasions.

Miss Barker, in her former sphere, had, I daresay, been made acquainted
with the beverage they call cherry-brandy.  We none of us had ever seen
such a thing, and rather shrank back when she proffered it us—“just a
little, leetle glass, ladies; after the oysters and lobsters, you know.
Shell-fish are sometimes thought not very wholesome.”  We all shook our
heads like female mandarins; but, at last, Mrs Jamieson suffered herself
to be persuaded, and we followed her lead.  It was not exactly
unpalatable, though so hot and so strong that we thought ourselves bound
to give evidence that we were not accustomed to such things by coughing
terribly—almost as strangely as Miss Barker had done, before we were
admitted by Peggy.

“It’s very strong,” said Miss Pole, as she put down her empty glass; “I
do believe there’s spirit in it.”

“Only a little drop—just necessary to make it keep,” said Miss Barker.
“You know we put brandy-pepper over our preserves to make them keep.  I
often feel tipsy myself from eating damson tart.”

I question whether damson tart would have opened Mrs Jamieson’s heart as
the cherry-brandy did; but she told us of a coming event, respecting
which she had been quite silent till that moment.

“My sister-in-law, Lady Glenmire, is coming to stay with me.”

There was a chorus of “Indeed!” and then a pause.  Each one rapidly
reviewed her wardrobe, as to its fitness to appear in the presence of a
baron’s widow; for, of course, a series of small festivals were always
held in Cranford on the arrival of a visitor at any of our friends’
houses.  We felt very pleasantly excited on the present occasion.

Not long after this the maids and the lanterns were announced.  Mrs
Jamieson had the sedan-chair, which had squeezed itself into Miss
Barker’s narrow lobby with some difficulty, and most literally “stopped
the way.”  It required some skilful manoeuvring on the part of the old
chairmen (shoemakers by day, but when summoned to carry the sedan
dressed up in a strange old livery—long great-coats, with small capes,
coeval with the sedan, and similar to the dress of the class in
Hogarth’s pictures) to edge, and back, and try at it again, and finally
to succeed in carrying their burden out of Miss Barker’s front door.
Then we heard their quick pit-a-pat along the quiet little street as we
put on our calashes and pinned up our gowns; Miss Barker hovering about
us with offers of help, which, if she had not remembered her former
occupation, and wished us to forget it, would have been much more
pressing.




CHAPTER VIII.
“YOUR LADYSHIP”


EARLY the next morning—directly after twelve—Miss Pole made her
appearance at Miss Matty’s.  Some very trifling piece of business was
alleged as a reason for the call; but there was evidently something
behind.  At last out it came.

“By the way, you’ll think I’m strangely ignorant; but, do you really
know, I am puzzled how we ought to address Lady Glenmire.  Do you say,
‘Your Ladyship,’ where you would say ‘you’ to a common person?  I have
been puzzling all morning; and are we to say ‘My Lady,’ instead of
‘Ma’am?’  Now you knew Lady Arley—will you kindly tell me the most
correct way of speaking to the peerage?”

Poor Miss Matty! she took off her spectacles and she put them on
again—but how Lady Arley was addressed, she could not remember.

“It is so long ago,” she said.  “Dear! dear! how stupid I am!  I don’t
think I ever saw her more than twice.  I know we used to call Sir Peter,
‘Sir Peter’—but he came much oftener to see us than Lady Arley did.
Deborah would have known in a minute.  ‘My lady’—‘your ladyship.’  It
sounds very strange, and as if it was not natural.  I never thought of
it before; but, now you have named it, I am all in a puzzle.”

It was very certain Miss Pole would obtain no wise decision from Miss
Matty, who got more bewildered every moment, and more perplexed as to
etiquettes of address.

“Well, I really think,” said Miss Pole, “I had better just go and tell
Mrs Forrester about our little difficulty.  One sometimes grows nervous;
and yet one would not have Lady Glenmire think we were quite ignorant of
the etiquettes of high life in Cranford.”

“And will you just step in here, dear Miss Pole, as you come back,
please, and tell me what you decide upon?  Whatever you and Mrs
Forrester fix upon, will be quite right, I’m sure.  ‘Lady Arley,’ ‘Sir
Peter,’” said Miss Matty to herself, trying to recall the old forms of
words.

“Who is Lady Glenmire?” asked I.

“Oh, she’s the widow of Mr Jamieson—that’s Mrs Jamieson’s late husband,
you know—widow of his eldest brother.  Mrs Jamieson was a Miss Walker,
daughter of Governor Walker.  ‘Your ladyship.’  My dear, if they fix on
that way of speaking, you must just let me practice a little on you
first, for I shall feel so foolish and hot saying it the first time to
Lady Glenmire.”

It was really a relief to Miss Matty when Mrs Jamieson came on a very
unpolite errand.  I notice that apathetic people have more quiet
impertinence than others; and Mrs Jamieson came now to insinuate pretty
plainly that she did not particularly wish that the Cranford ladies
should call upon her sister-in-law.  I can hardly say how she made this
clear; for I grew very indignant and warm, while with slow deliberation
she was explaining her wishes to Miss Matty, who, a true lady herself,
could hardly understand the feeling which made Mrs Jamieson wish to
appear to her noble sister-in-law as if she only visited “county”
families.  Miss Matty remained puzzled and perplexed long after I had
found out the object of Mrs Jamieson’s visit.

When she did understand the drift of the honourable lady’s call, it was
pretty to see with what quiet dignity she received the intimation thus
uncourteously given.  She was not in the least hurt—she was of too
gentle a spirit for that; nor was she exactly conscious of disapproving
of Mrs Jamieson’s conduct; but there was something of this feeling in
her mind, I am sure, which made her pass from the subject to others in a
less flurried and more composed manner than usual.  Mrs Jamieson was,
indeed, the more flurried of the two, and I could see she was glad to
take her leave.

A little while afterwards Miss Pole returned, red and indignant.  “Well!
to be sure!  You’ve had Mrs Jamieson here, I find from Martha; and we
are not to call on Lady Glenmire.  Yes!  I met Mrs Jamieson, half-way
between here and Mrs Forrester’s, and she told me; she took me so by
surprise, I had nothing to say.  I wish I had thought of something very
sharp and sarcastic; I dare say I shall to-night.  And Lady Glenmire is
but the widow of a Scotch baron after all!  I went on to look at Mrs
Forrester’s Peerage, to see who this lady was, that is to be kept under
a glass case: widow of a Scotch peer—never sat in the House of Lords—and
as poor as Job, I dare say; and she—fifth daughter of some Mr Campbell
or other. You are the daughter of a rector, at any rate, and related to
the Arleys; and Sir Peter might have been Viscount Arley, every one
says.”

Miss Matty tried to soothe Miss Pole, but in vain.  That lady, usually
so kind and good-humoured, was now in a full flow of anger.

“And I went and ordered a cap this morning, to be quite ready,” said she
at last, letting out the secret which gave sting to Mrs Jamieson’s
intimation.  “Mrs Jamieson shall see if it is so easy to get me to make
fourth at a pool when she has none of her fine Scotch relations with
her!”

In coming out of church, the first Sunday on which Lady Glenmire
appeared in Cranford, we sedulously talked together, and turned our
backs on Mrs Jamieson and her guest.  If we might not call on her, we
would not even look at her, though we were dying with curiosity to know
what she was like.  We had the comfort of questioning Martha in the
afternoon.  Martha did not belong to a sphere of society whose
observation could be an implied compliment to Lady Glenmire, and Martha
had made good use of her eyes.

“Well, ma’am! is it the little lady with Mrs Jamieson, you mean?  I
thought you would like more to know how young Mrs Smith was dressed; her
being a bride.”  (Mrs Smith was the butcher’s wife).

Miss Pole said, “Good gracious me! as if we cared about a Mrs Smith;”
but was silent as Martha resumed her speech.

“The little lady in Mrs Jamieson’s pew had on, ma’am, rather an old
black silk, and a shepherd’s plaid cloak, ma’am, and very bright black
eyes she had, ma’am, and a pleasant, sharp face; not over young, ma’am,
but yet, I should guess, younger than Mrs Jamieson herself.  She looked
up and down the church, like a bird, and nipped up her petticoats, when
she came out, as quick and sharp as ever I see.  I’ll tell you what,
ma’am, she’s more like Mrs Deacon, at the ‘Coach and Horses,’ nor any
one.”

“Hush, Martha!” said Miss Matty, “that’s not respectful.”

“Isn’t it, ma’am?  I beg pardon, I’m sure; but Jem Hearn said so as
well. He said, she was just such a sharp, stirring sort of a body”—

“Lady,” said Miss Pole.

“Lady—as Mrs Deacon.”

Another Sunday passed away, and we still averted our eyes from Mrs
Jamieson and her guest, and made remarks to ourselves that we thought
were very severe—almost too much so.  Miss Matty was evidently uneasy at
our sarcastic manner of speaking.

Perhaps by this time Lady Glenmire had found out that Mrs Jamieson’s was
not the gayest, liveliest house in the world; perhaps Mrs Jamieson had
found out that most of the county families were in London, and that
those who remained in the country were not so alive as they might have
been to the circumstance of Lady Glenmire being in their neighbourhood.
Great events spring out of small causes; so I will not pretend to say
what induced Mrs Jamieson to alter her determination of excluding the
Cranford ladies, and send notes of invitation all round for a small
party on the following Tuesday.  Mr Mulliner himself brought them round.
 He _would_ always ignore the fact of there being a back door to any
house, and gave a louder rat-tat than his mistress, Mrs Jamieson.  He
had three little notes, which he carried in a large basket, in order to
impress his mistress with an idea of their great weight, though they
might easily have gone into his waistcoat pocket.

Miss Matty and I quietly decided that we would have a previous
engagement at home: it was the evening on which Miss Matty usually made
candle-lighters of all the notes and letters of the week; for on Mondays
her accounts were always made straight—not a penny owing from the week
before; so, by a natural arrangement, making candle-lighters fell upon a
Tuesday evening, and gave us a legitimate excuse for declining Mrs
Jamieson’s invitation.  But before our answer was written, in came Miss
Pole, with an open note in her hand.

“So!” she said.  “Ah!  I see you have got your note, too.  Better late
than never.  I could have told my Lady Glenmire she would be glad enough
of our society before a fortnight was over.”

“Yes,” said Miss Matty, “we’re asked for Tuesday evening.  And perhaps
you would just kindly bring your work across and drink tea with us that
night.  It is my usual regular time for looking over the last week’s
bills, and notes, and letters, and making candle-lighters of them; but
that does not seem quite reason enough for saying I have a previous
engagement at home, though I meant to make it do.  Now, if you would
come, my conscience would be quite at ease, and luckily the note is not
written yet.”

I saw Miss Pole’s countenance change while Miss Matty was speaking.

“Don’t you mean to go then?” asked she.

“Oh, no!” said, Miss Matty quietly.  “You don’t either, I suppose?”

“I don’t know,” replied Miss Pole.  “Yes, I think I do,” said she,
rather briskly; and on seeing Miss Matty look surprised, she added, “You
see, one would not like Mrs Jamieson to think that anything she could
do, or say, was of consequence enough to give offence; it would be a
kind of letting down of ourselves, that I, for one, should not like.  It
would be too flattering to Mrs Jamieson if we allowed her to suppose
that what she had said affected us a week, nay ten days afterwards.”

“Well!  I suppose it is wrong to be hurt and annoyed so long about
anything; and, perhaps, after all, she did not mean to vex us.  But I
must say, I could not have brought myself to say the things Mrs Jamieson
did about our not calling.  I really don’t think I shall go.”

“Oh, come!  Miss Matty, you must go; you know our friend Mrs Jamieson is
much more phlegmatic than most people, and does not enter into the
little delicacies of feeling which you possess in so remarkable a
degree.”

“I thought you possessed them, too, that day Mrs Jamieson called to tell
us not to go,” said Miss Matty innocently.

But Miss Pole, in addition to her delicacies of feeling, possessed a
very smart cap, which she was anxious to show to an admiring world; and
so she seemed to forget all her angry words uttered not a fortnight
before, and to be ready to act on what she called the great Christian
principle of “Forgive and forget”; and she lectured dear Miss Matty so
long on this head that she absolutely ended by assuring her it was her
duty, as a deceased rector’s daughter, to buy a new cap and go to the
party at Mrs Jamieson’s.  So “we were most happy to accept,” instead of
“regretting that we were obliged to decline.”

                          [Picture: Mr Mulliner]

The expenditure on dress in Cranford was principally in that one article
referred to.  If the heads were buried in smart new caps, the ladies
were like ostriches, and cared not what became of their bodies.  Old
gowns, white and venerable collars, any number of brooches, up and down
and everywhere (some with dogs’ eyes painted in them; some that were
like small picture-frames with mausoleums and weeping-willows neatly
executed in hair inside; some, again, with miniatures of ladies and
gentlemen sweetly smiling out of a nest of stiff muslin), old brooches
for a permanent ornament, and new caps to suit the fashion of the
day—the ladies of Cranford always dressed with chaste elegance and
propriety, as Miss Barker once prettily expressed it.

And with three new caps, and a greater array of brooches than had ever
been seen together at one time since Cranford was a town, did Mrs
Forrester, and Miss Matty, and Miss Pole appear on that memorable
Tuesday evening.  I counted seven brooches myself on Miss Pole’s dress.
Two were fixed negligently in her cap (one was a butterfly made of
Scotch pebbles, which a vivid imagination might believe to be the real
insect); one fastened her net neckerchief; one her collar; one
ornamented the front of her gown, midway between her throat and waist;
and another adorned the point of her stomacher.  Where the seventh was I
have forgotten, but it was somewhere about her, I am sure.

But I am getting on too fast, in describing the dresses of the company.
I should first relate the gathering on the way to Mrs Jamieson’s.  That
lady lived in a large house just outside the town.  A road which had
known what it was to be a street ran right before the house, which
opened out upon it without any intervening garden or court.  Whatever
the sun was about, he never shone on the front of that house.  To be
sure, the living-rooms were at the back, looking on to a pleasant
garden; the front windows only belonged to kitchens and housekeepers’
rooms, and pantries, and in one of them Mr Mulliner was reported to sit.
 Indeed, looking askance, we often saw the back of a head covered with
hair powder, which also extended itself over his coat-collar down to his
very waist; and this imposing back was always engaged in reading the _St
James’s Chronicle_, opened wide, which, in some degree, accounted for
the length of time the said newspaper was in reaching us—equal
subscribers with Mrs Jamieson, though, in right of her honourableness,
she always had the reading of it first.  This very Tuesday, the delay in
forwarding the last number had been particularly aggravating; just when
both Miss Pole and Miss Matty, the former more especially, had been
wanting to see it, in order to coach up the Court news ready for the
evening’s interview with aristocracy.  Miss Pole told us she had
absolutely taken time by the forelock, and been dressed by five o’clock,
in order to be ready if the _St James’s Chronicle_ should come in at the
last moment—the very _St James’s Chronicle_ which the powdered head was
tranquilly and composedly reading as we passed the accustomed window
this evening.

“The impudence of the man!” said Miss Pole, in a low indignant whisper.
“I should like to ask him whether his mistress pays her quarter-share
for his exclusive use.”

We looked at her in admiration of the courage of her thought; for Mr
Mulliner was an object of great awe to all of us.  He seemed never to
have forgotten his condescension in coming to live at Cranford.  Miss
Jenkyns, at times, had stood forth as the undaunted champion of her sex,
and spoken to him on terms of equality; but even Miss Jenkyns could get
no higher.  In his pleasantest and most gracious moods he looked like a
sulky cockatoo.  He did not speak except in gruff monosyllables.  He
would wait in the hall when we begged him not to wait, and then look
deeply offended because we had kept him there, while, with trembling,
hasty hands we prepared ourselves for appearing in company.

Miss Pole ventured on a small joke as we went upstairs, intended, though
addressed to us, to afford Mr Mulliner some slight amusement.  We all
smiled, in order to seem as if we felt at our ease, and timidly looked
for Mr Mulliner’s sympathy.  Not a muscle of that wooden face had
relaxed; and we were grave in an instant.

Mrs Jamieson’s drawing-room was cheerful; the evening sun came streaming
into it, and the large square window was clustered round with flowers.
The furniture was white and gold; not the later style, Louis Quatorze, I
think they call it, all shells and twirls; no, Mrs Jamieson’s chairs and
tables had not a curve or bend about them.  The chair and table legs
diminished as they neared the ground, and were straight and square in
all their corners.  The chairs were all a-row against the walls, with
the exception of four or five which stood in a circle round the fire.
They were railed with white bars across the back and knobbed with gold;
neither the railings nor the knobs invited to ease.  There was a
japanned table devoted to literature, on which lay a Bible, a Peerage,
and a Prayer-Book.  There was another square Pembroke table dedicated to
the Fine Arts, on which were a kaleidoscope, conversation-cards,
puzzle-cards (tied together to an interminable length with faded pink
satin ribbon), and a box painted in fond imitation of the drawings which
decorate tea-chests.  Carlo lay on the worsted-worked rug, and
ungraciously barked at us as we entered.  Mrs Jamieson stood up, giving
us each a torpid smile of welcome, and looking helplessly beyond us at
Mr Mulliner, as if she hoped he would place us in chairs, for, if he did
not, she never could.  I suppose he thought we could find our way to the
circle round the fire, which reminded me of Stonehenge, I don’t know
why.  Lady Glenmire came to the rescue of our hostess, and, somehow or
other, we found ourselves for the first time placed agreeably, and not
formally, in Mrs Jamieson’s house.  Lady Glenmire, now we had time to
look at her, proved to be a bright little woman of middle age, who had
been very pretty in the days of her youth, and who was even yet very
pleasant-looking.  I saw Miss Pole appraising her dress in the first
five minutes, and I take her word when she said the next day—

“My dear! ten pounds would have purchased every stitch she had on—lace
and all.”

It was pleasant to suspect that a peeress could be poor, and partly
reconciled us to the fact that her husband had never sat in the House of
Lords; which, when we first heard of it, seemed a kind of swindling us
out of our prospects on false pretences; a sort of “A Lord and No Lord”
business.

We were all very silent at first.  We were thinking what we could talk
about, that should be high enough to interest My Lady.  There had been a
rise in the price of sugar, which, as preserving-time was near, was a
piece of intelligence to all our house-keeping hearts, and would have
been the natural topic if Lady Glenmire had not been by.  But we were
not sure if the peerage ate preserves—much less knew how they were made.
 At last, Miss Pole, who had always a great deal of courage and _savoir
faire_, spoke to Lady Glenmire, who on her part had seemed just as much
puzzled to know how to break the silence as we were.

“Has your ladyship been to Court lately?” asked she; and then gave a
little glance round at us, half timid and half triumphant, as much as to
say, “See how judiciously I have chosen a subject befitting the rank of
the stranger.”

“I never was there in my life,” said Lady Glenmire, with a broad Scotch
accent, but in a very sweet voice.  And then, as if she had been too
abrupt, she added: “We very seldom went to London—only twice, in fact,
during all my married life; and before I was married my father had far
too large a family” (fifth daughter of Mr Campbell was in all our minds,
I am sure) “to take us often from our home, even to Edinburgh.  Ye’ll
have been in Edinburgh, maybe?” said she, suddenly brightening up with
the hope of a common interest.  We had none of us been there; but Miss
Pole had an uncle who once had passed a night there, which was very
pleasant.

Mrs Jamieson, meanwhile, was absorbed in wonder why Mr Mulliner did not
bring the tea; and at length the wonder oozed out of her mouth.

“I had better ring the bell, my dear, had not I?” said Lady Glenmire
briskly.

“No—I think not—Mulliner does not like to be hurried.”

We should have liked our tea, for we dined at an earlier hour than Mrs
Jamieson.  I suspect Mr Mulliner had to finish the _St James’s
Chronicle_ before he chose to trouble himself about tea.  His mistress
fidgeted and fidgeted, and kept saying, “I can’t think why Mulliner does
not bring tea.  I can’t think what he can be about.”  And Lady Glenmire
at last grew quite impatient, but it was a pretty kind of impatience
after all; and she rang the bell rather sharply, on receiving a
half-permission from her sister-in-law to do so.  Mr Mulliner appeared
in dignified surprise. “Oh!” said Mrs Jamieson, “Lady Glenmire rang the
bell; I believe it was for tea.”

In a few minutes tea was brought.  Very delicate was the china, very old
the plate, very thin the bread and butter, and very small the lumps of
sugar.  Sugar was evidently Mrs Jamieson’s favourite economy.  I
question if the little filigree sugar-tongs, made something like
scissors, could have opened themselves wide enough to take up an honest,
vulgar good-sized piece; and when I tried to seize two little minnikin
pieces at once, so as not to be detected in too many returns to the
sugar-basin, they absolutely dropped one, with a little sharp clatter,
quite in a malicious and unnatural manner.  But before this happened we
had had a slight disappointment.  In the little silver jug was cream, in
the larger one was milk.  As soon as Mr Mulliner came in, Carlo began to
beg, which was a thing our manners forbade us to do, though I am sure we
were just as hungry; and Mrs Jamieson said she was certain we would
excuse her if she gave her poor dumb Carlo his tea first.  She
accordingly mixed a saucerful for him, and put it down for him to lap;
and then she told us how intelligent and sensible the dear little fellow
was; he knew cream quite well, and constantly refused tea with only milk
in it: so the milk was left for us; but we silently thought we were
quite as intelligent and sensible as Carlo, and felt as if insult were
added to injury when we were called upon to admire the gratitude evinced
by his wagging his tail for the cream which should have been ours.

After tea we thawed down into common-life subjects.  We were thankful to
Lady Glenmire for having proposed some more bread and butter, and this
mutual want made us better acquainted with her than we should ever have
been with talking about the Court, though Miss Pole did say she had
hoped to know how the dear Queen was from some one who had seen her.

The friendship begun over bread and butter extended on to cards.  Lady
Glenmire played Preference to admiration, and was a complete authority
as to Ombre and Quadrille.  Even Miss Pole quite forgot to say “my
lady,” and “your ladyship,” and said “Basto! ma’am”; “you have Spadille,
I believe,” just as quietly as if we had never held the great Cranford
Parliament on the subject of the proper mode of addressing a peeress.

As a proof of how thoroughly we had forgotten that we were in the
presence of one who might have sat down to tea with a coronet, instead
of a cap, on her head, Mrs Forrester related a curious little fact to
Lady Glenmire—an anecdote known to the circle of her intimate friends,
but of which even Mrs Jamieson was not aware.  It related to some fine
old lace, the sole relic of better days, which Lady Glenmire was
admiring on Mrs Forrester’s collar.

“Yes,” said that lady, “such lace cannot be got now for either love or
money; made by the nuns abroad, they tell me.  They say that they can’t
make it now even there.  But perhaps they can, now they’ve passed the
Catholic Emancipation Bill.  I should not wonder.  But, in the meantime,
I treasure up my lace very much.  I daren’t even trust the washing of it
to my maid” (the little charity school-girl I have named before, but who
sounded well as “my maid”).  “I always wash it myself.  And once it had
a narrow escape.  Of course, your ladyship knows that such lace must
never be starched or ironed.  Some people wash it in sugar and water,
and some in coffee, to make it the right yellow colour; but I myself
have a very good receipt for washing it in milk, which stiffens it
enough, and gives it a very good creamy colour.  Well, ma’am, I had
tacked it together (and the beauty of this fine lace is that, when it is
wet, it goes into a very little space), and put it to soak in milk,
when, unfortunately, I left the room; on my return, I found pussy on the
table, looking very like a thief, but gulping very uncomfortably, as if
she was half-chocked with something she wanted to swallow and could not.
 And, would you believe it?  At first I pitied her, and said ‘Poor
pussy! poor pussy!’ till, all at once, I looked and saw the cup of milk
empty—cleaned out!  ‘You naughty cat!’ said I, and I believe I was
provoked enough to give her a slap, which did no good, but only helped
the lace down—just as one slaps a choking child on the back.  I could
have cried, I was so vexed; but I determined I would not give the lace
up without a struggle for it.  I hoped the lace might disagree with her,
at any rate; but it would have been too much for Job, if he had seen, as
I did, that cat come in, quite placid and purring, not a quarter of an
hour after, and almost expecting to be stroked.  ‘No, pussy!’ said I,
‘if you have any conscience you ought not to expect that!’  And then a
thought struck me; and I rang the bell for my maid, and sent her to Mr
Hoggins, with my compliments, and would he be kind enough to lend me one
of his top-boots for an hour?  I did not think there was anything odd in
the message; but Jenny said the young men in the surgery laughed as if
they would be ill at my wanting a top-boot.  When it came, Jenny and I
put pussy in, with her forefeet straight down, so that they were
fastened, and could not scratch, and we gave her a teaspoonful of
current-jelly in which (your ladyship must excuse me) I had mixed some
tartar emetic.  I shall never forget how anxious I was for the next
half-hour.  I took pussy to my own room, and spread a clean towel on the
floor.  I could have kissed her when she returned the lace to sight,
very much as it had gone down.  Jenny had boiling water ready, and we
soaked it and soaked it, and spread it on a lavender-bush in the sun
before I could touch it again, even to put it in milk.  But now your
ladyship would never guess that it had been in pussy’s inside.”

          [Picture: We gave her a teaspoonful of current-jelly]

We found out, in the course of the evening, that Lady Glenmire was going
to pay Mrs Jamieson a long visit, as she had given up her apartments in
Edinburgh, and had no ties to take her back there in a hurry.  On the
whole, we were rather glad to hear this, for she had made a pleasant
impression upon us; and it was also very comfortable to find, from
things which dropped out in the course of conversation, that, in
addition to many other genteel qualities, she was far removed from the
“vulgarity of wealth.”

“Don’t you find it very unpleasant walking?” asked Mrs Jamieson, as our
respective servants were announced.  It was a pretty regular question
from Mrs Jamieson, who had her own carriage in the coach-house, and
always went out in a sedan-chair to the very shortest distances.  The
answers were nearly as much a matter of course.

“Oh dear, no! it is so pleasant and still at night!”  “Such a
refreshment after the excitement of a party!”  “The stars are so
beautiful!”  This last was from Miss Matty.

“Are you fond of astronomy?” Lady Glenmire asked.

“Not very,” replied Miss Matty, rather confused at the moment to
remember which was astronomy and which was astrology—but the answer was
true under either circumstance, for she read, and was slightly alarmed
at Francis Moore’s astrological predictions; and, as to astronomy, in a
private and confidential conversation, she had told me she never could
believe that the earth was moving constantly, and that she would not
believe it if she could, it made her feel so tired and dizzy whenever
she thought about it.

In our pattens we picked our way home with extra care that night, so
refined and delicate were our perceptions after drinking tea with “my
lady.”




CHAPTER IX.
SIGNOR BRUNONI


SOON after the events of which I gave an account in my last paper, I was
summoned home by my father’s illness; and for a time I forgot, in
anxiety about him, to wonder how my dear friends at Cranford were
getting on, or how Lady Glenmire could reconcile herself to the dulness
of the long visit which she was still paying to her sister-in-law, Mrs
Jamieson. When my father grew a little stronger I accompanied him to the
seaside, so that altogether I seemed banished from Cranford, and was
deprived of the opportunity of hearing any chance intelligence of the
dear little town for the greater part of that year.

Late in November—when we had returned home again, and my father was once
more in good health—I received a letter from Miss Matty; and a very
mysterious letter it was.  She began many sentences without ending them,
running them one into another, in much the same confused sort of way in
which written words run together on blotting-paper.  All I could make
out was that, if my father was better (which she hoped he was), and
would take warning and wear a great-coat from Michaelmas to Lady-day, if
turbans were in fashion, could I tell her?  Such a piece of gaiety was
going to happen as had not been seen or known of since Wombwell’s lions
came, when one of them ate a little child’s arm; and she was, perhaps,
too old to care about dress, but a new cap she must have; and, having
heard that turbans were worn, and some of the county families likely to
come, she would like to look tidy, if I would bring her a cap from the
milliner I employed; and oh, dear! how careless of her to forget that
she wrote to beg I would come and pay her a visit next Tuesday; when she
hoped to have something to offer me in the way of amusement, which she
would not now more particularly describe, only sea-green was her
favourite colour.  So she ended her letter; but in a P.S. she added, she
thought she might as well tell me what was the peculiar attraction to
Cranford just now; Signor Brunoni was going to exhibit his wonderful
magic in the Cranford Assembly Rooms on Wednesday and Friday evening in
the following week.

I was very glad to accept the invitation from my dear Miss Matty,
independently of the conjuror, and most particularly anxious to prevent
her from disfiguring her small, gentle, mousey face with a great
Saracen’s head turban; and accordingly, I bought her a pretty, neat,
middle-aged cap, which, however, was rather a disappointment to her
when, on my arrival, she followed me into my bedroom, ostensibly to poke
the fire, but in reality, I do believe, to see if the sea-green turban
was not inside the cap-box with which I had travelled.  It was in vain
that I twirled the cap round on my hand to exhibit back and side fronts:
her heart had been set upon a turban, and all she could do was to say,
with resignation in her look and voice—

“I am sure you did your best, my dear.  It is just like the caps all the
ladies in Cranford are wearing, and they have had theirs for a year, I
dare say.  I should have liked something newer, I confess—something more
like the turbans Miss Betty Barker tells me Queen Adelaide wears; but it
is very pretty, my dear.  And I dare say lavender will wear better than
sea-green.  Well, after all, what is dress, that we should care anything
about it?  You’ll tell me if you want anything, my dear.  Here is the
bell.  I suppose turbans have not got down to Drumble yet?”

So saying, the dear old lady gently bemoaned herself out of the room,
leaving me to dress for the evening, when, as she informed me, she
expected Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester, and she hoped I should not feel
myself too much tired to join the party.  Of course I should not; and I
made some haste to unpack and arrange my dress; but, with all my speed,
I heard the arrivals and the buzz of conversation in the next room
before I was ready.  Just as I opened the door, I caught the words, “I
was foolish to expect anything very genteel out of the Drumble shops;
poor girl! she did her best, I’ve no doubt.”  But, for all that, I had
rather that she blamed Drumble and me than disfigured herself with a
turban.

Miss Pole was always the person, in the trio of Cranford ladies now
assembled, to have had adventures.  She was in the habit of spending the
morning in rambling from shop to shop, not to purchase anything (except
an occasional reel of cotton or a piece of tape), but to see the new
articles and report upon them, and to collect all the stray pieces of
intelligence in the town.  She had a way, too, of demurely popping
hither and thither into all sorts of places to gratify her curiosity on
any point—a way which, if she had not looked so very genteel and prim,
might have been considered impertinent.  And now, by the expressive way
in which she cleared her throat, and waited for all minor subjects (such
as caps and turbans) to be cleared off the course, we knew she had
something very particular to relate, when the due pause came—and I defy
any people possessed of common modesty to keep up a conversation long,
where one among them sits up aloft in silence, looking down upon all the
things they chance to say as trivial and contemptible compared to what
they could disclose, if properly entreated.  Miss Pole began—

“As I was stepping out of Gordon’s shop to-day, I chanced to go into the
‘George’ (my Betty has a second-cousin who is chambermaid there, and I
thought Betty would like to hear how she was), and, not seeing anyone
about, I strolled up the staircase, and found myself in the passage
leading to the Assembly Room (you and I remember the Assembly Room, I am
sure, Miss Matty! and the minuets de la cour!); so I went on, not
thinking of what I was about, when, all at once, I perceived that I was
in the middle of the preparations for to-morrow night—the room being
divided with great clothes-maids, over which Crosby’s men were tacking
red flannel; very dark and odd it seemed; it quite bewildered me, and I
was going on behind the screens, in my absence of mind, when a
gentleman (quite the gentleman, I can assure you) stepped forwards and
asked if I had any business he could arrange for me.  He spoke such
pretty broken English, I could not help thinking of Thaddeus of Warsaw,
and the Hungarian Brothers, and Santo Sebastiani; and while I was busy
picturing his past life to myself, he had bowed me out of the room.  But
wait a minute!  You have not heard half my story yet!  I was going
downstairs, when who should I meet but Betty’s second-cousin.  So, of
course, I stopped to speak to her for Betty’s sake; and she told me that
I had really seen the conjuror—the gentleman who spoke broken English
was Signor Brunoni himself.  Just at this moment he passed us on the
stairs, making such a graceful bow! in reply to which I dropped a
curtsey—all foreigners have such polite manners, one catches something
of it.  But when he had gone downstairs, I bethought me that I had
dropped my glove in the Assembly Room (it was safe in my muff all the
time, but I never found it till afterwards); so I went back, and, just
as I was creeping up the passage left on one side of the great screen
that goes nearly across the room, who should I see but the very same
gentleman that had met me before, and passed me on the stairs, coming
now forwards from the inner part of the room, to which there is no
entrance—you remember, Miss Matty—and just repeating, in his pretty
broken English, the inquiry if I had any business there—I don’t mean
that he put it quite so bluntly, but he seemed very determined that I
should not pass the screen—so, of course, I explained about my glove,
which, curiously enough, I found at that very moment.”

Miss Pole, then, had seen the conjuror—the real, live conjuror! and
numerous were the questions we all asked her.  “Had he a beard?”  “Was
he young, or old?”  “Fair, or dark?”  “Did he look”—(unable to shape my
question prudently, I put it in another form)—“How did he look?”  In
short, Miss Pole was the heroine of the evening, owing to her morning’s
encounter.  If she was not the rose (that is to say the conjuror) she
had been near it.

Conjuration, sleight of hand, magic, witchcraft, were the subjects of
the evening.  Miss Pole was slightly sceptical, and inclined to think
there might be a scientific solution found for even the proceedings of
the Witch of Endor.  Mrs Forrester believed everything, from ghosts to
death-watches.  Miss Matty ranged between the two—always convinced by
the last speaker.  I think she was naturally more inclined to Mrs
Forrester’s side, but a desire of proving herself a worthy sister to
Miss Jenkyns kept her equally balanced—Miss Jenkyns, who would never
allow a servant to call the little rolls of tallow that formed
themselves round candles “winding-sheets,” but insisted on their being
spoken of as “roley-poleys!”  A sister of hers to be superstitious!  It
would never do.

After tea, I was despatched downstairs into the dining-parlour for that
volume of the old Encyclopædia which contained the nouns beginning with
C, in order that Miss Pole might prime herself with scientific
explanations for the tricks of the following evening.  It spoilt the
pool at Preference which Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester had been looking
forward to, for Miss Pole became so much absorbed in her subject, and
the plates by which it was illustrated, that we felt it would be cruel
to disturb her otherwise than by one or two well-timed yawns, which I
threw in now and then, for I was really touched by the meek way in which
the two ladies were bearing their disappointment.  But Miss Pole only
read the more zealously, imparting to us no more information than this—

“Ah! I see; I comprehend perfectly.  A represents the ball.  Put A
between B and D—no! between C and F, and turn the second joint of the
third finger of your left hand over the wrist of your right H.  Very
clear indeed!  My dear Mrs Forrester, conjuring and witchcraft is a mere
affair of the alphabet.  Do let me read you this one passage?”

Mrs Forrester implored Miss Pole to spare her, saying, from a child
upwards, she never could understand being read aloud to; and I dropped
the pack of cards, which I had been shuffling very audibly, and by this
discreet movement I obliged Miss Pole to perceive that Preference was to
have been the order of the evening, and to propose, rather unwillingly,
that the pool should commence.  The pleasant brightness that stole over
the other two ladies’ faces on this!  Miss Matty had one or two twinges
of self-reproach for having interrupted Miss Pole in her studies: and
did not remember her cards well, or give her full attention to the game,
until she had soothed her conscience by offering to lend the volume of
the Encyclopædia to Miss Pole, who accepted it thankfully, and said
Betty should take it home when she came with the lantern.

The next evening we were all in a little gentle flutter at the idea of
the gaiety before us.  Miss Matty went up to dress betimes, and hurried
me until I was ready, when we found we had an hour-and-a-half to wait
before the “doors opened at seven precisely.”  And we had only twenty
yards to go!  However, as Miss Matty said, it would not do to get too
much absorbed in anything, and forget the time; so she thought we had
better sit quietly, without lighting the candles, till five minutes to
seven.  So Miss Matty dozed, and I knitted.

At length we set off; and at the door under the carriage-way at the
“George,” we met Mrs Forrester and Miss Pole: the latter was discussing
the subject of the evening with more vehemence than ever, and throwing
X’s and B’s at our heads like hailstones.  She had even copied one or
two of the “receipts”—as she called them—for the different tricks, on
backs of letters, ready to explain and to detect Signor Brunoni’s arts.

We went into the cloak-room adjoining the Assembly Room; Miss Matty gave
a sigh or two to her departed youth, and the remembrance of the last
time she had been there, as she adjusted her pretty new cap before the
strange, quaint old mirror in the cloak-room.  The Assembly Room had
been added to the inn, about a hundred years before, by the different
county families, who met together there once a month during the winter
to dance and play at cards.  Many a county beauty had first swung
through the minuet that she afterwards danced before Queen Charlotte in
this very room.  It was said that one of the Gunnings had graced the
apartment with her beauty; it was certain that a rich and beautiful
widow, Lady Williams, had here been smitten with the noble figure of a
young artist, who was staying with some family in the neighbourhood for
professional purposes, and accompanied his patrons to the Cranford
Assembly.  And a pretty bargain poor Lady Williams had of her handsome
husband, if all tales were true.  Now, no beauty blushed and dimpled
along the sides of the Cranford Assembly Room; no handsome artist won
hearts by his bow, _chapeau bras_ in hand; the old room was dingy; the
salmon-coloured paint had faded into a drab; great pieces of plaster had
chipped off from the fine wreaths and festoons on its walls; but still a
mouldy odour of aristocracy lingered about the place, and a dusty
recollection of the days that were gone made Miss Matty and Mrs
Forrester bridle up as they entered, and walk mincingly up the room, as
if there were a number of genteel observers, instead of two little boys
with a stick of toffee between them with which to beguile the time.

We stopped short at the second front row; I could hardly understand why,
until I heard Miss Pole ask a stray waiter if any of the county families
were expected; and when he shook his head, and believed not, Mrs
Forrester and Miss Matty moved forwards, and our party represented a
conversational square.  The front row was soon augmented and enriched by
Lady Glenmire and Mrs Jamieson.  We six occupied the two front rows, and
our aristocratic seclusion was respected by the groups of shopkeepers
who strayed in from time to time and huddled together on the back
benches.  At least I conjectured so, from the noise they made, and the
sonorous bumps they gave in sitting down; but when, in weariness of the
obstinate green curtain that would not draw up, but would stare at me
with two odd eyes, seen through holes, as in the old tapestry story, I
would fain have looked round at the merry chattering people behind me,
Miss Pole clutched my arm, and begged me not to turn, for “it was not
the thing.”  What “the thing” was, I never could find out, but it must
have been something eminently dull and tiresome.  However, we all sat
eyes right, square front, gazing at the tantalising curtain, and hardly
speaking intelligibly, we were so afraid of being caught in the
vulgarity of making any noise in a place of public amusement.  Mrs
Jamieson was the most fortunate, for she fell asleep.

At length the eyes disappeared—the curtain quivered—one side went up
before the other, which stuck fast; it was dropped again, and, with a
fresh effort, and a vigorous pull from some unseen hand, it flew up,
revealing to our sight a magnificent gentleman in the Turkish costume,
seated before a little table, gazing at us (I should have said with the
same eyes that I had last seen through the hole in the curtain) with
calm and condescending dignity, “like a being of another sphere,” as I
heard a sentimental voice ejaculate behind me.

“That’s not Signor Brunoni!” said Miss Pole decidedly; and so audibly
that I am sure he heard, for he glanced down over his flowing beard at
our party with an air of mute reproach.  “Signor Brunoni had no
beard—but perhaps he’ll come soon.”  So she lulled herself into
patience. Meanwhile, Miss Matty had reconnoitred through her eye-glass,
wiped it, and looked again.  Then she turned round, and said to me, in a
kind, mild, sorrowful tone—

“You see, my dear, turbans _are_ worn.”

But we had no time for more conversation.  The Grand Turk, as Miss Pole
chose to call him, arose and announced himself as Signor Brunoni.

“I don’t believe him!” exclaimed Miss Pole, in a defiant manner.  He
looked at her again, with the same dignified upbraiding in his
countenance.  “I don’t!” she repeated more positively than ever.
“Signor Brunoni had not got that muffy sort of thing about his chin, but
looked like a close-shaved Christian gentleman.”

Miss Pole’s energetic speeches had the good effect of wakening up Mrs
Jamieson, who opened her eyes wide, in sign of the deepest attention—a
proceeding which silenced Miss Pole and encouraged the Grand Turk to
proceed, which he did in very broken English—so broken that there was no
cohesion between the parts of his sentences; a fact which he himself
perceived at last, and so left off speaking and proceeded to action.

Now we _were_ astonished.  How he did his tricks I could not imagine;
no, not even when Miss Pole pulled out her pieces of paper and began
reading aloud—or at least in a very audible whisper—the separate
“receipts” for the most common of his tricks.  If ever I saw a man frown
and look enraged, I saw the Grand Turk frown at Miss Pole; but, as she
said, what could be expected but unchristian looks from a Mussulman?  If
Miss Pole were sceptical, and more engrossed with her receipts and
diagrams than with his tricks, Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester were
mystified and perplexed to the highest degree.  Mrs Jamieson kept taking
her spectacles off and wiping them, as if she thought it was something
defective in them which made the legerdemain; and Lady Glenmire, who had
seen many curious sights in Edinburgh, was very much struck with the
tricks, and would not at all agree with Miss Pole, who declared that
anybody could do them with a little practice, and that she would,
herself, undertake to do all he did, with two hours given to study the
Encyclopædia and make her third finger flexible.

At last Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester became perfectly awestricken.  They
whispered together.  I sat just behind them, so I could not help hearing
what they were saying.  Miss Matty asked Mrs Forrester “if she thought
it was quite right to have come to see such things?  She could not help
fearing they were lending encouragement to something that was not
quite”— A little shake of the head filled up the blank.  Mrs Forrester
replied, that the same thought had crossed her mind; she too was feeling
very uncomfortable, it was so very strange.  She was quite certain that
it was her pocket-handkerchief which was in that loaf just now; and it
had been in her own hand not five minutes before.  She wondered who had
furnished the bread?  She was sure it could not be Dakin, because he was
the churchwarden.  Suddenly Miss Matty half-turned towards me—

“Will you look, my dear—you are a stranger in the town, and it won’t
give rise to unpleasant reports—will you just look round and see if the
rector is here?  If he is, I think we may conclude that this wonderful
man is sanctioned by the Church, and that will be a great relief to my
mind.”

I looked, and I saw the tall, thin, dry, dusty rector, sitting
surrounded by National School boys, guarded by troops of his own sex
from any approach of the many Cranford spinsters.  His kind face was all
agape with broad smiles, and the boys around him were in chinks of
laughing.  I told Miss Matty that the Church was smiling approval, which
set her mind at ease.

                 [Picture: Afraid of matrimonial reports]

I have never named Mr Hayter, the rector, because I, as a well-to-do and
happy young woman, never came in contact with him.  He was an old
bachelor, but as afraid of matrimonial reports getting abroad about him
as any girl of eighteen: and he would rush into a shop or dive down an
entry, sooner than encounter any of the Cranford ladies in the street;
and, as for the Preference parties, I did not wonder at his not
accepting invitations to them.  To tell the truth, I always suspected
Miss Pole of having given very vigorous chase to Mr Hayter when he first
came to Cranford; and not the less, because now she appeared to share so
vividly in his dread lest her name should ever be coupled with his.  He
found all his interests among the poor and helpless; he had treated the
National School boys this very night to the performance; and virtue was
for once its own reward, for they guarded him right and left, and clung
round him as if he had been the queen-bee and they the swarm.  He felt
so safe in their environment that he could even afford to give our party
a bow as we filed out.  Miss Pole ignored his presence, and pretended to
be absorbed in convincing us that we had been cheated, and had not seen
Signor Brunoni after all.




CHAPTER X.
THE PANIC


I THINK a series of circumstances dated from Signor Brunoni’s visit to
Cranford, which seemed at the time connected in our minds with him,
though I don’t know that he had anything really to do with them.  All at
once all sorts of uncomfortable rumours got afloat in the town.  There
were one or two robberies—real _bonâ fide_ robberies; men had up before
the magistrates and committed for trial—and that seemed to make us all
afraid of being robbed; and for a long time, at Miss Matty’s, I know, we
used to make a regular expedition all round the kitchens and cellars
every night, Miss Matty leading the way, armed with the poker, I
following with the hearth-brush, and Martha carrying the shovel and
fire-irons with which to sound the alarm; and by the accidental hitting
together of them she often frightened us so much that we bolted
ourselves up, all three together, in the back-kitchen, or store-room, or
wherever we happened to be, till, when our affright was over, we
recollected ourselves and set out afresh with double valiance.  By day
we heard strange stories from the shopkeepers and cottagers, of carts
that went about in the dead of night, drawn by horses shod with felt,
and guarded by men in dark clothes, going round the town, no doubt in
search of some unwatched house or some unfastened door.

Miss Pole, who affected great bravery herself, was the principal person
to collect and arrange these reports so as to make them assume their
most fearful aspect.  But we discovered that she had begged one of Mr
Hoggins’s worn-out hats to hang up in her lobby, and we (at least I) had
doubts as to whether she really would enjoy the little adventure of
having her house broken into, as she protested she should.  Miss Matty
made no secret of being an arrant coward, but she went regularly through
her housekeeper’s duty of inspection—only the hour for this became
earlier and earlier, till at last we went the rounds at half-past six,
and Miss Matty adjourned to bed soon after seven, “in order to get the
night over the sooner.”

Cranford had so long piqued itself on being an honest and moral town
that it had grown to fancy itself too genteel and well-bred to be
otherwise, and felt the stain upon its character at this time doubly.
But we comforted ourselves with the assurance which we gave to each
other that the robberies could never have been committed by any Cranford
person; it must have been a stranger or strangers who brought this
disgrace upon the town, and occasioned as many precautions as if we were
living among the Red Indians or the French.

This last comparison of our nightly state of defence and fortification
was made by Mrs Forrester, whose father had served under General
Burgoyne in the American war, and whose husband had fought the French in
Spain. She indeed inclined to the idea that, in some way, the French
were connected with the small thefts, which were ascertained facts, and
the burglaries and highway robberies, which were rumours.  She had been
deeply impressed with the idea of French spies at some time in her life;
and the notion could never be fairly eradicated, but sprang up again
from time to time.  And now her theory was this:—The Cranford people
respected themselves too much, and were too grateful to the aristocracy
who were so kind as to live near the town, ever to disgrace their
bringing up by being dishonest or immoral; therefore, we must believe
that the robbers were strangers—if strangers, why not foreigners?—if
foreigners, who so likely as the French?  Signor Brunoni spoke broken
English like a Frenchman; and, though he wore a turban like a Turk, Mrs
Forrester had seen a print of Madame de Staël with a turban on, and
another of Mr Denon in just such a dress as that in which the conjuror
had made his appearance, showing clearly that the French, as well as the
Turks, wore turbans.  There could be no doubt Signor Brunoni was a
Frenchman—a French spy come to discover the weak and undefended places
of England, and doubtless he had his accomplices.  For her part, she,
Mrs Forrester, had always had her own opinion of Miss Pole’s adventure
at the “George Inn”—seeing two men where only one was believed to be.
French people had ways and means which, she was thankful to say, the
English knew nothing about; and she had never felt quite easy in her
mind about going to see that conjuror—it was rather too much like a
forbidden thing, though the rector was there.  In short, Mrs Forrester
grew more excited than we had ever known her before, and, being an
officer’s daughter and widow, we looked up to her opinion, of course.

Really I do not know how much was true or false in the reports which
flew about like wildfire just at this time; but it seemed to me then
that there was every reason to believe that at Mardon (a small town
about eight miles from Cranford) houses and shops were entered by holes
made in the walls, the bricks being silently carried away in the dead of
the night, and all done so quietly that no sound was heard either in or
out of the house.  Miss Matty gave it up in despair when she heard of
this. “What was the use,” said she, “of locks and bolts, and bells to
the windows, and going round the house every night?  That last trick was
fit for a conjuror.  Now she did believe that Signor Brunoni was at the
bottom of it.”

One afternoon, about five o’clock, we were startled by a hasty knock at
the door.  Miss Matty bade me run and tell Martha on no account to open
the door till she (Miss Matty) had reconnoitred through the window; and
she armed herself with a footstool to drop down on the head of the
visitor, in case he should show a face covered with black crape, as he
looked up in answer to her inquiry of who was there.  But it was nobody
but Miss Pole and Betty.  The former came upstairs, carrying a little
hand-basket, and she was evidently in a state of great agitation.

“Take care of that!” said she to me, as I offered to relieve her of her
basket.  “It’s my plate.  I am sure there is a plan to rob my house
to-night.  I am come to throw myself on your hospitality, Miss Matty.
Betty is going to sleep with her cousin at the ‘George.’  I can sit up
here all night if you will allow me; but my house is so far from any
neighbours, and I don’t believe we could be heard if we screamed ever
so!”

“But,” said Miss Matty, “what has alarmed you so much?  Have you seen
any men lurking about the house?”

“Oh, yes!” answered Miss Pole.  “Two very bad-looking men have gone
three times past the house, very slowly; and an Irish beggar-woman came
not half-an-hour ago, and all but forced herself in past Betty, saying
her children were starving, and she must speak to the mistress.  You
see, she said ‘mistress,’ though there was a hat hanging up in the hall,
and it would have been more natural to have said ‘master.’  But Betty
shut the door in her face, and came up to me, and we got the spoons
together, and sat in the parlour-window watching till we saw Thomas
Jones going from his work, when we called to him and asked him to take
care of us into the town.”

We might have triumphed over Miss Pole, who had professed such bravery
until she was frightened; but we were too glad to perceive that she
shared in the weaknesses of humanity to exult over her; and I gave up my
room to her very willingly, and shared Miss Matty’s bed for the night.
But before we retired, the two ladies rummaged up, out of the recesses
of their memory, such horrid stories of robbery and murder that I quite
quaked in my shoes.  Miss Pole was evidently anxious to prove that such
terrible events had occurred within her experience that she was
justified in her sudden panic; and Miss Matty did not like to be
outdone, and capped every story with one yet more horrible, till it
reminded me oddly enough, of an old story I had read somewhere, of a
nightingale and a musician, who strove one against the other which could
produce the most admirable music, till poor Philomel dropped down dead.

One of the stories that haunted me for a long time afterwards was of a
girl who was left in charge of a great house in Cumberland on some
particular fair-day, when the other servants all went off to the
gaieties.  The family were away in London, and a pedlar came by, and
asked to leave his large and heavy pack in the kitchen, saying he would
call for it again at night; and the girl (a gamekeeper’s daughter),
roaming about in search of amusement, chanced to hit upon a gun hanging
up in the hall, and took it down to look at the chasing; and it went off
through the open kitchen door, hit the pack, and a slow dark thread of
blood came oozing out. (How Miss Pole enjoyed this part of the story,
dwelling on each word as if she loved it!)  She rather hurried over the
further account of the girl’s bravery, and I have but a confused idea
that, somehow, she baffled the robbers with Italian irons, heated
red-hot, and then restored to blackness by being dipped in grease.

We parted for the night with an awe-stricken wonder as to what we should
hear of in the morning—and, on my part, with a vehement desire for the
night to be over and gone: I was so afraid lest the robbers should have
seen, from some dark lurking-place, that Miss Pole had carried off her
plate, and thus have a double motive for attacking our house.

                 [Picture: Asked him to take care of us]

But until Lady Glenmire came to call next day we heard of nothing
unusual.  The kitchen fire-irons were in exactly the same position
against the back door as when Martha and I had skilfully piled them up,
like spillikins, ready to fall with an awful clatter if only a cat had
touched the outside panels.  I had wondered what we should all do if
thus awakened and alarmed, and had proposed to Miss Matty that we should
cover up our faces under the bed-clothes so that there should be no
danger of the robbers thinking that we could identify them; but Miss
Matty, who was trembling very much, scouted this idea, and said we owed
it to society to apprehend them, and that she should certainly do her
best to lay hold of them and lock them up in the garret till morning.

When Lady Glenmire came, we almost felt jealous of her.  Mrs Jamieson’s
house had really been attacked; at least there were men’s footsteps to
be seen on the flower borders, underneath the kitchen windows, “where
nae men should be;” and Carlo had barked all through the night as if
strangers were abroad.  Mrs Jamieson had been awakened by Lady Glenmire,
and they had rung the bell which communicated with Mr Mulliner’s room in
the third storey, and when his night-capped head had appeared over the
bannisters, in answer to the summons, they had told him of their alarm,
and the reasons for it; whereupon he retreated into his bedroom, and
locked the door (for fear of draughts, as he informed them in the
morning), and opened the window, and called out valiantly to say, if the
supposed robbers would come to him he would fight them; but, as Lady
Glenmire observed, that was but poor comfort, since they would have to
pass by Mrs Jamieson’s room and her own before they could reach him, and
must be of a very pugnacious disposition indeed if they neglected the
opportunities of robbery presented by the unguarded lower storeys, to go
up to a garret, and there force a door in order to get at the champion
of the house.  Lady Glenmire, after waiting and listening for some time
in the drawing-room, had proposed to Mrs Jamieson that they should go to
bed; but that lady said she should not feel comfortable unless she sat
up and watched; and, accordingly, she packed herself warmly up on the
sofa, where she was found by the housemaid, when she came into the room
at six o’clock, fast asleep; but Lady Glenmire went to bed, and kept
awake all night.

When Miss Pole heard of this, she nodded her head in great satisfaction.
She had been sure we should hear of something happening in Cranford that
night; and we had heard.  It was clear enough they had first proposed to
attack her house; but when they saw that she and Betty were on their
guard, and had carried off the plate, they had changed their tactics and
gone to Mrs Jamieson’s, and no one knew what might have happened if
Carlo had not barked, like a good dog as he was!

Poor Carlo! his barking days were nearly over.  Whether the gang who
infested the neighbourhood were afraid of him, or whether they were
revengeful enough, for the way in which he had baffled them on the night
in question, to poison him; or whether, as some among the more
uneducated people thought, he died of apoplexy, brought on by too much
feeding and too little exercise; at any rate, it is certain that, two
days after this eventful night, Carlo was found dead, with his poor legs
stretched out stiff in the attitude of running, as if by such unusual
exertion he could escape the sure pursuer, Death.

We were all sorry for Carlo, the old familiar friend who had snapped at
us for so many years; and the mysterious mode of his death made us very
uncomfortable.  Could Signor Brunoni be at the bottom of this?  He had
apparently killed a canary with only a word of command; his will seemed
of deadly force; who knew but what he might yet be lingering in the
neighbourhood willing all sorts of awful things!

We whispered these fancies among ourselves in the evenings; but in the
mornings our courage came back with the daylight, and in a week’s time
we had got over the shock of Carlo’s death; all but Mrs Jamieson.  She,
poor thing, felt it as she had felt no event since her husband’s death;
indeed, Miss Pole said, that as the Honourable Mr Jamieson drank a good
deal, and occasioned her much uneasiness, it was possible that Carlo’s
death might be the greater affliction.  But there was always a tinge of
cynicism in Miss Pole’s remarks.  However, one thing was clear and
certain—it was necessary for Mrs Jamieson to have some change of scene;
and Mr Mulliner was very impressive on this point, shaking his head
whenever we inquired after his mistress, and speaking of her loss of
appetite and bad nights very ominously; and with justice too, for if she
had two characteristics in her natural state of health they were a
facility of eating and sleeping.  If she could neither eat nor sleep,
she must be indeed out of spirits and out of health.

Lady Glenmire (who had evidently taken very kindly to Cranford) did not
like the idea of Mrs Jamieson’s going to Cheltenham, and more than once
insinuated pretty plainly that it was Mr Mulliner’s doing, who had been
much alarmed on the occasion of the house being attacked, and since had
said, more than once, that he felt it a very responsible charge to have
to defend so many women.  Be that as it might, Mrs Jamieson went to
Cheltenham, escorted by Mr Mulliner; and Lady Glenmire remained in
possession of the house, her ostensible office being to take care that
the maid-servants did not pick up followers.  She made a very
pleasant-looking dragon; and, as soon as it was arranged for her stay in
Cranford, she found out that Mrs Jamieson’s visit to Cheltenham was just
the best thing in the world.  She had let her house in Edinburgh, and
was for the time house-less, so the charge of her sister-in-law’s
comfortable abode was very convenient and acceptable.

Miss Pole was very much inclined to instal herself as a heroine, because
of the decided steps she had taken in flying from the two men and one
woman, whom she entitled “that murderous gang.”  She described their
appearance in glowing colours, and I noticed that every time she went
over the story some fresh trait of villainy was added to their
appearance.  One was tall—he grew to be gigantic in height before we had
done with him; he of course had black hair—and by-and-by it hung in
elf-locks over his forehead and down his back.  The other was short and
broad—and a hump sprouted out on his shoulder before we heard the last
of him; he had red hair—which deepened into carroty; and she was almost
sure he had a cast in the eye—a decided squint.  As for the woman, her
eyes glared, and she was masculine-looking—a perfect virago; most
probably a man dressed in woman’s clothes; afterwards, we heard of a
beard on her chin, and a manly voice and a stride.

If Miss Pole was delighted to recount the events of that afternoon to
all inquirers, others were not so proud of their adventures in the
robbery line.  Mr Hoggins, the surgeon, had been attacked at his own
door by two ruffians, who were concealed in the shadow of the porch, and
so effectually silenced him that he was robbed in the interval between
ringing his bell and the servant’s answering it.  Miss Pole was sure it
would turn out that this robbery had been committed by “her men,” and
went the very day she heard the report to have her teeth examined, and
to question Mr Hoggins.  She came to us afterwards; so we heard what she
had heard, straight and direct from the source, while we were yet in the
excitement and flutter of the agitation caused by the first
intelligence; for the event had only occurred the night before.

“Well!” said Miss Pole, sitting down with the decision of a person who
has made up her mind as to the nature of life and the world (and such
people never tread lightly, or seat themselves without a bump), “well,
Miss Matty! men will be men.  Every mother’s son of them wishes to be
considered Samson and Solomon rolled into one—too strong ever to be
beaten or discomfited—too wise ever to be outwitted.  If you will
notice, they have always foreseen events, though they never tell one for
one’s warning before the events happen.  My father was a man, and I know
the sex pretty well.”

She had talked herself out of breath, and we should have been very glad
to fill up the necessary pause as chorus, but we did not exactly know
what to say, or which man had suggested this diatribe against the sex;
so we only joined in generally, with a grave shake of the head, and a
soft murmur of “They are very incomprehensible, certainly!”

“Now, only think,” said she.  “There, I have undergone the risk of
having one of my remaining teeth drawn (for one is terribly at the mercy
of any surgeon-dentist; and I, for one, always speak them fair till I
have got my mouth out of their clutches), and, after all, Mr Hoggins is
too much of a man to own that he was robbed last night.”

“Not robbed!” exclaimed the chorus.

“Don’t tell me!” Miss Pole exclaimed, angry that we could be for a
moment imposed upon.  “I believe he was robbed, just as Betty told me,
and he is ashamed to own it; and, to be sure, it was very silly of him
to be robbed just at his own door; I daresay he feels that such a thing
won’t raise him in the eyes of Cranford society, and is anxious to
conceal it—but he need not have tried to impose upon me, by saying I
must have heard an exaggerated account of some petty theft of a neck of
mutton, which, it seems, was stolen out of the safe in his yard last
week; he had the impertinence to add, he believed that that was taken by
the cat.  I have no doubt, if I could get at the bottom of it, it was
that Irishman dressed up in woman’s clothes, who came spying about my
house, with the story about the starving children.”

After we had duly condemned the want of candour which Mr Hoggins had
evinced, and abused men in general, taking him for the representative
and type, we got round to the subject about which we had been talking
when Miss Pole came in; namely, how far, in the present disturbed state
of the country, we could venture to accept an invitation which Miss
Matty had just received from Mrs Forrester, to come as usual and keep
the anniversary of her wedding-day by drinking tea with her at five
o’clock, and playing a quiet pool afterwards.  Mrs Forrester had said
that she asked us with some diffidence, because the roads were, she
feared, very unsafe.  But she suggested that perhaps one of us would not
object to take the sedan, and that the others, by walking briskly, might
keep up with the long trot of the chairmen, and so we might all arrive
safely at Over Place, a suburb of the town.  (No; that is too large an
expression: a small cluster of houses separated from Cranford by about
two hundred yards of a dark and lonely lane.)  There was no doubt but
that a similar note was awaiting Miss Pole at home; so her call was a
very fortunate affair, as it enabled us to consult together.  We would
all much rather have declined this invitation; but we felt that it would
not be quite kind to Mrs Forrester, who would otherwise be left to a
solitary retrospect of her not very happy or fortunate life.  Miss Matty
and Miss Pole had been visitors on this occasion for many years, and now
they gallantly determined to nail their colours to the mast, and to go
through Darkness Lane rather than fail in loyalty to their friend.

But when the evening came, Miss Matty (for it was she who was voted into
the chair, as she had a cold), before being shut down in the sedan, like
jack-in-a-box, implored the chairmen, whatever might befall, not to run
away and leave her fastened up there, to be murdered; and even after
they had promised, I saw her tighten her features into the stern
determination of a martyr, and she gave me a melancholy and ominous
shake of the head through the glass.  However, we got there safely, only
rather out of breath, for it was who could trot hardest through Darkness
Lane, and I am afraid poor Miss Matty was sadly jolted.

Mrs Forrester had made extra preparations, in acknowledgment of our
exertion in coming to see her through such dangers.  The usual forms of
genteel ignorance as to what her servants might send up were all gone
through; and harmony and Preference seemed likely to be the order of the
evening, but for an interesting conversation that began I don’t know
how, but which had relation, of course, to the robbers who infested the
neighbourhood of Cranford.

Having braved the dangers of Darkness Lane, and thus having a little
stock of reputation for courage to fall back upon; and also, I daresay,
desirous of proving ourselves superior to men (_videlicet_ Mr Hoggins)
in the article of candour, we began to relate our individual fears, and
the private precautions we each of us took.  I owned that my pet
apprehension was eyes—eyes looking at me, and watching me, glittering
out from some dull, flat, wooden surface; and that if I dared to go up
to my looking-glass when I was panic-stricken, I should certainly turn
it round, with its back towards me, for fear of seeing eyes behind me
looking out of the darkness.  I saw Miss Matty nerving herself up for a
confession; and at last out it came.  She owned that, ever since she had
been a girl, she had dreaded being caught by her last leg, just as she
was getting into bed, by some one concealed under it.  She said, when
she was younger and more active, she used to take a flying leap from a
distance, and so bring both her legs up safely into bed at once; but
that this had always annoyed Deborah, who piqued herself upon getting
into bed gracefully, and she had given it up in consequence.  But now
the old terror would often come over her, especially since Miss Pole’s
house had been attacked (we had got quite to believe in the fact of the
attack having taken place), and yet it was very unpleasant to think of
looking under a bed, and seeing a man concealed, with a great, fierce
face staring out at you; so she had bethought herself of
something—perhaps I had noticed that she had told Martha to buy her a
penny ball, such as children play with—and now she rolled this ball
under the bed every night: if it came out on the other side, well and
good; if not she always took care to have her hand on the bell-rope, and
meant to call out John and Harry, just as if she expected men-servants
to answer her ring.

We all applauded this ingenious contrivance, and Miss Matty sank back
into satisfied silence, with a look at Mrs Forrester as if to ask for
_her_ private weakness.

Mrs Forrester looked askance at Miss Pole, and tried to change the
subject a little by telling us that she had borrowed a boy from one of
the neighbouring cottages and promised his parents a hundredweight of
coals at Christmas, and his supper every evening, for the loan of him at
nights.  She had instructed him in his possible duties when he first
came; and, finding him sensible, she had given him the Major’s sword
(the Major was her late husband), and desired him to put it very
carefully behind his pillow at night, turning the edge towards the head
of the pillow.  He was a sharp lad, she was sure; for, spying out the
Major’s cocked hat, he had said, if he might have that to wear, he was
sure he could frighten two Englishmen, or four Frenchmen any day.  But
she had impressed upon him anew that he was to lose no time in putting
on hats or anything else; but, if he heard any noise, he was to run at
it with his drawn sword.  On my suggesting that some accident might
occur from such slaughterous and indiscriminate directions, and that he
might rush on Jenny getting up to wash, and have spitted her before he
had discovered that she was not a Frenchman, Mrs Forrester said she did
not think that that was likely, for he was a very sound sleeper, and
generally had to be well shaken or cold-pigged in a morning before they
could rouse him.  She sometimes thought such dead sleep must be owing to
the hearty suppers the poor lad ate, for he was half-starved at home,
and she told Jenny to see that he got a good meal at night.

          [Picture: Slaughterous and indiscriminate directions]

Still this was no confession of Mrs Forrester’s peculiar timidity, and
we urged her to tell us what she thought would frighten her more than
anything.  She paused, and stirred the fire, and snuffed the candles,
and then she said, in a sounding whisper—

“Ghosts!”

She looked at Miss Pole, as much as to say, she had declared it, and
would stand by it.  Such a look was a challenge in itself.  Miss Pole
came down upon her with indigestion, spectral illusions, optical
delusions, and a great deal out of Dr Ferrier and Dr Hibbert besides.
Miss Matty had rather a leaning to ghosts, as I have mentioned before,
and what little she did say was all on Mrs Forrester’s side, who,
emboldened by sympathy, protested that ghosts were a part of her
religion; that surely she, the widow of a major in the army, knew what
to be frightened at, and what not; in short, I never saw Mrs Forrester
so warm either before or since, for she was a gentle, meek, enduring old
lady in most things.  Not all the elder-wine that ever was mulled could
this night wash out the remembrance of this difference between Miss Pole
and her hostess.  Indeed, when the elder-wine was brought in, it gave
rise to a new burst of discussion; for Jenny, the little maiden who
staggered under the tray, had to give evidence of having seen a ghost
with her own eyes, not so many nights ago, in Darkness Lane, the very
lane we were to go through on our way home.

In spite of the uncomfortable feeling which this last consideration gave
me, I could not help being amused at Jenny’s position, which was
exceedingly like that of a witness being examined and cross-examined by
two counsel who are not at all scrupulous about asking leading
questions. The conclusion I arrived at was, that Jenny had certainly
seen something beyond what a fit of indigestion would have caused.  A
lady all in white, and without her head, was what she deposed and
adhered to, supported by a consciousness of the secret sympathy of her
mistress under the withering scorn with which Miss Pole regarded her.
And not only she, but many others, had seen this headless lady, who sat
by the roadside wringing her hands as in deep grief.  Mrs Forrester
looked at us from time to time with an air of conscious triumph; but
then she had not to pass through Darkness Lane before she could bury
herself beneath her own familiar bed-clothes.

We preserved a discreet silence as to the headless lady while we were
putting on our things to go home, for there was no knowing how near the
ghostly head and ears might be, or what spiritual connection they might
be keeping up with the unhappy body in Darkness Lane; and, therefore,
even Miss Pole felt that it was as well not to speak lightly on such
subjects, for fear of vexing or insulting that woebegone trunk.  At
least, so I conjecture; for, instead of the busy clatter usual in the
operation, we tied on our cloaks as sadly as mutes at a funeral.  Miss
Matty drew the curtains round the windows of the chair to shut out
disagreeable sights, and the men (either because they were in spirits
that their labours were so nearly ended, or because they were going down
hill), set off at such a round and merry pace, that it was all Miss Pole
and I could do to keep up with them.  She had breath for nothing beyond
an imploring “Don’t leave me!” uttered as she clutched my arm so tightly
that I could not have quitted her, ghost or no ghost.  What a relief it
was when the men, weary of their burden and their quick trot, stopped
just where Headingley Causeway branches off from Darkness Lane!  Miss
Pole unloosed me and caught at one of the men—

“Could not you—could not you take Miss Matty round by Headingley
Causeway?—the pavement in Darkness Lane jolts so, and she is not very
strong.”

A smothered voice was heard from the inside of the chair—

“Oh! pray go on!  What is the matter?  What is the matter?  I will give
you sixpence more to go on very fast; pray don’t stop here.”

“And I’ll give you a shilling,” said Miss Pole, with tremulous dignity,
“if you’ll go by Headingley Causeway.”

The two men grunted acquiescence and took up the chair, and went along
the causeway, which certainly answered Miss Pole’s kind purpose of
saving Miss Matty’s bones; for it was covered with soft, thick mud, and
even a fall there would have been easy till the getting-up came, when
there might have been some difficulty in extrication.




CHAPTER XI.
SAMUEL BROWN


THE next morning I met Lady Glenmire and Miss Pole setting out on a long
walk to find some old woman who was famous in the neighbourhood for her
skill in knitting woollen stockings.  Miss Pole said to me, with a smile
half-kindly and half-contemptuous upon her countenance, “I have been
just telling Lady Glenmire of our poor friend Mrs Forrester, and her
terror of ghosts.  It comes from living so much alone, and listening to
the bug-a-boo stories of that Jenny of hers.”  She was so calm and so
much above superstitious fears herself that I was almost ashamed to say
how glad I had been of her Headingley Causeway proposition the night
before, and turned off the conversation to something else.

In the afternoon Miss Pole called on Miss Matty to tell her of the
adventure—the real adventure they had met with on their morning’s walk.
They had been perplexed about the exact path which they were to take
across the fields in order to find the knitting old woman, and had
stopped to inquire at a little wayside public-house, standing on the
high road to London, about three miles from Cranford.  The good woman
had asked them to sit down and rest themselves while she fetched her
husband, who could direct them better than she could; and, while they
were sitting in the sanded parlour, a little girl came in.  They thought
that she belonged to the landlady, and began some trifling conversation
with her; but, on Mrs Roberts’s return, she told them that the little
thing was the only child of a couple who were staying in the house.  And
then she began a long story, out of which Lady Glenmire and Miss Pole
could only gather one or two decided facts, which were that, about six
weeks ago, a light spring-cart had broken down just before their door,
in which there were two men, one woman, and this child.  One of the men
was seriously hurt—no bones broken, only “shaken,” the landlady called
it; but he had probably sustained some severe internal injury, for he
had languished in their house ever since, attended by his wife, the
mother of this little girl. Miss Pole had asked what he was, what he
looked like.  And Mrs Roberts had made answer that he was not like a
gentleman, nor yet like a common person; if it had not been that he and
his wife were such decent, quiet people, she could almost have thought
he was a mountebank, or something of that kind, for they had a great box
in the cart, full of she did not know what.  She had helped to unpack
it, and take out their linen and clothes, when the other man—his
twin-brother, she believed he was—had gone off with the horse and cart.

Miss Pole had begun to have her suspicions at this point, and expressed
her idea that it was rather strange that the box and cart and horse and
all should have disappeared; but good Mrs Roberts seemed to have become
quite indignant at Miss Pole’s implied suggestion; in fact, Miss Pole
said she was as angry as if Miss Pole had told her that she herself was
a swindler.  As the best way of convincing the ladies, she bethought her
of begging them to see the wife; and, as Miss Pole said, there was no
doubting the honest, worn, bronzed face of the woman, who at the first
tender word from Lady Glenmire, burst into tears, which she was too weak
to check until some word from the landlady made her swallow down her
sobs, in order that she might testify to the Christian kindness shown by
Mr and Mrs Roberts.  Miss Pole came round with a swing to as vehement a
belief in the sorrowful tale as she had been sceptical before; and, as
a proof of this, her energy in the poor sufferer’s behalf was nothing
daunted when she found out that he, and no other, was our Signor
Brunoni, to whom all Cranford had been attributing all manner of evil
this six weeks past!  Yes! his wife said his proper name was Samuel
Brown—“Sam,” she called him—but to the last we preferred calling him
“the Signor”; it sounded so much better.

The end of their conversation with the Signora Brunoni was that it was
agreed that he should be placed under medical advice, and for any
expense incurred in procuring this Lady Glenmire promised to hold
herself responsible, and had accordingly gone to Mr Hoggins to beg him
to ride over to the “Rising Sun” that very afternoon, and examine into
the signor’s real state; and, as Miss Pole said, if it was desirable to
remove him to Cranford to be more immediately under Mr Hoggins’s eye,
she would undertake to see for lodgings and arrange about the rent.  Mrs
Roberts had been as kind as could be all throughout, but it was evident
that their long residence there had been a slight inconvenience.

Before Miss Pole left us, Miss Matty and I were as full of the morning’s
adventure as she was.  We talked about it all the evening, turning it in
every possible light, and we went to bed anxious for the morning, when
we should surely hear from someone what Mr Hoggins thought and
recommended; for, as Miss Matty observed, though Mr Hoggins did say
“Jack’s up,” “a fig for his heels,” and called Preference “Pref.” she
believed he was a very worthy man and a very clever surgeon.  Indeed, we
were rather proud of our doctor at Cranford, as a doctor.  We often
wished, when we heard of Queen Adelaide or the Duke of Wellington being
ill, that they would send for Mr Hoggins; but, on consideration, we were
rather glad they did not, for, if we were ailing, what should we do if
Mr Hoggins had been appointed physician-in-ordinary to the Royal Family?
 As a surgeon we were proud of him; but as a man—or rather, I should
say, as a gentleman—we could only shake our heads over his name and
himself, and wished that he had read Lord Chesterfield’s Letters in the
days when his manners were susceptible of improvement.  Nevertheless, we
all regarded his dictum in the signor’s case as infallible, and when he
said that with care and attention he might rally, we had no more fear
for him.

But, although we had no more fear, everybody did as much as if there was
great cause for anxiety—as indeed there was until Mr Hoggins took charge
of him.  Miss Pole looked out clean and comfortable, if homely,
lodgings; Miss Matty sent the sedan-chair for him, and Martha and I
aired it well before it left Cranford by holding a warming-pan full of
red-hot coals in it, and then shutting it up close, smoke and all, until
the time when he should get into it at the “Rising Sun.”  Lady Glenmire
undertook the medical department under Mr Hoggins’s directions, and
rummaged up all Mrs Jamieson’s medicine glasses, and spoons, and
bed-tables, in a free-and-easy way, that made Miss Matty feel a little
anxious as to what that lady and Mr Mulliner might say, if they knew.
Mrs Forrester made some of the bread-jelly, for which she was so famous,
to have ready as a refreshment in the lodgings when he should arrive.  A
present of this bread-jelly was the highest mark of favour dear Mrs
Forrester could confer.  Miss Pole had once asked her for the receipt,
but she had met with a very decided rebuff; that lady told her that she
could not part with it to any one during her life, and that after her
death it was bequeathed, as her executors would find, to Miss Matty.
What Miss Matty, or, as Mrs Forrester called her (remembering the clause
in her will and the dignity of the occasion), Miss Matilda Jenkyns—might
choose to do with the receipt when it came into her possession—whether
to make it public, or to hand it down as an heirloom—she did not know,
nor would she dictate.  And a mould of this admirable, digestible,
unique bread-jelly was sent by Mrs Forrester to our poor sick conjuror.
Who says that the aristocracy are proud?  Here was a lady by birth a
Tyrrell, and descended from the great Sir Walter that shot King Rufus,
and in whose veins ran the blood of him who murdered the little princes
in the Tower, going every day to see what dainty dishes she could
prepare for Samuel Brown, a mountebank!  But, indeed, it was wonderful
to see what kind feelings were called out by this poor man’s coming
amongst us.  And also wonderful to see how the great Cranford panic,
which had been occasioned by his first coming in his Turkish dress,
melted away into thin air on his second coming—pale and feeble, and with
his heavy, filmy eyes, that only brightened a very little when they fell
upon the countenance of his faithful wife, or their pale and sorrowful
little girl.

Somehow we all forgot to be afraid.  I daresay it was that finding out
that he, who had first excited our love of the marvellous by his
unprecedented arts, had not sufficient every-day gifts to manage a
shying horse, made us feel as if we were ourselves again.  Miss Pole
came with her little basket at all hours of the evening, as if her
lonely house and the unfrequented road to it had never been infested by
that “murderous gang”; Mrs Forrester said she thought that neither Jenny
nor she need mind the headless lady who wept and wailed in Darkness
Lane, for surely the power was never given to such beings to harm those
who went about to try to do what little good was in their power, to
which Jenny tremblingly assented; but the mistress’s theory had little
effect on the maid’s practice until she had sewn two pieces of red
flannel in the shape of a cross on her inner garment.

I found Miss Matty covering her penny ball—the ball that she used to
roll under her bed—with gay-coloured worsted in rainbow stripes.

“My dear,” said she, “my heart is sad for that little careworn child.
Although her father is a conjuror, she looks as if she had never had a
good game of play in her life.  I used to make very pretty balls in this
way when I was a girl, and I thought I would try if I could not make
this one smart and take it to Phoebe this afternoon.  I think ‘the gang’
must have left the neighbourhood, for one does not hear any more of
their violence and robbery now.”

We were all of us far too full of the signor’s precarious state to talk
either about robbers or ghosts.  Indeed, Lady Glenmire said she never
had heard of any actual robberies, except that two little boys had
stolen some apples from Farmer Benson’s orchard, and that some eggs had
been missed on a market-day off Widow Hayward’s stall.  But that was
expecting too much of us; we could not acknowledge that we had only had
this small foundation for all our panic.  Miss Pole drew herself up at
this remark of Lady Glenmire’s, and said “that she wished she could
agree with her as to the very small reason we had had for alarm, but
with the recollection of a man disguised as a woman who had endeavoured
to force himself into her house while his confederates waited outside;
with the knowledge gained from Lady Glenmire herself, of the footprints
seen on Mrs Jamieson’s flower borders; with the fact before her of the
audacious robbery committed on Mr Hoggins at his own door”—But here Lady
Glenmire broke in with a very strong expression of doubt as to whether
this last story was not an entire fabrication founded upon the theft of
a cat; she grew so red while she was saying all this that I was not
surprised at Miss Pole’s manner of bridling up, and I am certain, if
Lady Glenmire had not been “her ladyship,” we should have had a more
emphatic contradiction than the “Well, to be sure!” and similar
fragmentary ejaculations, which were all that she ventured upon in my
lady’s presence.  But when she was gone Miss Pole began a long
congratulation to Miss Matty that so far they had escaped marriage,
which she noticed always made people credulous to the last degree;
indeed, she thought it argued great natural credulity in a woman if she
could not keep herself from being married; and in what Lady Glenmire had
said about Mr Hoggins’s robbery we had a specimen of what people came to
if they gave way to such a weakness; evidently Lady Glenmire would
swallow anything if she could believe the poor vamped-up story about a
neck of mutton and a pussy with which he had tried to impose on Miss
Pole, only she had always been on her guard against believing too much
of what men said.

We were thankful, as Miss Pole desired us to be, that we had never been
married; but I think, of the two, we were even more thankful that the
robbers had left Cranford; at least I judge so from a speech of Miss
Matty’s that evening, as we sat over the fire, in which she evidently
looked upon a husband as a great protector against thieves, burglars,
and ghosts; and said that she did not think that she should dare to be
always warning young people against matrimony, as Miss Pole did
continually; to be sure, marriage was a risk, as she saw, now she had
had some experience; but she remembered the time when she had looked
forward to being married as much as any one.

“Not to any particular person, my dear,” said she, hastily checking
herself up, as if she were afraid of having admitted too much; “only the
old story, you know, of ladies always saying, ‘_When_ I marry,’ and
gentlemen, ‘_If_ I marry.’”  It was a joke spoken in rather a sad tone,
and I doubt if either of us smiled; but I could not see Miss Matty’s
face by the flickering fire-light.  In a little while she continued—

“But, after all, I have not told you the truth.  It is so long ago, and
no one ever knew how much I thought of it at the time, unless, indeed,
my dear mother guessed; but I may say that there was a time when I did
not think I should have been only Miss Matty Jenkyns all my life; for
even if I did meet with any one who wished to marry me now (and, as Miss
Pole says, one is never too safe), I could not take him—I hope he would
not take it too much to heart, but I could _not_ take him—or any one but
the person I once thought I should be married to; and he is dead and
gone, and he never knew how it all came about that I said ‘No,’ when I
had thought many and many a time—Well, it’s no matter what I thought.
God ordains it all, and I am very happy, my dear.  No one has such kind
friends as I,” continued she, taking my hand and holding it in hers.

If I had never known of Mr Holbrook, I could have said something in this
pause, but as I had, I could not think of anything that would come in
naturally, and so we both kept silence for a little time.

“My father once made us,” she began, “keep a diary, in two columns; on
one side we were to put down in the morning what we thought would be the
course and events of the coming day, and at night we were to put down on
the other side what really had happened.  It would be to some people
rather a sad way of telling their lives,” (a tear dropped upon my hand
at these words)—“I don’t mean that mine has been sad, only so very
different to what I expected.  I remember, one winter’s evening, sitting
over our bedroom fire with Deborah—I remember it as if it were
yesterday—and we were planning our future lives, both of us were
planning, though only she talked about it.  She said she should like to
marry an archdeacon, and write his charges; and you know, my dear, she
never was married, and, for aught I know, she never spoke to an
unmarried archdeacon in her life.  I never was ambitious, nor could I
have written charges, but I thought I could manage a house (my mother
used to call me her right hand), and I was always so fond of little
children—the shyest babies would stretch out their little arms to come
to me; when I was a girl, I was half my leisure time nursing in the
neighbouring cottages; but I don’t know how it was, when I grew sad and
grave—which I did a year or two after this time—the little things drew
back from me, and I am afraid I lost the knack, though I am just as fond
of children as ever, and have a strange yearning at my heart whenever I
see a mother with her baby in her arms.  Nay, my dear” (and by a sudden
blaze which sprang up from a fall of the unstirred coals, I saw that her
eyes were full of tears—gazing intently on some vision of what might
have been), “do you know I dream sometimes that I have a little
child—always the same—a little girl of about two years old; she never
grows older, though I have dreamt about her for many years.  I don’t
think I ever dream of any words or sound she makes; she is very
noiseless and still, but she comes to me when she is very sorry or very
glad, and I have wakened with the clasp of her dear little arms round my
neck.  Only last night—perhaps because I had gone to sleep thinking of
this ball for Phoebe—my little darling came in my dream, and put up her
mouth to be kissed, just as I have seen real babies do to real mothers
before going to bed.  But all this is nonsense, dear! only don’t be
frightened by Miss Pole from being married.  I can fancy it may be a
very happy state, and a little credulity helps one on through life very
smoothly—better than always doubting and doubting and seeing
difficulties and disagreeables in everything.”

              [Picture: Would stretch out their little arms]

If I had been inclined to be daunted from matrimony, it would not have
been Miss Pole to do it; it would have been the lot of poor Signor
Brunoni and his wife.  And yet again, it was an encouragement to see
how, through all their cares and sorrows, they thought of each other and
not of themselves; and how keen were their joys, if they only passed
through each other, or through the little Phoebe.

The signora told me, one day, a good deal about their lives up to this
period.  It began by my asking her whether Miss Pole’s story of the
twin-brothers were true; it sounded so wonderful a likeness, that I
should have had my doubts, if Miss Pole had not been unmarried.  But the
signora, or (as we found out she preferred to be called) Mrs Brown, said
it was quite true; that her brother-in-law was by many taken for her
husband, which was of great assistance to them in their profession;
“though,” she continued, “how people can mistake Thomas for the real
Signor Brunoni, I can’t conceive; but he says they do; so I suppose I
must believe him.  Not but what he is a very good man; I am sure I don’t
know how we should have paid our bill at the ‘Rising Sun’ but for the
money he sends; but people must know very little about art if they can
take him for my husband.  Why, Miss, in the ball trick, where my husband
spreads his fingers wide, and throws out his little finger with quite an
air and a grace, Thomas just clumps up his hand like a fist, and might
have ever so many balls hidden in it.  Besides, he has never been in
India, and knows nothing of the proper sit of a turban.”

“Have you been in India?” said I, rather astonished.

“Oh, yes! many a year, ma’am.  Sam was a sergeant in the 31st; and when
the regiment was ordered to India, I drew a lot to go, and I was more
thankful than I can tell; for it seemed as if it would only be a slow
death to me to part from my husband.  But, indeed, ma’am, if I had known
all, I don’t know whether I would not rather have died there and then
than gone through what I have done since.  To be sure, I’ve been able to
comfort Sam, and to be with him; but, ma’am, I’ve lost six children,”
said she, looking up at me with those strange eyes that I’ve never
noticed but in mothers of dead children—with a kind of wild look in
them, as if seeking for what they never more might find.  “Yes!  Six
children died off, like little buds nipped untimely, in that cruel
India.  I thought, as each died, I never could—I never would—love a
child again; and when the next came, it had not only its own love, but
the deeper love that came from the thoughts of its little dead brothers
and sisters.  And when Phoebe was coming, I said to my husband, ‘Sam,
when the child is born, and I am strong, I shall leave you; it will cut
my heart cruel; but if this baby dies too, I shall go mad; the madness
is in me now; but if you let me go down to Calcutta, carrying my baby
step by step, it will, maybe, work itself off; and I will save, and I
will hoard, and I will beg—and I will die, to get a passage home to
England, where our baby may live?’  God bless him! he said I might go;
and he saved up his pay, and I saved every pice I could get for washing
or any way; and when Phoebe came, and I grew strong again, I set off.
It was very lonely; through the thick forests, dark again with their
heavy trees—along by the river’s side (but I had been brought up near
the Avon in Warwickshire, so that flowing noise sounded like home)—from
station to station, from Indian village to village, I went along,
carrying my child.  I had seen one of the officer’s ladies with a little
picture, ma’am—done by a Catholic foreigner, ma’am—of the Virgin and the
little Saviour, ma’am.  She had him on her arm, and her form was softly
curled round him, and their cheeks touched.  Well, when I went to bid
good-bye to this lady, for whom I had washed, she cried sadly; for she,
too, had lost her children, but she had not another to save, like me;
and I was bold enough to ask her would she give me that print.  And she
cried the more, and said her children were with that little blessed
Jesus; and gave it me, and told me that she had heard it had been
painted on the bottom of a cask, which made it have that round shape.
And when my body was very weary, and my heart was sick (for there were
times when I misdoubted if I could ever reach my home, and there were
times when I thought of my husband, and one time when I thought my baby
was dying), I took out that picture and looked at it, till I could have
thought the mother spoke to me, and comforted me.  And the natives were
very kind.  We could not understand one another; but they saw my baby on
my breast, and they came out to me, and brought me rice and milk, and
sometimes flowers—I have got some of the flowers dried.  Then, the next
morning, I was so tired; and they wanted me to stay with them—I could
tell that—and tried to frighten me from going into the deep woods,
which, indeed, looked very strange and dark; but it seemed to me as if
Death was following me to take my baby away from me; and as if I must go
on, and on—and I thought how God had cared for mothers ever since the
world was made, and would care for me; so I bade them good-bye, and set
off afresh.  And once when my baby was ill, and both she and I needed
rest, He led me to a place where I found a kind Englishman lived, right
in the midst of the natives.”

“And you reached Calcutta safely at last?”

“Yes, safely!  Oh! when I knew I had only two days’ journey more before
me, I could not help it, ma’am—it might be idolatry, I cannot tell—but I
was near one of the native temples, and I went into it with my baby to
thank God for His great mercy; for it seemed to me that where others had
prayed before to their God, in their joy or in their agony, was of
itself a sacred place.  And I got as servant to an invalid lady, who
grew quite fond of my baby aboard-ship; and, in two years’ time, Sam
earned his discharge, and came home to me, and to our child.  Then he
had to fix on a trade; but he knew of none; and once, once upon a time,
he had learnt some tricks from an Indian juggler; so he set up
conjuring, and it answered so well that he took Thomas to help him—as
his man, you know, not as another conjuror, though Thomas has set it up
now on his own hook. But it has been a great help to us that likeness
between the twins, and made a good many tricks go off well that they
made up together.  And Thomas is a good brother, only he has not the
fine carriage of my husband, so that I can’t think how he can be taken
for Signor Brunoni himself, as he says he is.”

“Poor little Phoebe!” said I, my thoughts going back to the baby she
carried all those hundred miles.

“Ah! you may say so!  I never thought I should have reared her, though,
when she fell ill at Chunderabaddad; but that good, kind Aga Jenkyns
took us in, which I believe was the very saving of her.”

“Jenkyns!” said I.

“Yes, Jenkyns.  I shall think all people of that name are kind; for here
is that nice old lady who comes every day to take Phoebe a walk!”

But an idea had flashed through my head; could the Aga Jenkyns be the
lost Peter?  True he was reported by many to be dead.  But, equally
true, some had said that he had arrived at the dignity of Great Lama of
Thibet. Miss Matty thought he was alive.  I would make further inquiry.




CHAPTER XII.
ENGAGED TO BE MARRIED


WAS the “poor Peter” of Cranford the Aga Jenkyns of Chunderabaddad, or
was he not?  As somebody says, that was the question.

In my own home, whenever people had nothing else to do, they blamed me
for want of discretion.  Indiscretion was my bug-bear fault.  Everybody
has a bug-bear fault, a sort of standing characteristic—a _pièce de
résistance_ for their friends to cut at; and in general they cut and
come again.  I was tired of being called indiscreet and incautious; and
I determined for once to prove myself a model of prudence and wisdom.  I
would not even hint my suspicions respecting the Aga.  I would collect
evidence and carry it home to lay before my father, as the family friend
of the two Miss Jenkynses.

In my search after facts, I was often reminded of a description my
father had once given of a ladies’ committee that he had had to preside
over. He said he could not help thinking of a passage in Dickens, which
spoke of a chorus in which every man took the tune he knew best, and
sang it to his own satisfaction.  So, at this charitable committee,
every lady took the subject uppermost in her mind, and talked about it
to her own great contentment, but not much to the advancement of the
subject they had met to discuss.  But even that committee could have
been nothing to the Cranford ladies when I attempted to gain some clear
and definite information as to poor Peter’s height, appearance, and when
and where he was seen and heard of last.  For instance, I remember
asking Miss Pole (and I thought the question was very opportune, for I
put it when I met her at a call at Mrs Forrester’s, and both the ladies
had known Peter, and I imagined that they might refresh each other’s
memories)—I asked Miss Pole what was the very last thing they had ever
heard about him; and then she named the absurd report to which I have
alluded, about his having been elected Great Lama of Thibet; and this
was a signal for each lady to go off on her separate idea.  Mrs
Forrester’s start was made on the veiled prophet in Lalla Rookh—whether
I thought he was meant for the Great Lama, though Peter was not so ugly,
indeed rather handsome, if he had not been freckled.  I was thankful to
see her double upon Peter; but, in a moment, the delusive lady was off
upon Rowland’s Kalydor, and the merits of cosmetics and hair oils in
general, and holding forth so fluently that I turned to listen to Miss
Pole, who (through the llamas, the beasts of burden) had got to Peruvian
bonds, and the share market, and her poor opinion of joint-stock banks
in general, and of that one in particular in which Miss Matty’s money
was invested.  In vain I put in “When was it—in what year was it that
you heard that Mr Peter was the Great Lama?”  They only joined issue to
dispute whether llamas were carnivorous animals or not; in which dispute
they were not quite on fair grounds, as Mrs Forrester (after they had
grown warm and cool again) acknowledged that she always confused
carnivorous and graminivorous together, just as she did horizontal and
perpendicular; but then she apologised for it very prettily, by saying
that in her day the only use people made of four-syllabled words was to
teach how they should be spelt.

The only fact I gained from this conversation was that certainly Peter
had last been heard of in India, “or that neighbourhood”; and that this
scanty intelligence of his whereabouts had reached Cranford in the year
when Miss Pole had brought her Indian muslin gown, long since worn out
(we washed it and mended it, and traced its decline and fall into a
window-blind before we could go on); and in a year when Wombwell came to
Cranford, because Miss Matty had wanted to see an elephant in order that
she might the better imagine Peter riding on one; and had seen a
boa-constrictor too, which was more than she wished to imagine in her
fancy-pictures of Peter’s locality; and in a year when Miss Jenkyns had
learnt some piece of poetry off by heart, and used to say, at all the
Cranford parties, how Peter was “surveying mankind from China to Peru,”
which everybody had thought very grand, and rather appropriate, because
India was between China and Peru, if you took care to turn the globe to
the left instead of the right.

I suppose all these inquiries of mine, and the consequent curiosity
excited in the minds of my friends, made us blind and deaf to what was
going on around us.  It seemed to me as if the sun rose and shone, and
as if the rain rained on Cranford, just as usual, and I did not notice
any sign of the times that could be considered as a prognostic of any
uncommon event; and, to the best of my belief, not only Miss Matty and
Mrs Forrester, but even Miss Pole herself, whom we looked upon as a kind
of prophetess, from the knack she had of foreseeing things before they
came to pass—although she did not like to disturb her friends by telling
them her foreknowledge—even Miss Pole herself was breathless with
astonishment when she came to tell us of the astounding piece of news.
But I must recover myself; the contemplation of it, even at this
distance of time, has taken away my breath and my grammar, and unless I
subdue my emotion, my spelling will go too.

We were sitting—Miss Matty and I—much as usual, she in the blue chintz
easy-chair, with her back to the light, and her knitting in her hand, I
reading aloud the _St James’s Chronicle_.  A few minutes more, and we
should have gone to make the little alterations in dress usual before
calling-time (twelve o’clock) in Cranford.  I remember the scene and the
date well.  We had been talking of the signor’s rapid recovery since
the warmer weather had set in, and praising Mr Hoggins’s skill, and
lamenting his want of refinement and manner (it seems a curious
coincidence that this should have been our subject, but so it was), when
a knock was heard—a caller’s knock—three distinct taps—and we were
flying (that is to say, Miss Matty could not walk very fast, having had
a touch of rheumatism) to our rooms, to change cap and collars, when
Miss Pole arrested us by calling out, as she came up the stairs, “Don’t
go—I can’t wait—it is not twelve, I know—but never mind your dress—I
must speak to you.”  We did our best to look as if it was not we who had
made the hurried movement, the sound of which she had heard; for, of
course, we did not like to have it supposed that we had any old clothes
that it was convenient to wear out in the “sanctuary of home,” as Miss
Jenkyns once prettily called the back parlour, where she was tying up
preserves.  So we threw our gentility with double force into our
manners, and very genteel we were for two minutes while Miss Pole
recovered breath, and excited our curiosity strongly by lifting up her
hands in amazement, and bringing them down in silence, as if what she
had to say was too big for words, and could only be expressed by
pantomime.

“What do you think, Miss Matty?  What _do_ you think?  Lady Glenmire is
to marry—is to be married, I mean—Lady Glenmire—Mr Hoggins—Mr Hoggins is
going to marry Lady Glenmire!”

“Marry!” said we.  “Marry!  Madness!”

                 [Picture: What do you think, Miss Matty]

“Marry!” said Miss Pole, with the decision that belonged to her
character.  “_I_ said marry! as you do; and I also said, ‘What a fool my
lady is going to make of herself!’  I could have said ‘Madness!’ but I
controlled myself, for it was in a public shop that I heard of it.
Where feminine delicacy is gone to, I don’t know!  You and I, Miss
Matty, would have been ashamed to have known that our marriage was
spoken of in a grocer’s shop, in the hearing of shopmen!”

“But,” said Miss Matty, sighing as one recovering from a blow, “perhaps
it is not true.  Perhaps we are doing her injustice.”

“No,” said Miss Pole.  “I have taken care to ascertain that.  I went
straight to Mrs Fitz-Adam, to borrow a cookery-book which I knew she
had; and I introduced my congratulations _à propos_ of the difficulty
gentlemen must have in house-keeping; and Mrs Fitz-Adam bridled up, and
said that she believed it was true, though how and where I could have
heard it she did not know.  She said her brother and Lady Glenmire had
come to an understanding at last.  ‘Understanding!’ such a coarse word!
But my lady will have to come down to many a want of refinement.  I have
reason to believe Mr Hoggins sups on bread-and-cheese and beer every
night.

“Marry!” said Miss Matty once again.  “Well!  I never thought of it.
Two people that we know going to be married.  It’s coming very near!”

“So near that my heart stopped beating when I heard of it, while you
might have counted twelve,” said Miss Pole.

“One does not know whose turn may come next.  Here, in Cranford, poor
Lady Glenmire might have thought herself safe,” said Miss Matty, with a
gentle pity in her tones.

“Bah!” said Miss Pole, with a toss of her head.  “Don’t you remember
poor dear Captain Brown’s song ‘Tibbie Fowler,’ and the line—

    ‘Set her on the Tintock tap,
    The wind will blaw a man till her.’”

“That was because ‘Tibbie Fowler’ was rich, I think.”

“Well! there was a kind of attraction about Lady Glenmire that I, for
one, should be ashamed to have.”

I put in my wonder.  “But how can she have fancied Mr Hoggins?  I am not
surprised that Mr Hoggins has liked her.”

“Oh!  I don’t know.  Mr Hoggins is rich, and very pleasant-looking,”
said Miss Matty, “and very good-tempered and kind-hearted.”

“She has married for an establishment, that’s it.  I suppose she takes
the surgery with it,” said Miss Pole, with a little dry laugh at her own
joke.  But, like many people who think they have made a severe and
sarcastic speech, which yet is clever of its kind, she began to relax in
her grimness from the moment when she made this allusion to the surgery;
and we turned to speculate on the way in which Mrs Jamieson would
receive the news.  The person whom she had left in charge of her house
to keep off followers from her maids to set up a follower of her own!
And that follower a man whom Mrs Jamieson had tabooed as vulgar, and
inadmissible to Cranford society, not merely on account of his name, but
because of his voice, his complexion, his boots, smelling of the stable,
and himself, smelling of drugs.  Had he ever been to see Lady Glenmire
at Mrs Jamieson’s?  Chloride of lime would not purify the house in its
owner’s estimation if he had.  Or had their interviews been confined to
the occasional meetings in the chamber of the poor sick conjuror, to
whom, with all our sense of the _mésalliance_, we could not help
allowing that they had both been exceedingly kind?  And now it turned
out that a servant of Mrs Jamieson’s had been ill, and Mr Hoggins had
been attending her for some weeks.  So the wolf had got into the fold,
and now he was carrying off the shepherdess.  What would Mrs Jamieson
say?  We looked into the darkness of futurity as a child gazes after a
rocket up in the cloudy sky, full of wondering expectation of the
rattle, the discharge, and the brilliant shower of sparks and light.
Then we brought ourselves down to earth and the present time by
questioning each other (being all equally ignorant, and all equally
without the slightest data to build any conclusions upon) as to when IT
would take place?  Where?  How much a year Mr Hoggins had?  Whether she
would drop her title?  And how Martha and the other correct servants in
Cranford would ever be brought to announce a married couple as Lady
Glenmire and Mr Hoggins?  But would they be visited?  Would Mrs Jamieson
let us?  Or must we choose between the Honourable Mrs Jamieson and the
degraded Lady Glenmire?  We all liked Lady Glenmire the best.  She was
bright, and kind, and sociable, and agreeable; and Mrs Jamieson was
dull, and inert, and pompous, and tiresome.  But we had acknowledged the
sway of the latter so long, that it seemed like a kind of disloyalty now
even to meditate disobedience to the prohibition we anticipated.

Mrs Forrester surprised us in our darned caps and patched collars; and
we forgot all about them in our eagerness to see how she would bear the
information, which we honourably left to Miss Pole, to impart, although,
if we had been inclined to take unfair advantage, we might have rushed
in ourselves, for she had a most out-of-place fit of coughing for five
minutes after Mrs Forrester entered the room.  I shall never forget the
imploring expression of her eyes, as she looked at us over her
pocket-handkerchief.  They said, as plain as words could speak, “Don’t
let Nature deprive me of the treasure which is mine, although for a time
I can make no use of it.”  And we did not.

Mrs Forrester’s surprise was equal to ours; and her sense of injury
rather greater, because she had to feel for her Order, and saw more
fully than we could do how such conduct brought stains on the
aristocracy.

When she and Miss Pole left us we endeavoured to subside into calmness;
but Miss Matty was really upset by the intelligence she had heard.  She
reckoned it up, and it was more than fifteen years since she had heard
of any of her acquaintance going to be married, with the one exception
of Miss Jessie Brown; and, as she said, it gave her quite a shock, and
made her feel as if she could not think what would happen next.

I don’t know whether it is a fancy of mine, or a real fact, but I have
noticed that, just after the announcement of an engagement in any set,
the unmarried ladies in that set flutter out in an unusual gaiety and
newness of dress, as much as to say, in a tacit and unconscious manner,
“We also are spinsters.”  Miss Matty and Miss Pole talked and thought
more about bonnets, gowns, caps, and shawls, during the fortnight that
succeeded this call, than I had known them do for years before.  But it
might be the spring weather, for it was a warm and pleasant March; and
merinoes and beavers, and woollen materials of all sorts were but
ungracious receptacles of the bright sun’s glancing rays.  It had not
been Lady Glenmire’s dress that had won Mr Hoggins’s heart, for she went
about on her errands of kindness more shabby than ever.  Although in the
hurried glimpses I caught of her at church or elsewhere she appeared
rather to shun meeting any of her friends, her face seemed to have
almost something of the flush of youth in it; her lips looked redder and
more trembling full than in their old compressed state, and her eyes
dwelt on all things with a lingering light, as if she was learning to
love Cranford and its belongings.  Mr Hoggins looked broad and radiant,
and creaked up the middle aisle at church in a brand-new pair of
top-boots—an audible, as well as visible, sign of his purposed change of
state; for the tradition went, that the boots he had worn till now were
the identical pair in which he first set out on his rounds in Cranford
twenty-five years ago; only they had been new-pieced, high and low, top
and bottom, heel and sole, black leather and brown leather, more times
than any one could tell.

None of the ladies in Cranford chose to sanction the marriage by
congratulating either of the parties.  We wished to ignore the whole
affair until our liege lady, Mrs Jamieson, returned.  Till she came back
to give us our cue, we felt that it would be better to consider the
engagement in the same light as the Queen of Spain’s legs—facts which
certainly existed, but the less said about the better.  This restraint
upon our tongues—for you see if we did not speak about it to any of the
parties concerned, how could we get answers to the questions that we
longed to ask?—was beginning to be irksome, and our idea of the dignity
of silence was paling before our curiosity, when another direction was
given to our thoughts, by an announcement on the part of the principal
shopkeeper of Cranford, who ranged the trades from grocer and
cheesemonger to man-milliner, as occasion required, that the spring
fashions were arrived, and would be exhibited on the following Tuesday
at his rooms in High Street.  Now Miss Matty had been only waiting for
this before buying herself a new silk gown.  I had offered, it is true,
to send to Drumble for patterns, but she had rejected my proposal,
gently implying that she had not forgotten her disappointment about the
sea-green turban.  I was thankful that I was on the spot now, to
counteract the dazzling fascination of any yellow or scarlet silk.

I must say a word or two here about myself.  I have spoken of my
father’s old friendship for the Jenkyns family; indeed, I am not sure if
there was not some distant relationship.  He had willingly allowed me to
remain all the winter at Cranford, in consideration of a letter which
Miss Matty had written to him about the time of the panic, in which I
suspect she had exaggerated my powers and my bravery as a defender of
the house.  But now that the days were longer and more cheerful, he was
beginning to urge the necessity of my return; and I only delayed in a
sort of odd forlorn hope that if I could obtain any clear information, I
might make the account given by the signora of the Aga Jenkyns tally
with that of “poor Peter,” his appearance and disappearance, which I had
winnowed out of the conversation of Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester.




CHAPTER XIII.
STOPPED PAYMENT


THE very Tuesday morning on which Mr Johnson was going to show the
fashions, the post-woman brought two letters to the house.  I say the
post-woman, but I should say the postman’s wife.  He was a lame
shoemaker, a very clean, honest man, much respected in the town; but he
never brought the letters round except on unusual occasions, such as
Christmas Day or Good Friday; and on those days the letters, which
should have been delivered at eight in the morning, did not make their
appearance until two or three in the afternoon, for every one liked poor
Thomas, and gave him a welcome on these festive occasions.  He used to
say, “He was welly stawed wi’ eating, for there were three or four
houses where nowt would serve ’em but he must share in their breakfast;”
and by the time he had done his last breakfast, he came to some other
friend who was beginning dinner; but come what might in the way of
temptation, Tom was always sober, civil, and smiling; and, as Miss
Jenkyns used to say, it was a lesson in patience, that she doubted not
would call out that precious quality in some minds, where, but for
Thomas, it might have lain dormant and undiscovered.  Patience was
certainly very dormant in Miss Jenkyns’s mind.  She was always expecting
letters, and always drumming on the table till the post-woman had called
or gone past.  On Christmas Day and Good Friday she drummed from
breakfast till church, from church-time till two o’clock—unless when the
fire wanted stirring, when she invariably knocked down the fire-irons,
and scolded Miss Matty for it. But equally certain was the hearty
welcome and the good dinner for Thomas; Miss Jenkyns standing over him
like a bold dragoon, questioning him as to his children—what they were
doing—what school they went to; upbraiding him if another was likely to
make its appearance, but sending even the little babies the shilling and
the mince-pie which was her gift to all the children, with half-a-crown
in addition for both father and mother.  The post was not half of so
much consequence to dear Miss Matty; but not for the world would she
have diminished Thomas’s welcome and his dole, though I could see that
she felt rather shy over the ceremony, which had been regarded by Miss
Jenkyns as a glorious opportunity for giving advice and benefiting her
fellow-creatures.  Miss Matty would steal the money all in a lump into
his hand, as if she were ashamed of herself.  Miss Jenkyns gave him each
individual coin separate, with a “There! that’s for yourself; that’s for
Jenny,” etc.  Miss Matty would even beckon Martha out of the kitchen
while he ate his food: and once, to my knowledge, winked at its rapid
disappearance into a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief.  Miss Jenkyns
almost scolded him if he did not leave a clean plate, however heaped it
might have been, and gave an injunction with every mouthful.

             [Picture: Standing over him like a bold dragoon]

I have wandered a long way from the two letters that awaited us on the
breakfast-table that Tuesday morning.  Mine was from my father.  Miss
Matty’s was printed.  My father’s was just a man’s letter; I mean it was
very dull, and gave no information beyond that he was well, that they
had had a good deal of rain, that trade was very stagnant, and there
were many disagreeable rumours afloat.  He then asked me if I knew
whether Miss Matty still retained her shares in the Town and County
Bank, as there were very unpleasant reports about it; though nothing
more than he had always foreseen, and had prophesied to Miss Jenkyns
years ago, when she would invest their little property in it—the only
unwise step that clever woman had ever taken, to his knowledge (the only
time she ever acted against his advice, I knew).  However, if anything
had gone wrong, of course I was not to think of leaving Miss Matty while
I could be of any use, etc.

“Who is your letter from, my dear?  Mine is a very civil invitation,
signed ‘Edwin Wilson,’ asking me to attend an important meeting of the
shareholders of the Town and County Bank, to be held in Drumble, on
Thursday the twenty-first.  I am sure, it is very attentive of them to
remember me.”

I did not like to hear of this “important meeting,” for, though I did
not know much about business, I feared it confirmed what my father said:
however, I thought, ill news always came fast enough, so I resolved to
say nothing about my alarm, and merely told her that my father was well,
and sent his kind regards to her.  She kept turning over and admiring
her letter.  At last she spoke—

“I remember their sending one to Deborah just like this; but that I did
not wonder at, for everybody knew she was so clear-headed.  I am afraid
I could not help them much; indeed, if they came to accounts, I should
be quite in the way, for I never could do sums in my head.  Deborah, I
know, rather wished to go, and went so far as to order a new bonnet for
the occasion: but when the time came she had a bad cold; so they sent
her a very polite account of what they had done.  Chosen a director, I
think it was.  Do you think they want me to help them to choose a
director?  I am sure I should choose your father at once!”

“My father has no shares in the bank,” said I.

“Oh, no!  I remember.  He objected very much to Deborah’s buying any, I
believe.  But she was quite the woman of business, and always judged for
herself; and here, you see, they have paid eight per cent. all these
years.”

It was a very uncomfortable subject to me, with my half-knowledge; so I
thought I would change the conversation, and I asked at what time she
thought we had better go and see the fashions.  “Well, my dear,” she
said, “the thing is this: it is not etiquette to go till after twelve;
but then, you see, all Cranford will be there, and one does not like to
be too curious about dress and trimmings and caps with all the world
looking on.  It is never genteel to be over-curious on these occasions.
Deborah had the knack of always looking as if the latest fashion was
nothing new to her; a manner she had caught from Lady Arley, who did see
all the new modes in London, you know.  So I thought we would just slip
down—for I do want this morning, soon after breakfast half-a-pound of
tea—and then we could go up and examine the things at our leisure, and
see exactly how my new silk gown must be made; and then, after twelve,
we could go with our minds disengaged, and free from thoughts of dress.”

We began to talk of Miss Matty’s new silk gown.  I discovered that it
would be really the first time in her life that she had had to choose
anything of consequence for herself: for Miss Jenkyns had always been
the more decided character, whatever her taste might have been; and it
is astonishing how such people carry the world before them by the mere
force of will.  Miss Matty anticipated the sight of the glossy folds
with as much delight as if the five sovereigns, set apart for the
purchase, could buy all the silks in the shop; and (remembering my own
loss of two hours in a toyshop before I could tell on what wonder to
spend a silver threepence) I was very glad that we were going early,
that dear Miss Matty might have leisure for the delights of perplexity.

If a happy sea-green could be met with, the gown was to be sea-green: if
not, she inclined to maize, and I to silver gray; and we discussed the
requisite number of breadths until we arrived at the shop-door.  We were
to buy the tea, select the silk, and then clamber up the iron corkscrew
stairs that led into what was once a loft, though now a fashion
show-room.

The young men at Mr Johnson’s had on their best looks; and their best
cravats, and pivoted themselves over the counter with surprising
activity.  They wanted to show us upstairs at once; but on the principle
of business first and pleasure afterwards, we stayed to purchase the
tea. Here Miss Matty’s absence of mind betrayed itself.  If she was
made aware that she had been drinking green tea at any time, she always
thought it her duty to lie awake half through the night afterward (I
have known her take it in ignorance many a time without such effects),
and consequently green tea was prohibited the house; yet to-day she
herself asked for the obnoxious article, under the impression that she
was talking about the silk.  However, the mistake was soon rectified;
and then the silks were unrolled in good truth.  By this time the shop
was pretty well filled, for it was Cranford market-day, and many of the
farmers and country people from the neighbourhood round came in,
sleeking down their hair, and glancing shyly about, from under their
eyelids, as anxious to take back some notion of the unusual gaiety to
the mistress or the lasses at home, and yet feeling that they were out
of place among the smart shopmen and gay shawls and summer prints.  One
honest-looking man, however, made his way up to the counter at which we
stood, and boldly asked to look at a shawl or two.  The other country
folk confined themselves to the grocery side; but our neighbour was
evidently too full of some kind intention towards mistress, wife or
daughter, to be shy; and it soon became a question with me, whether he
or Miss Matty would keep their shopmen the longest time.  He thought
each shawl more beautiful than the last; and, as for Miss Matty, she
smiled and sighed over each fresh bale that was brought out; one colour
set off another, and the heap together would, as she said, make even the
rainbow look poor.

“I am afraid,” said she, hesitating, “Whichever I choose I shall wish I
had taken another.  Look at this lovely crimson! it would be so warm in
winter.  But spring is coming on, you know.  I wish I could have a gown
for every season,” said she, dropping her voice—as we all did in
Cranford whenever we talked of anything we wished for but could not
afford. “However,” she continued in a louder and more cheerful tone, “it
would give me a great deal of trouble to take care of them if I had
them; so, I think, I’ll only take one.  But which must it be, my dear?”

And now she hovered over a lilac with yellow spots, while I pulled out a
quiet sage-green that had faded into insignificance under the more
brilliant colours, but which was nevertheless a good silk in its humble
way.  Our attention was called off to our neighbour.  He had chosen a
shawl of about thirty shillings’ value; and his face looked broadly
happy, under the anticipation, no doubt, of the pleasant surprise he
would give to some Molly or Jenny at home; he had tugged a leathern
purse out of his breeches-pocket, and had offered a five-pound note in
payment for the shawl, and for some parcels which had been brought round
to him from the grocery counter; and it was just at this point that he
attracted our notice.  The shopman was examining the note with a
puzzled, doubtful air.

“Town and County Bank!  I am not sure, sir, but I believe we have
received a warning against notes issued by this bank only this morning.
I will just step and ask Mr Johnson, sir; but I’m afraid I must trouble
you for payment in cash, or in a note of a different bank.”

I never saw a man’s countenance fall so suddenly into dismay and
bewilderment.  It was almost piteous to see the rapid change.

“Dang it!” said he, striking his fist down on the table, as if to try
which was the harder, “the chap talks as if notes and gold were to be
had for the picking up.”

Miss Matty had forgotten her silk gown in her interest for the man.  I
don’t think she had caught the name of the bank, and in my nervous
cowardice I was anxious that she should not; and so I began admiring the
yellow-spotted lilac gown that I had been utterly condemning only a
minute before.  But it was of no use.

“What bank was it?  I mean, what bank did your note belong to?”

“Town and County Bank.”

“Let me see it,” said she quietly to the shopman, gently taking it out
of his hand, as he brought it back to return it to the farmer.

Mr Johnson was very sorry, but, from information he had received, the
notes issued by that bank were little better than waste paper.

“I don’t understand it,” said Miss Matty to me in a low voice.  “That is
our bank, is it not?—the Town and County Bank?”

“Yes,” said I.  “This lilac silk will just match the ribbons in your new
cap, I believe,” I continued, holding up the folds so as to catch the
light, and wishing that the man would make haste and be gone, and yet
having a new wonder, that had only just sprung up, how far it was wise
or right in me to allow Miss Matty to make this expensive purchase, if
the affairs of the bank were really so bad as the refusal of the note
implied.

But Miss Matty put on the soft dignified manner, peculiar to her, rarely
used, and yet which became her so well, and laying her hand gently on
mine, she said—

“Never mind the silks for a few minutes, dear.  I don’t understand you,
sir,” turning now to the shopman, who had been attending to the farmer.
“Is this a forged note?”

“Oh, no, ma’am.  It is a true note of its kind; but you see, ma’am, it
is a joint-stock bank, and there are reports out that it is likely to
break. Mr Johnson is only doing his duty, ma’am, as I am sure Mr Dobson
knows.”

But Mr Dobson could not respond to the appealing bow by any answering
smile.  He was turning the note absently over in his fingers, looking
gloomily enough at the parcel containing the lately-chosen shawl.

“It’s hard upon a poor man,” said he, “as earns every farthing with the
sweat of his brow.  However, there’s no help for it.  You must take back
your shawl, my man; Lizzle must go on with her cloak for a while.  And
yon figs for the little ones—I promised them to ’em—I’ll take them; but
the ’bacco, and the other things”—

“I will give you five sovereigns for your note, my good man,” said Miss
Matty.  “I think there is some great mistake about it, for I am one of
the shareholders, and I’m sure they would have told me if things had not
been going on right.”

The shopman whispered a word or two across the table to Miss Matty.  She
looked at him with a dubious air.

“Perhaps so,” said she.  “But I don’t pretend to understand business; I
only know that if it is going to fail, and if honest people are to lose
their money because they have taken our notes—I can’t explain myself,”
said she, suddenly becoming aware that she had got into a long sentence
with four people for audience; “only I would rather exchange my gold for
the note, if you please,” turning to the farmer, “and then you can take
your wife the shawl.  It is only going without my gown a few days
longer,” she continued, speaking to me.  “Then, I have no doubt,
everything will be cleared up.”

“But if it is cleared up the wrong way?” said I.

“Why, then it will only have been common honesty in me, as a
shareholder, to have given this good man the money.  I am quite clear
about it in my own mind; but, you know, I can never speak quite as
comprehensibly as others can, only you must give me your note, Mr
Dobson, if you please, and go on with your purchases with these
sovereigns.”

     [Picture: You must give me your note, Mr Dobson, if you please]

The man looked at her with silent gratitude—too awkward to put his
thanks into words; but he hung back for a minute or two, fumbling with
his note.

“I’m loth to make another one lose instead of me, if it is a loss; but,
you see, five pounds is a deal of money to a man with a family; and, as
you say, ten to one in a day or two the note will be as good as gold
again.”

“No hope of that, my friend,” said the shopman.

“The more reason why I should take it,” said Miss Matty quietly.  She
pushed her sovereigns towards the man, who slowly laid his note down in
exchange.  “Thank you.  I will wait a day or two before I purchase any
of these silks; perhaps you will then have a greater choice.  My dear,
will you come upstairs?”

We inspected the fashions with as minute and curious an interest as if
the gown to be made after them had been bought.  I could not see that
the little event in the shop below had in the least damped Miss Matty’s
curiosity as to the make of sleeves or the sit of skirts.  She once or
twice exchanged congratulations with me on our private and leisurely
view of the bonnets and shawls; but I was, all the time, not so sure
that our examination was so utterly private, for I caught glimpses of a
figure dodging behind the cloaks and mantles; and, by a dexterous move,
I came face to face with Miss Pole, also in morning costume (the
principal feature of which was her being without teeth, and wearing a
veil to conceal the deficiency), come on the same errand as ourselves.
But she quickly took her departure, because, as she said, she had a bad
headache, and did not feel herself up to conversation.

As we came down through the shop, the civil Mr Johnson was awaiting us;
he had been informed of the exchange of the note for gold, and with much
good feeling and real kindness, but with a little want of tact, he
wished to condole with Miss Matty, and impress upon her the true state
of the case.  I could only hope that he had heard an exaggerated rumour
for he said that her shares were worse than nothing, and that the bank
could not pay a shilling in the pound.  I was glad that Miss Matty
seemed still a little incredulous; but I could not tell how much of this
was real or assumed, with that self-control which seemed habitual to
ladies of Miss Matty’s standing in Cranford, who would have thought
their dignity compromised by the slightest expression of surprise,
dismay, or any similar feeling to an inferior in station, or in a public
shop.  However, we walked home very silently.  I am ashamed to say, I
believe I was rather vexed and annoyed at Miss Matty’s conduct in taking
the note to herself so decidedly.  I had so set my heart upon her having
a new silk gown, which she wanted sadly; in general she was so undecided
anybody might turn her round; in this case I had felt that it was no use
attempting it, but I was not the less put out at the result.

Somehow, after twelve o’clock, we both acknowledged to a sated curiosity
about the fashions, and to a certain fatigue of body (which was, in
fact, depression of mind) that indisposed us to go out again.  But still
we never spoke of the note; till, all at once, something possessed me to
ask Miss Matty if she would think it her duty to offer sovereigns for
all the notes of the Town and County Bank she met with?  I could have
bitten my tongue out the minute I had said it.  She looked up rather
sadly, and as if I had thrown a new perplexity into her already
distressed mind; and for a minute or two she did not speak.  Then she
said—my own dear Miss Matty—without a shade of reproach in her voice—

“My dear, I never feel as if my mind was what people call very strong;
and it’s often hard enough work for me to settle what I ought to do with
the case right before me.  I was very thankful to—I was very thankful,
that I saw my duty this morning, with the poor man standing by me; but
its rather a strain upon me to keep thinking and thinking what I should
do if such and such a thing happened; and, I believe, I had rather wait
and see what really does come; and I don’t doubt I shall be helped then
if I don’t fidget myself, and get too anxious beforehand.  You know,
love, I’m not like Deborah.  If Deborah had lived, I’ve no doubt she
would have seen after them, before they had got themselves into this
state.”

We had neither of us much appetite for dinner, though we tried to talk
cheerfully about indifferent things.  When we returned into the
drawing-room, Miss Matty unlocked her desk and began to look over her
account-books.  I was so penitent for what I had said in the morning,
that I did not choose to take upon myself the presumption to suppose
that I could assist her; I rather left her alone, as, with puzzled brow,
her eye followed her pen up and down the ruled page.  By-and-by she shut
the book, locked the desk, and came and drew a chair to mine, where I
sat in moody sorrow over the fire.  I stole my hand into hers; she
clasped it, but did not speak a word.  At last she said, with forced
composure in her voice, “If that bank goes wrong, I shall lose one
hundred and forty-nine pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence a year; I
shall only have thirteen pounds a year left.”  I squeezed her hand hard
and tight.  I did not know what to say.  Presently (it was too dark to
see her face) I felt her fingers work convulsively in my grasp; and I
knew she was going to speak again.  I heard the sobs in her voice as she
said, “I hope it’s not wrong—not wicked—but, oh!  I am so glad poor
Deborah is spared this.  She could not have borne to come down in the
world—she had such a noble, lofty spirit.”

This was all she said about the sister who had insisted upon investing
their little property in that unlucky bank.  We were later in lighting
the candle than usual that night, and until that light shamed us into
speaking, we sat together very silently and sadly.

However, we took to our work after tea with a kind of forced
cheerfulness (which soon became real as far as it went), talking of that
never-ending wonder, Lady Glenmire’s engagement.  Miss Matty was almost
coming round to think it a good thing.

“I don’t mean to deny that men are troublesome in a house.  I don’t
judge from my own experience, for my father was neatness itself, and
wiped his shoes on coming in as carefully as any woman; but still a man
has a sort of knowledge of what should be done in difficulties, that it
is very pleasant to have one at hand ready to lean upon.  Now, Lady
Glenmire, instead of being tossed about, and wondering where she is to
settle, will be certain of a home among pleasant and kind people, such
as our good Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester.  And Mr Hoggins is really a
very personable man; and as for his manners, why, if they are not very
polished, I have known people with very good hearts and very clever
minds too, who were not what some people reckoned refined, but who were
both true and tender.”

She fell off into a soft reverie about Mr Holbrook, and I did not
interrupt her, I was so busy maturing a plan I had had in my mind for
some days, but which this threatened failure of the bank had brought to
a crisis.  That night, after Miss Matty went to bed, I treacherously
lighted the candle again, and sat down in the drawing-room to compose a
letter to the Aga Jenkyns, a letter which should affect him if he were
Peter, and yet seem a mere statement of dry facts if he were a stranger.
The church clock pealed out two before I had done.

The next morning news came, both official and otherwise, that the Town
and County Bank had stopped payment.  Miss Matty was ruined.

She tried to speak quietly to me; but when she came to the actual fact
that she would have but about five shillings a week to live upon, she
could not restrain a few tears.

“I am not crying for myself, dear,” said she, wiping them away; “I
believe I am crying for the very silly thought of how my mother would
grieve if she could know; she always cared for us so much more than for
herself.  But many a poor person has less, and I am not very
extravagant, and, thank God, when the neck of mutton, and Martha’s
wages, and the rent are paid, I have not a farthing owing.  Poor Martha!
 I think she’ll be sorry to leave me.”

Miss Matty smiled at me through her tears, and she would fain have had
me see only the smile, not the tears.




CHAPTER XIV.
FRIENDS IN NEED


IT was an example to me, and I fancy it might be to many others, to see
how immediately Miss Matty set about the retrenchment which she knew to
be right under her altered circumstances.  While she went down to speak
to Martha, and break the intelligence to her, I stole out with my letter
to the Aga Jenkyns, and went to the signor’s lodgings to obtain the
exact address.  I bound the signora to secrecy; and indeed her military
manners had a degree of shortness and reserve in them which made her
always say as little as possible, except when under the pressure of
strong excitement.  Moreover (which made my secret doubly sure), the
signor was now so far recovered as to be looking forward to travelling
and conjuring again in the space of a few days, when he, his wife, and
little Phoebe would leave Cranford.  Indeed, I found him looking over a
great black and red placard, in which the Signor Brunoni’s
accomplishments were set forth, and to which only the name of the town
where he would next display them was wanting.  He and his wife were so
much absorbed in deciding where the red letters would come in with most
effect (it might have been the Rubric for that matter), that it was some
time before I could get my question asked privately, and not before I
had given several decisions, the which I questioned afterwards with
equal wisdom of sincerity as soon as the signor threw in his doubts and
reasons on the important subject. At last I got the address, spelt by
sound, and very queer it looked.  I dropped it in the post on my way
home, and then for a minute I stood looking at the wooden pane with a
gaping slit which divided me from the letter but a moment ago in my
hand.  It was gone from me like life, never to be recalled.  It would
get tossed about on the sea, and stained with sea-waves perhaps, and be
carried among palm-trees, and scented with all tropical fragrance; the
little piece of paper, but an hour ago so familiar and commonplace, had
set out on its race to the strange wild countries beyond the Ganges!
But I could not afford to lose much time on this speculation.  I
hastened home, that Miss Matty might not miss me. Martha opened the door
to me, her face swollen with crying.  As soon as she saw me she burst
out afresh, and taking hold of my arm she pulled me in, and banged the
door to, in order to ask me if indeed it was all true that Miss Matty
had been saying.

“I’ll never leave her!  No; I won’t.  I telled her so, and said I could
not think how she could find in her heart to give me warning.  I could
not have had the face to do it, if I’d been her.  I might ha’ been just
as good for nothing as Mrs Fitz-Adam’s Rosy, who struck for wages after
living seven years and a half in one place.  I said I was not one to go
and serve Mammon at that rate; that I knew when I’d got a good missus,
if she didn’t know when she’d got a good servant”—

“But, Martha,” said I, cutting in while she wiped her eyes.

“Don’t, ‘but Martha’ me,” she replied to my deprecatory tone.

“Listen to reason”—

“I’ll not listen to reason,” she said, now in full possession of her
voice, which had been rather choked with sobbing.  “Reason always means
what someone else has got to say.  Now I think what I’ve got to say is
good enough reason; but reason or not, I’ll say it, and I’ll stick to
it. I’ve money in the Savings Bank, and I’ve a good stock of clothes,
and I’m not going to leave Miss Matty.  No, not if she gives me warning
every hour in the day!”

She put her arms akimbo, as much as to say she defied me; and, indeed, I
could hardly tell how to begin to remonstrate with her, so much did I
feel that Miss Matty, in her increasing infirmity, needed the attendance
of this kind and faithful woman.

“Well”—said I at last.

“I’m thankful you begin with ‘well!’  If you’d have begun with ‘but,’ as
you did afore, I’d not ha’ listened to you.  Now you may go on.”

“I know you would be a great loss to Miss Matty, Martha”—

“I telled her so.  A loss she’d never cease to be sorry for,” broke in
Martha triumphantly.

“Still, she will have so little—so very little—to live upon, that I
don’t see just now how she could find you food—she will even be pressed
for her own.  I tell you this, Martha, because I feel you are like a
friend to dear Miss Matty, but you know she might not like to have it
spoken about.”

Apparently this was even a blacker view of the subject than Miss Matty
had presented to her, for Martha just sat down on the first chair that
came to hand, and cried out loud (we had been standing in the kitchen).

At last she put her apron down, and looking me earnestly in the face,
asked, “Was that the reason Miss Matty wouldn’t order a pudding to-day?
She said she had no great fancy for sweet things, and you and she would
just have a mutton chop.  But I’ll be up to her.  Never you tell, but
I’ll make her a pudding, and a pudding she’ll like, too, and I’ll pay
for it myself; so mind you see she eats it.  Many a one has been
comforted in their sorrow by seeing a good dish come upon the table.”

I was rather glad that Martha’s energy had taken the immediate and
practical direction of pudding-making, for it staved off the quarrelsome
discussion as to whether she should or should not leave Miss Matty’s
service.  She began to tie on a clean apron, and otherwise prepare
herself for going to the shop for the butter, eggs, and what else she
might require.  She would not use a scrap of the articles already in the
house for her cookery, but went to an old tea-pot in which her private
store of money was deposited, and took out what she wanted.

I found Miss Matty very quiet, and not a little sad; but by-and-by she
tried to smile for my sake.  It was settled that I was to write to my
father, and ask him to come over and hold a consultation, and as soon as
this letter was despatched we began to talk over future plans.  Miss
Matty’s idea was to take a single room, and retain as much of her
furniture as would be necessary to fit up this, and sell the rest, and
there to quietly exist upon what would remain after paying the rent.
For my part, I was more ambitious and less contented.  I thought of all
the things by which a woman, past middle age, and with the education
common to ladies fifty years ago, could earn or add to a living without
materially losing caste; but at length I put even this last clause on
one side, and wondered what in the world Miss Matty could do.

Teaching was, of course, the first thing that suggested itself.  If Miss
Matty could teach children anything, it would throw her among the little
elves in whom her soul delighted.  I ran over her accomplishments.  Once
upon a time I had heard her say she could play “Ah! vous dirai-je,
maman?” on the piano, but that was long, long ago; that faint shadow of
musical acquirement had died out years before.  She had also once been
able to trace out patterns very nicely for muslin embroidery, by dint of
placing a piece of silver paper over the design to be copied, and
holding both against the window-pane while she marked the scollop and
eyelet-holes.  But that was her nearest approach to the accomplishment
of drawing, and I did not think it would go very far.  Then again, as to
the branches of a solid English education—fancy work and the use of the
globes—such as the mistress of the Ladies’ Seminary, to which all the
tradespeople in Cranford sent their daughters, professed to teach.  Miss
Matty’s eyes were failing her, and I doubted if she could discover the
number of threads in a worsted-work pattern, or rightly appreciate the
different shades required for Queen Adelaide’s face in the loyal
wool-work now fashionable in Cranford.  As for the use of the globes, I
had never been able to find it out myself, so perhaps I was not a good
judge of Miss Matty’s capability of instructing in this branch of
education; but it struck me that equators and tropics, and such mystical
circles, were very imaginary lines indeed to her, and that she looked
upon the signs of the Zodiac as so many remnants of the Black Art.

What she piqued herself upon, as arts in which she excelled, was making
candle-lighters, or “spills” (as she preferred calling them), of
coloured paper, cut so as to resemble feathers, and knitting garters in
a variety of dainty stitches.  I had once said, on receiving a present
of an elaborate pair, that I should feel quite tempted to drop one of
them in the street, in order to have it admired; but I found this little
joke (and it was a very little one) was such a distress to her sense of
propriety, and was taken with such anxious, earnest alarm, lest the
temptation might some day prove too strong for me, that I quite
regretted having ventured upon it.  A present of these
delicately-wrought garters, a bunch of gay “spills,” or a set of cards
on which sewing-silk was wound in a mystical manner, were the well-known
tokens of Miss Matty’s favour. But would any one pay to have their
children taught these arts? or, indeed, would Miss Matty sell, for
filthy lucre, the knack and the skill with which she made trifles of
value to those who loved her?

I had to come down to reading, writing, and arithmetic; and, in reading
the chapter every morning, she always coughed before coming to long
words.  I doubted her power of getting through a genealogical chapter,
with any number of coughs.  Writing she did well and delicately—but
spelling!  She seemed to think that the more out-of-the-way this was,
and the more trouble it cost her, the greater the compliment she paid to
her correspondent; and words that she would spell quite correctly in her
letters to me became perfect enigmas when she wrote to my father.

No! there was nothing she could teach to the rising generation of
Cranford, unless they had been quick learners and ready imitators of her
patience, her humility, her sweetness, her quiet contentment with all
that she could not do.  I pondered and pondered until dinner was
announced by Martha, with a face all blubbered and swollen with crying.

Miss Matty had a few little peculiarities which Martha was apt to regard
as whims below her attention, and appeared to consider as childish
fancies of which an old lady of fifty-eight should try and cure herself.
But to-day everything was attended to with the most careful regard.  The
bread was cut to the imaginary pattern of excellence that existed in
Miss Matty’s mind, as being the way which her mother had preferred, the
curtain was drawn so as to exclude the dead brick wall of a neighbour’s
stable, and yet left so as to show every tender leaf of the poplar which
was bursting into spring beauty.  Martha’s tone to Miss Matty was just
such as that good, rough-spoken servant usually kept sacred for little
children, and which I had never heard her use to any grown-up person.

I had forgotten to tell Miss Matty about the pudding, and I was afraid
she might not do justice to it, for she had evidently very little
appetite this day; so I seized the opportunity of letting her into the
secret while Martha took away the meat.  Miss Matty’s eyes filled with
tears, and she could not speak, either to express surprise or delight,
when Martha returned bearing it aloft, made in the most wonderful
representation of a lion _couchant_ that ever was moulded.  Martha’s
face gleamed with triumph as she set it down before Miss Matty with an
exultant “There!”  Miss Matty wanted to speak her thanks, but could not;
so she took Martha’s hand and shook it warmly, which set Martha off
crying, and I myself could hardly keep up the necessary composure.
Martha burst out of the room, and Miss Matty had to clear her voice once
or twice before she could speak.  At last she said, “I should like to
keep this pudding under a glass shade, my dear!” and the notion of the
lion _couchant_, with his currant eyes, being hoisted up to the place of
honour on a mantelpiece, tickled my hysterical fancy, and I began to
laugh, which rather surprised Miss Matty.

“I am sure, dear, I have seen uglier things under a glass shade before
now,” said she.

So had I, many a time and oft, and I accordingly composed my countenance
(and now I could hardly keep from crying), and we both fell to upon the
pudding, which was indeed excellent—only every morsel seemed to choke
us, our hearts were so full.

We had too much to think about to talk much that afternoon.  It passed
over very tranquilly.  But when the tea-urn was brought in a new thought
came into my head.  Why should not Miss Matty sell tea—be an agent to
the East India Tea Company which then existed?  I could see no
objections to this plan, while the advantages were many—always supposing
that Miss Matty could get over the degradation of condescending to
anything like trade.  Tea was neither greasy nor sticky—grease and
stickiness being two of the qualities which Miss Matty could not endure.
 No shop-window would be required.  A small, genteel notification of her
being licensed to sell tea would, it is true, be necessary, but I hoped
that it could be placed where no one would see it.  Neither was tea a
heavy article, so as to tax Miss Matty’s fragile strength.  The only
thing against my plan was the buying and selling involved.

While I was giving but absent answers to the questions Miss Matty was
putting—almost as absently—we heard a clumping sound on the stairs, and
a whispering outside the door, which indeed once opened and shut as if
by some invisible agency.  After a little while Martha came in, dragging
after her a great tall young man, all crimson with shyness, and finding
his only relief in perpetually sleeking down his hair.

“Please, ma’am, he’s only Jem Hearn,” said Martha, by way of an
introduction; and so out of breath was she that I imagine she had had
some bodily struggle before she could overcome his reluctance to be
presented on the courtly scene of Miss Matilda Jenkyns’s drawing-room.

“And please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand.  And please, ma’am,
we want to take a lodger—just one quiet lodger, to make our two ends
meet; and we’d take any house conformable; and, oh dear Miss Matty, if I
may be so bold, would you have any objections to lodging with us?  Jem
wants it as much as I do.”  [To Jem ]—“You great oaf! why can’t you back
me!—But he does want it all the same, very bad—don’t you, Jem?—only, you
see, he’s dazed at being called on to speak before quality.”

         [Picture: Please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand]

“It’s not that,” broke in Jem.  “It’s that you’ve taken me all on a
sudden, and I didn’t think for to get married so soon—and such quick
words does flabbergast a man.  It’s not that I’m against it, ma’am”
(addressing Miss Matty), “only Martha has such quick ways with her when
once she takes a thing into her head; and marriage, ma’am—marriage nails
a man, as one may say.  I dare say I shan’t mind it after it’s once
over.”

“Please, ma’am,” said Martha—who had plucked at his sleeve, and nudged
him with her elbow, and otherwise tried to interrupt him all the time
he had been speaking—“don’t mind him, he’ll come to; ’twas only last
night he was an-axing me, and an-axing me, and all the more because I
said I could not think of it for years to come, and now he’s only taken
aback with the suddenness of the joy; but you know, Jem, you are just as
full as me about wanting a lodger.”  (Another great nudge.)

“Ay! if Miss Matty would lodge with us—otherwise I’ve no mind to be
cumbered with strange folk in the house,” said Jem, with a want of tact
which I could see enraged Martha, who was trying to represent a lodger
as the great object they wished to obtain, and that, in fact, Miss Matty
would be smoothing their path and conferring a favour, if she would only
come and live with them.

Miss Matty herself was bewildered by the pair; their, or rather Martha’s
sudden resolution in favour of matrimony staggered her, and stood
between her and the contemplation of the plan which Martha had at heart.
 Miss Matty began—

“Marriage is a very solemn thing, Martha.”

“It is indeed, ma’am,” quoth Jem.  “Not that I’ve no objections to
Martha.”

“You’ve never let me a-be for asking me for to fix when I would be
married,” said Martha—her face all a-fire, and ready to cry with
vexation—“and now you’re shaming me before my missus and all.”

“Nay, now!  Martha don’t ee! don’t ee! only a man likes to have
breathing-time,” said Jem, trying to possess himself of her hand, but in
vain.  Then seeing that she was more seriously hurt than he had
imagined, he seemed to try to rally his scattered faculties, and with
more straightforward dignity than, ten minutes before, I should have
thought it possible for him to assume, he turned to Miss Matty, and
said, “I hope, ma’am, you know that I am bound to respect every one who
has been kind to Martha.  I always looked on her as to be my wife—some
time; and she has often and often spoken of you as the kindest lady that
ever was; and though the plain truth is, I would not like to be troubled
with lodgers of the common run, yet if, ma’am, you’d honour us by living
with us, I’m sure Martha would do her best to make you comfortable; and
I’d keep out of your way as much as I could, which I reckon would be the
best kindness such an awkward chap as me could do.”

Miss Matty had been very busy with taking off her spectacles, wiping
them, and replacing them; but all she could say was, “Don’t let any
thought of me hurry you into marriage: pray don’t.  Marriage is such a
very solemn thing!”

“But Miss Matilda will think of your plan, Martha,” said I, struck with
the advantages that it offered, and unwilling to lose the opportunity of
considering about it.  “And I’m sure neither she nor I can ever forget
your kindness; nor yours either, Jem.”

“Why, yes, ma’am!  I’m sure I mean kindly, though I’m a bit fluttered by
being pushed straight ahead into matrimony, as it were, and mayn’t
express myself conformable.  But I’m sure I’m willing enough, and give
me time to get accustomed; so, Martha, wench, what’s the use of crying
so, and slapping me if I come near?”

This last was _sotto voce_, and had the effect of making Martha bounce
out of the room, to be followed and soothed by her lover.  Whereupon
Miss Matty sat down and cried very heartily, and accounted for it by
saying that the thought of Martha being married so soon gave her quite a
shock, and that she should never forgive herself if she thought she was
hurrying the poor creature.  I think my pity was more for Jem, of the
two; but both Miss Matty and I appreciated to the full the kindness of
the honest couple, although we said little about this, and a good deal
about the chances and dangers of matrimony.

The next morning, very early, I received a note from Miss Pole, so
mysteriously wrapped up, and with so many seals on it to secure secrecy,
that I had to tear the paper before I could unfold it.  And when I came
to the writing I could hardly understand the meaning, it was so involved
and oracular.  I made out, however, that I was to go to Miss Pole’s at
eleven o’clock; the number _eleven_ being written in full length as well
as in numerals, and _A.M._ twice dashed under, as if I were very likely
to come at eleven at night, when all Cranford was usually abed and
asleep by ten.  There was no signature except Miss Pole’s initials
reversed, P.E.; but as Martha had given me the note, “with Miss Pole’s
kind regards,” it needed no wizard to find out who sent it; and if the
writer’s name was to be kept secret, it was very well that I was alone
when Martha delivered it.

I went as requested to Miss Pole’s.  The door was opened to me by her
little maid Lizzy in Sunday trim, as if some grand event was impending
over this work-day.  And the drawing-room upstairs was arranged in
accordance with this idea.  The table was set out with the best green
card-cloth, and writing materials upon it.  On the little chiffonier was
a tray with a newly-decanted bottle of cowslip wine, and some
ladies’-finger biscuits.  Miss Pole herself was in solemn array, as if
to receive visitors, although it was only eleven o’clock.  Mrs Forrester
was there, crying quietly and sadly, and my arrival seemed only to call
forth fresh tears.  Before we had finished our greetings, performed with
lugubrious mystery of demeanour, there was another rat-tat-tat, and Mrs
Fitz-Adam appeared, crimson with walking and excitement.  It seemed as
if this was all the company expected; for now Miss Pole made several
demonstrations of being about to open the business of the meeting, by
stirring the fire, opening and shutting the door, and coughing and
blowing her nose.  Then she arranged us all round the table, taking care
to place me opposite to her; and last of all, she inquired of me if the
sad report was true, as she feared it was, that Miss Matty had lost all
her fortune?

Of course, I had but one answer to make; and I never saw more unaffected
sorrow depicted on any countenances than I did there on the three before
me.

“I wish Mrs Jamieson was here!” said Mrs Forrester at last; but to judge
from Mrs Fitz-Adam’s face, she could not second the wish.

“But without Mrs Jamieson,” said Miss Pole, with just a sound of
offended merit in her voice, “we, the ladies of Cranford, in my
drawing-room assembled, can resolve upon something.  I imagine we are
none of us what may be called rich, though we all possess a genteel
competency, sufficient for tastes that are elegant and refined, and
would not, if they could, be vulgarly ostentatious.”  (Here I observed
Miss Pole refer to a small card concealed in her hand, on which I
imagine she had put down a few notes.)

“Miss Smith,” she continued, addressing me (familiarly known as “Mary”
to all the company assembled, but this was a state occasion), “I have
conversed in private—I made it my business to do so yesterday
afternoon—with these ladies on the misfortune which has happened to our
friend, and one and all of us have agreed that while we have a
superfluity, it is not only a duty, but a pleasure—a true pleasure,
Mary!”—her voice was rather choked just here, and she had to wipe her
spectacles before she could go on—“to give what we can to assist
her—Miss Matilda Jenkyns.  Only in consideration of the feelings of
delicate independence existing in the mind of every refined female”—I
was sure she had got back to the card now—“we wish to contribute our
mites in a secret and concealed manner, so as not to hurt the feelings I
have referred to. And our object in requesting you to meet us this
morning is that, believing you are the daughter—that your father is, in
fact, her confidential adviser, in all pecuniary matters, we imagined
that, by consulting with him, you might devise some mode in which our
contribution could be made to appear the legal due which Miss Matilda
Jenkyns ought to receive from—  Probably your father, knowing her
investments, can fill up the blank.”

Miss Pole concluded her address, and looked round for approval and
agreement.

“I have expressed your meaning, ladies, have I not?  And while Miss
Smith considers what reply to make, allow me to offer you some little
refreshment.”

I had no great reply to make: I had more thankfulness at my heart for
their kind thoughts than I cared to put into words; and so I only
mumbled out something to the effect “that I would name what Miss Pole
had said to my father, and that if anything could be arranged for dear
Miss Matty,”—and here I broke down utterly, and had to be refreshed with
a glass of cowslip wine before I could check the crying which had been
repressed for the last two or three days.  The worst was, all the ladies
cried in concert.  Even Miss Pole cried, who had said a hundred times
that to betray emotion before any one was a sign of weakness and want of
self-control.  She recovered herself into a slight degree of impatient
anger, directed against me, as having set them all off; and, moreover, I
think she was vexed that I could not make a speech back in return for
hers; and if I had known beforehand what was to be said, and had a card
on which to express the probable feelings that would rise in my heart, I
would have tried to gratify her.  As it was, Mrs Forrester was the
person to speak when we had recovered our composure.

“I don’t mind, among friends, stating that I—no!  I’m not poor exactly,
but I don’t think I’m what you may call rich; I wish I were, for dear
Miss Matty’s sake—but, if you please, I’ll write down in a sealed paper
what I can give.  I only wish it was more; my dear Mary, I do indeed.”

Now I saw why paper, pens, and ink were provided.  Every lady wrote down
the sum she could give annually, signed the paper, and sealed it
mysteriously.  If their proposal was acceded to, my father was to be
allowed to open the papers, under pledge of secrecy.  If not, they were
to be returned to their writers.

When the ceremony had been gone through, I rose to depart; but each lady
seemed to wish to have a private conference with me.  Miss Pole kept me
in the drawing-room to explain why, in Mrs Jamieson’s absence, she had
taken the lead in this “movement,” as she was pleased to call it, and
also to inform me that she had heard from good sources that Mrs Jamieson
was coming home directly in a state of high displeasure against her
sister-in-law, who was forthwith to leave her house, and was, she
believed, to return to Edinburgh that very afternoon.  Of course this
piece of intelligence could not be communicated before Mrs Fitz-Adam,
more especially as Miss Pole was inclined to think that Lady Glenmire’s
engagement to Mr Hoggins could not possibly hold against the blaze of
Mrs Jamieson’s displeasure.  A few hearty inquiries after Miss Matty’s
health concluded my interview with Miss Pole.

On coming downstairs I found Mrs Forrester waiting for me at the
entrance to the dining-parlour; she drew me in, and when the door was
shut, she tried two or three times to begin on some subject, which was
so unapproachable apparently, that I began to despair of our ever
getting to a clear understanding.  At last out it came; the poor old
lady trembling all the time as if it were a great crime which she was
exposing to daylight, in telling me how very, very little she had to
live upon; a confession which she was brought to make from a dread lest
we should think that the small contribution named in her paper bore any
proportion to her love and regard for Miss Matty.  And yet that sum
which she so eagerly relinquished was, in truth, more than a twentieth
part of what she had to live upon, and keep house, and a little
serving-maid, all as became one born a Tyrrell.  And when the whole
income does not nearly amount to a hundred pounds, to give up a
twentieth of it will necessitate many careful economies, and many pieces
of self-denial, small and insignificant in the world’s account, but
bearing a different value in another account-book that I have heard of.
She did so wish she was rich, she said, and this wish she kept
repeating, with no thought of herself in it, only with a longing,
yearning desire to be able to heap up Miss Matty’s measure of comforts.

It was some time before I could console her enough to leave her; and
then, on quitting the house, I was waylaid by Mrs Fitz-Adam, who had
also her confidence to make of pretty nearly the opposite description.
She had not liked to put down all that she could afford and was ready to
give.  She told me she thought she never could look Miss Matty in the
face again if she presumed to be giving her so much as she should like
to do.  “Miss Matty!” continued she, “that I thought was such a fine
young lady when I was nothing but a country girl, coming to market with
eggs and butter and such like things.  For my father, though well-to-do,
would always make me go on as my mother had done before me, and I had to
come into Cranford every Saturday, and see after sales, and prices, and
what not.  And one day, I remember, I met Miss Matty in the lane that
leads to Combehurst; she was walking on the footpath, which, you know,
is raised a good way above the road, and a gentleman rode beside her,
and was talking to her, and she was looking down at some primroses she
had gathered, and pulling them all to pieces, and I do believe she was
crying.  But after she had passed, she turned round and ran after me to
ask—oh, so kindly—about my poor mother, who lay on her death-bed; and
when I cried she took hold of my hand to comfort me—and the gentleman
waiting for her all the time—and her poor heart very full of something,
I am sure; and I thought it such an honour to be spoken to in that
pretty way by the rector’s daughter, who visited at Arley Hall.  I have
loved her ever since, though perhaps I’d no right to do it; but if you
can think of any way in which I might be allowed to give a little more
without any one knowing it, I should be so much obliged to you, my dear.
 And my brother would be delighted to doctor her for nothing—medicines,
leeches, and all. I know that he and her ladyship (my dear, I little
thought in the days I was telling you of that I should ever come to be
sister-in-law to a ladyship!) would do anything for her.  We all would.”

I told her I was quite sure of it, and promised all sorts of things in
my anxiety to get home to Miss Matty, who might well be wondering what
had become of me—absent from her two hours without being able to account
for it.  She had taken very little note of time, however, as she had
been occupied in numberless little arrangements preparatory to the great
step of giving up her house.  It was evidently a relief to her to be
doing something in the way of retrenchment, for, as she said, whenever
she paused to think, the recollection of the poor fellow with his bad
five-pound note came over her, and she felt quite dishonest; only if it
made her so uncomfortable, what must it not be doing to the directors of
the bank, who must know so much more of the misery consequent upon this
failure?  She almost made me angry by dividing her sympathy between
these directors (whom she imagined overwhelmed by self-reproach for the
mismanagement of other people’s affairs) and those who were suffering
like her.  Indeed, of the two, she seemed to think poverty a lighter
burden than self-reproach; but I privately doubted if the directors
would agree with her.

Old hoards were taken out and examined as to their money value which
luckily was small, or else I don’t know how Miss Matty would have
prevailed upon herself to part with such things as her mother’s
wedding-ring, the strange, uncouth brooch with which her father had
disfigured his shirt-frill, &c.  However, we arranged things a little in
order as to their pecuniary estimation, and were all ready for my father
when he came the next morning.

I am not going to weary you with the details of all the business we went
through; and one reason for not telling about them is, that I did not
understand what we were doing at the time, and cannot recollect it now.
Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts, and schemes, and reports,
and documents, of which I do not believe we either of us understood a
word; for my father was clear-headed and decisive, and a capital man of
business, and if we made the slightest inquiry, or expressed the
slightest want of comprehension, he had a sharp way of saying, “Eh? eh?
it’s as clear as daylight.  What’s your objection?”  And as we had not
comprehended anything of what he had proposed, we found it rather
difficult to shape our objections; in fact, we never were sure if we had
any.  So presently Miss Matty got into a nervously acquiescent state,
and said “Yes,” and “Certainly,” at every pause, whether required or
not; but when I once joined in as chorus to a “Decidedly,” pronounced by
Miss Matty in a tremblingly dubious tone, my father fired round at me
and asked me “What there was to decide?”  And I am sure to this day I
have never known.  But, in justice to him, I must say he had come over
from Drumble to help Miss Matty when he could ill spare the time, and
when his own affairs were in a very anxious state.

          [Picture: Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts]

While Miss Matty was out of the room giving orders for luncheon—and
sadly perplexed between her desire of honouring my father by a delicate,
dainty meal, and her conviction that she had no right, now that all her
money was gone, to indulge this desire—I told him of the meeting of the
Cranford ladies at Miss Pole’s the day before.  He kept brushing his
hand before his eyes as I spoke—and when I went back to Martha’s offer
the evening before, of receiving Miss Matty as a lodger, he fairly
walked away from me to the window, and began drumming with his fingers
upon it. Then he turned abruptly round, and said, “See, Mary, how a
good, innocent life makes friends all around.  Confound it!  I could
make a good lesson out of it if I were a parson; but, as it is, I can’t
get a tail to my sentences—only I’m sure you feel what I want to say.
You and I will have a walk after lunch and talk a bit more about these
plans.”

The lunch—a hot savoury mutton-chop, and a little of the cold loin
sliced and fried—was now brought in.  Every morsel of this last dish was
finished, to Martha’s great gratification.  Then my father bluntly told
Miss Matty he wanted to talk to me alone, and that he would stroll out
and see some of the old places, and then I could tell her what plan we
thought desirable.  Just before we went out, she called me back and
said, “Remember, dear, I’m the only one left—I mean, there’s no one to
be hurt by what I do.  I’m willing to do anything that’s right and
honest; and I don’t think, if Deborah knows where she is, she’ll care so
very much if I’m not genteel; because, you see, she’ll know all, dear.
Only let me see what I can do, and pay the poor people as far as I’m
able.”

I gave her a hearty kiss, and ran after my father.  The result of our
conversation was this.  If all parties were agreeable, Martha and Jem
were to be married with as little delay as possible, and they were to
live on in Miss Matty’s present abode; the sum which the Cranford ladies
had agreed to contribute annually being sufficient to meet the greater
part of the rent, and leaving Martha free to appropriate what Miss Matty
should pay for her lodgings to any little extra comforts required.
About the sale, my father was dubious at first.  He said the old rectory
furniture, however carefully used and reverently treated, would fetch
very little; and that little would be but as a drop in the sea of the
debts of the Town and County Bank.  But when I represented how Miss
Matty’s tender conscience would be soothed by feeling that she had done
what she could, he gave way; especially after I had told him the
five-pound note adventure, and he had scolded me well for allowing it.
I then alluded to my idea that she might add to her small income by
selling tea; and, to my surprise (for I had nearly given up the plan),
my father grasped at it with all the energy of a tradesman.  I think he
reckoned his chickens before they were hatched, for he immediately ran
up the profits of the sales that she could effect in Cranford to more
than twenty pounds a year.  The small dining-parlour was to be converted
into a shop, without any of its degrading characteristics; a table was
to be the counter; one window was to be retained unaltered, and the
other changed into a glass door.  I evidently rose in his estimation for
having made this bright suggestion.  I only hoped we should not both
fall in Miss Matty’s.

But she was patient and content with all our arrangements.  She knew,
she said, that we should do the best we could for her; and she only
hoped, only stipulated, that she should pay every farthing that she
could be said to owe, for her father’s sake, who had been so respected
in Cranford.  My father and I had agreed to say as little as possible
about the bank, indeed never to mention it again, if it could be helped.
 Some of the plans were evidently a little perplexing to her; but she
had seen me sufficiently snubbed in the morning for want of
comprehension to venture on too many inquiries now; and all passed over
well with a hope on her part that no one would be hurried into marriage
on her account. When we came to the proposal that she should sell tea, I
could see it was rather a shock to her; not on account of any personal
loss of gentility involved, but only because she distrusted her own
powers of action in a new line of life, and would timidly have preferred
a little more privation to any exertion for which she feared she was
unfitted. However, when she saw my father was bent upon it, she sighed,
and said she would try; and if she did not do well, of course she might
give it up.  One good thing about it was, she did not think men ever
bought tea; and it was of men particularly she was afraid.  They had
such sharp loud ways with them; and did up accounts, and counted their
change so quickly! Now, if she might only sell comfits to children, she
was sure she could please them!




CHAPTER XV.
A HAPPY RETURN


BEFORE I left Miss Matty at Cranford everything had been comfortably
arranged for her.  Even Mrs Jamieson’s approval of her selling tea had
been gained.  That oracle had taken a few days to consider whether by so
doing Miss Matty would forfeit her right to the privileges of society in
Cranford.  I think she had some little idea of mortifying Lady Glenmire
by the decision she gave at last; which was to this effect: that whereas
a married woman takes her husband’s rank by the strict laws of
precedence, an unmarried woman retains the station her father occupied.
So Cranford was allowed to visit Miss Matty; and, whether allowed or
not, it intended to visit Lady Glenmire.

But what was our surprise—our dismay—when we learnt that Mr and _Mrs
Hoggins_ were returning on the following Tuesday!  Mrs Hoggins!  Had
she absolutely dropped her title, and so, in a spirit of bravado, cut
the aristocracy to become a Hoggins!  She, who might have been called
Lady Glenmire to her dying day!  Mrs Jamieson was pleased.  She said it
only convinced her of what she had known from the first, that the
creature had a low taste.  But “the creature” looked very happy on
Sunday at church; nor did we see it necessary to keep our veils down on
that side of our bonnets on which Mr and Mrs Hoggins sat, as Mrs
Jamieson did; thereby missing all the smiling glory of his face, and all
the becoming blushes of hers.  I am not sure if Martha and Jem looked
more radiant in the afternoon, when they, too, made their first
appearance.  Mrs Jamieson soothed the turbulence of her soul by having
the blinds of her windows drawn down, as if for a funeral, on the day
when Mr and Mrs Hoggins received callers; and it was with some
difficulty that she was prevailed upon to continue the _St James’s
Chronicle_, so indignant was she with its having inserted the
announcement of the marriage.

           [Picture: Smiling glory ... and becoming blushes]

Miss Matty’s sale went off famously.  She retained the furniture of her
sitting-room and bedroom; the former of which she was to occupy till
Martha could meet with a lodger who might wish to take it; and into this
sitting-room and bedroom she had to cram all sorts of things, which were
(the auctioneer assured her) bought in for her at the sale by an unknown
friend.  I always suspected Mrs Fitz-Adam of this; but she must have had
an accessory, who knew what articles were particularly regarded by Miss
Matty on account of their associations with her early days.  The rest of
the house looked rather bare, to be sure; all except one tiny bedroom,
of which my father allowed me to purchase the furniture for my
occasional use in case of Miss Matty’s illness.

I had expended my own small store in buying all manner of comfits and
lozenges, in order to tempt the little people whom Miss Matty loved so
much to come about her.  Tea in bright green canisters, and comfits in
tumblers—Miss Matty and I felt quite proud as we looked round us on the
evening before the shop was to be opened.  Martha had scoured the
boarded floor to a white cleanness, and it was adorned with a brilliant
piece of oil-cloth, on which customers were to stand before the
table-counter. The wholesome smell of plaster and whitewash pervaded the
apartment.  A very small “Matilda Jenkyns, licensed to sell tea,” was
hidden under the lintel of the new door, and two boxes of tea, with
cabalistic inscriptions all over them, stood ready to disgorge their
contents into the canisters.

Miss Matty, as I ought to have mentioned before, had had some scruples
of conscience at selling tea when there was already Mr Johnson in the
town, who included it among his numerous commodities; and, before she
could quite reconcile herself to the adoption of her new business, she
had trotted down to his shop, unknown to me, to tell him of the project
that was entertained, and to inquire if it was likely to injure his
business. My father called this idea of hers “great nonsense,” and
“wondered how tradespeople were to get on if there was to be a continual
consulting of each other’s interests, which would put a stop to all
competition directly.”  And, perhaps, it would not have done in Drumble,
but in Cranford it answered very well; for not only did Mr Johnson
kindly put at rest all Miss Matty’s scruples and fear of injuring his
business, but I have reason to know he repeatedly sent customers to her,
saying that the teas he kept were of a common kind, but that Miss
Jenkyns had all the choice sorts.  And expensive tea is a very favourite
luxury with well-to-do tradespeople and rich farmers’ wives, who turn up
their noses at the Congou and Souchong prevalent at many tables of
gentility, and will have nothing else than Gunpowder and Pekoe for
themselves.

But to return to Miss Matty.  It was really very pleasant to see how her
unselfishness and simple sense of justice called out the same good
qualities in others.  She never seemed to think any one would impose
upon her, because she should be so grieved to do it to them.  I have
heard her put a stop to the asseverations of the man who brought her
coals by quietly saying, “I am sure you would be sorry to bring me wrong
weight;” and if the coals were short measure that time, I don’t believe
they ever were again.  People would have felt as much ashamed of
presuming on her good faith as they would have done on that of a child.
But my father says “such simplicity might be very well in Cranford, but
would never do in the world.”  And I fancy the world must be very bad,
for with all my father’s suspicion of every one with whom he has
dealings, and in spite of all his many precautions, he lost upwards of a
thousand pounds by roguery only last year.

I just stayed long enough to establish Miss Matty in her new mode of
life, and to pack up the library, which the rector had purchased.  He
had written a very kind letter to Miss Matty, saying “how glad he should
be to take a library, so well selected as he knew that the late Mr
Jenkyns’s must have been, at any valuation put upon them.”  And when she
agreed to this, with a touch of sorrowful gladness that they would go
back to the rectory and be arranged on the accustomed walls once more,
he sent word that he feared that he had not room for them all, and
perhaps Miss Matty would kindly allow him to leave some volumes on her
shelves.  But Miss Matty said that she had her Bible and “Johnson’s
Dictionary,” and should not have much time for reading, she was afraid;
still, I retained a few books out of consideration for the rector’s
kindness.

The money which he had paid, and that produced by the sale, was partly
expended in the stock of tea, and part of it was invested against a
rainy day—_i.e._ old age or illness.  It was but a small sum, it is
true; and it occasioned a few evasions of truth and white lies (all of
which I think very wrong indeed—in theory—and would rather not put them
in practice), for we knew Miss Matty would be perplexed as to her duty
if she were aware of any little reserve-fund being made for her while
the debts of the bank remained unpaid.  Moreover, she had never been
told of the way in which her friends were contributing to pay the rent.
I should have liked to tell her this, but the mystery of the affair gave
a piquancy to their deed of kindness which the ladies were unwilling to
give up; and at first Martha had to shirk many a perplexed question as
to her ways and means of living in such a house, but by-and-by Miss
Matty’s prudent uneasiness sank down into acquiescence with the existing
arrangement.

I left Miss Matty with a good heart.  Her sales of tea during the first
two days had surpassed my most sanguine expectations.  The whole country
round seemed to be all out of tea at once.  The only alteration I could
have desired in Miss Matty’s way of doing business was, that she should
not have so plaintively entreated some of her customers not to buy green
tea—running it down as a slow poison, sure to destroy the nerves, and
produce all manner of evil.  Their pertinacity in taking it, in spite of
all her warnings, distressed her so much that I really thought she would
relinquish the sale of it, and so lose half her custom; and I was driven
to my wits’ end for instances of longevity entirely attributable to a
persevering use of green tea.  But the final argument, which settled the
question, was a happy reference of mine to the train-oil and tallow
candles which the Esquimaux not only enjoy but digest.  After that she
acknowledged that “one man’s meat might be another man’s poison,” and
contented herself thence-forward with an occasional remonstrance when
she thought the purchaser was too young and innocent to be acquainted
with the evil effects green tea produced on some constitutions, and an
habitual sigh when people old enough to choose more wisely would prefer
it.

I went over from Drumble once a quarter at least to settle the accounts,
and see after the necessary business letters.  And, speaking of letters,
I began to be very much ashamed of remembering my letter to the Aga
Jenkyns, and very glad I had never named my writing to any one.  I only
hoped the letter was lost.  No answer came.  No sign was made.

About a year after Miss Matty set up shop, I received one of Martha’s
hieroglyphics, begging me to come to Cranford very soon.  I was afraid
that Miss Matty was ill, and went off that very afternoon, and took
Martha by surprise when she saw me on opening the door.  We went into
the kitchen as usual, to have our confidential conference, and then
Martha told me she was expecting her confinement very soon—in a week or
two; and she did not think Miss Matty was aware of it, and she wanted me
to break the news to her, “for indeed, miss,” continued Martha, crying
hysterically, “I’m afraid she won’t approve of it, and I’m sure I don’t
know who is to take care of her as she should be taken care of when I am
laid up.”

I comforted Martha by telling her I would remain till she was about
again, and only wished she had told me her reason for this sudden
summons, as then I would have brought the requisite stock of clothes.
But Martha was so tearful and tender-spirited, and unlike her usual
self, that I said as little as possible about myself, and endeavoured
rather to comfort Martha under all the probable and possible misfortunes
which came crowding upon her imagination.

I then stole out of the house-door, and made my appearance as if I were
a customer in the shop, just to take Miss Matty by surprise, and gain an
idea of how she looked in her new situation.  It was warm May weather,
so only the little half-door was closed; and Miss Matty sat behind the
counter, knitting an elaborate pair of garters; elaborate they seemed to
me, but the difficult stitch was no weight upon her mind, for she was
singing in a low voice to herself as her needles went rapidly in and
out. I call it singing, but I dare say a musician would not use that
word to the tuneless yet sweet humming of the low worn voice.  I found
out from the words, far more than from the attempt at the tune, that it
was the Old Hundredth she was crooning to herself; but the quiet
continuous sound told of content, and gave me a pleasant feeling, as I
stood in the street just outside the door, quite in harmony with that
soft May morning.  I went in.  At first she did not catch who it was,
and stood up as if to serve me; but in another minute watchful pussy had
clutched her knitting, which was dropped in eager joy at seeing me.  I
found, after we had had a little conversation, that it was as Martha
said, and that Miss Matty had no idea of the approaching household
event.  So I thought I would let things take their course, secure that
when I went to her with the baby in my arms, I should obtain that
forgiveness for Martha which she was needlessly frightening herself into
believing that Miss Matty would withhold, under some notion that the new
claimant would require attentions from its mother that it would be
faithless treason to Miss Matty to render.

But I was right.  I think that must be an hereditary quality, for my
father says he is scarcely ever wrong.  One morning, within a week after
I arrived, I went to call Miss Matty, with a little bundle of flannel in
my arms.  She was very much awestruck when I showed her what it was, and
asked for her spectacles off the dressing-table, and looked at it
curiously, with a sort of tender wonder at its small perfection of
parts. She could not banish the thought of the surprise all day, but
went about on tiptoe, and was very silent.  But she stole up to see
Martha and they both cried with joy, and she got into a complimentary
speech to Jem, and did not know how to get out of it again, and was only
extricated from her dilemma by the sound of the shop-bell, which was an
equal relief to the shy, proud, honest Jem, who shook my hand so
vigorously when I congratulated him, that I think I feel the pain of it
yet.

                   [Picture: I went to call Miss Matty]

I had a busy life while Martha was laid up.  I attended on Miss Matty,
and prepared her meals; I cast up her accounts, and examined into the
state of her canisters and tumblers.  I helped her, too, occasionally,
in the shop; and it gave me no small amusement, and sometimes a little
uneasiness, to watch her ways there.  If a little child came in to ask
for an ounce of almond-comfits (and four of the large kind which Miss
Matty sold weighed that much), she always added one more by “way of
make-weight,” as she called it, although the scale was handsomely turned
before; and when I remonstrated against this, her reply was, “The little
things like it so much!”  There was no use in telling her that the fifth
comfit weighed a quarter of an ounce, and made every sale into a loss to
her pocket.  So I remembered the green tea, and winged my shaft with a
feather out of her own plumage.  I told her how unwholesome
almond-comfits were, and how ill excess in them might make the little
children.  This argument produced some effect; for, henceforward,
instead of the fifth comfit, she always told them to hold out their tiny
palms, into which she shook either peppermint or ginger lozenges, as a
preventive to the dangers that might arise from the previous sale.
Altogether the lozenge trade, conducted on these principles, did not
promise to be remunerative; but I was happy to find she had made more
than twenty pounds during the last year by her sales of tea; and,
moreover, that now she was accustomed to it, she did not dislike the
employment, which brought her into kindly intercourse with many of the
people round about.  If she gave them good weight, they, in their turn,
brought many a little country present to the “old rector’s daughter”; a
cream cheese, a few new-laid eggs, a little fresh ripe fruit, a bunch of
flowers.  The counter was quite loaded with these offerings sometimes,
as she told me.

As for Cranford in general, it was going on much as usual.  The Jamieson
and Hoggins feud still raged, if a feud it could be called, when only
one side cared much about it.  Mr and Mrs Hoggins were very happy
together, and, like most very happy people, quite ready to be friendly;
indeed, Mrs Hoggins was really desirous to be restored to Mrs Jamieson’s
good graces, because of the former intimacy.  But Mrs Jamieson
considered their very happiness an insult to the Glenmire family, to
which she had still the honour to belong, and she doggedly refused and
rejected every advance. Mr Mulliner, like a faithful clansman, espoused
his mistress’ side with ardour.  If he saw either Mr or Mrs Hoggins, he
would cross the street, and appear absorbed in the contemplation of life
in general, and his own path in particular, until he had passed them by.
 Miss Pole used to amuse herself with wondering what in the world Mrs
Jamieson would do, if either she, or Mr Mulliner, or any other member of
her household was taken ill; she could hardly have the face to call in
Mr Hoggins after the way she had behaved to them.  Miss Pole grew quite
impatient for some indisposition or accident to befall Mrs Jamieson or
her dependents, in order that Cranford might see how she would act under
the perplexing circumstances.

Martha was beginning to go about again, and I had already fixed a limit,
not very far distant, to my visit, when one afternoon, as I was sitting
in the shop-parlour with Miss Matty—I remember the weather was colder
now than it had been in May, three weeks before, and we had a fire and
kept the door fully closed—we saw a gentleman go slowly past the window,
and then stand opposite to the door, as if looking out for the name
which we had so carefully hidden.  He took out a double eyeglass and
peered about for some time before he could discover it.  Then he came
in.  And, all on a sudden, it flashed across me that it was the Aga
himself!  For his clothes had an out-of-the-way foreign cut about them,
and his face was deep brown, as if tanned and re-tanned by the sun.  His
complexion contrasted oddly with his plentiful snow-white hair, his eyes
were dark and piercing, and he had an odd way of contracting them and
puckering up his cheeks into innumerable wrinkles when he looked
earnestly at objects. He did so to Miss Matty when he first came in.
His glance had first caught and lingered a little upon me, but then
turned, with the peculiar searching look I have described, to Miss
Matty.  She was a little fluttered and nervous, but no more so than she
always was when any man came into her shop.  She thought that he would
probably have a note, or a sovereign at least, for which she would have
to give change, which was an operation she very much disliked to
perform.  But the present customer stood opposite to her, without asking
for anything, only looking fixedly at her as he drummed upon the table
with his fingers, just for all the world as Miss Jenkyns used to do.
Miss Matty was on the point of asking him what he wanted (as she told me
afterwards), when he turned sharp to me: “Is your name Mary Smith?”

“Yes!” said I.

All my doubts as to his identity were set at rest, and I only wondered
what he would say or do next, and how Miss Matty would stand the joyful
shock of what he had to reveal.  Apparently he was at a loss how to
announce himself, for he looked round at last in search of something to
buy, so as to gain time, and, as it happened, his eye caught on the
almond-comfits, and he boldly asked for a pound of “those things.”  I
doubt if Miss Matty had a whole pound in the shop, and, besides the
unusual magnitude of the order, she was distressed with the idea of the
indigestion they would produce, taken in such unlimited quantities.  She
looked up to remonstrate.  Something of tender relaxation in his face
struck home to her heart.  She said, “It is—oh, sir! can you be Peter?”
and trembled from head to foot.  In a moment he was round the table and
had her in his arms, sobbing the tearless cries of old age.  I brought
her a glass of wine, for indeed her colour had changed so as to alarm me
and Mr Peter too.  He kept saying, “I have been too sudden for you,
Matty—I have, my little girl.”

I proposed that she should go at once up into the drawing-room and lie
down on the sofa there.  She looked wistfully at her brother, whose hand
she had held tight, even when nearly fainting; but on his assuring her
that he would not leave her, she allowed him to carry her upstairs.

I thought that the best I could do was to run and put the kettle on the
fire for early tea, and then to attend to the shop, leaving the brother
and sister to exchange some of the many thousand things they must have
to say.  I had also to break the news to Martha, who received it with a
burst of tears which nearly infected me.  She kept recovering herself to
ask if I was sure it was indeed Miss Matty’s brother, for I had
mentioned that he had grey hair, and she had always heard that he was a
very handsome young man.  Something of the same kind perplexed Miss
Matty at tea-time, when she was installed in the great easy-chair
opposite to Mr Jenkyns in order to gaze her fill.  She could hardly
drink for looking at him, and as for eating, that was out of the
question.

“I suppose hot climates age people very quickly,” said she, almost to
herself.  “When you left Cranford you had not a grey hair in your head.”

“But how many years ago is that?” said Mr Peter, smiling.

“Ah, true! yes, I suppose you and I are getting old.  But still I did
not think we were so very old!  But white hair is very becoming to you,
Peter,” she continued—a little afraid lest she had hurt him by revealing
how his appearance had impressed her.

“I suppose I forgot dates too, Matty, for what do you think I have
brought for you from India?  I have an Indian muslin gown and a pearl
necklace for you somewhere in my chest at Portsmouth.”  He smiled as if
amused at the idea of the incongruity of his presents with the
appearance of his sister; but this did not strike her all at once, while
the elegance of the articles did.  I could see that for a moment her
imagination dwelt complacently on the idea of herself thus attired; and
instinctively she put her hand up to her throat—that little delicate
throat which (as Miss Pole had told me) had been one of her youthful
charms; but the hand met the touch of folds of soft muslin in which she
was always swathed up to her chin, and the sensation recalled a sense of
the unsuitableness of a pearl necklace to her age.  She said, “I’m
afraid I’m too old; but it was very kind of you to think of it.  They
are just what I should have liked years ago—when I was young.”

“So I thought, my little Matty.  I remembered your tastes; they were so
like my dear mother’s.”  At the mention of that name the brother and
sister clasped each other’s hands yet more fondly, and, although they
were perfectly silent, I fancied they might have something to say if
they were unchecked by my presence, and I got up to arrange my room for
Mr Peter’s occupation that night, intending myself to share Miss Matty’s
bed.  But at my movement, he started up.  “I must go and settle about a
room at the ‘George.’  My carpet-bag is there too.”

“No!” said Miss Matty, in great distress—“you must not go; please, dear
Peter—pray, Mary—oh! you must not go!”

She was so much agitated that we both promised everything she wished.
Peter sat down again and gave her his hand, which for better security
she held in both of hers, and I left the room to accomplish my
arrangements.

Long, long into the night, far, far into the morning, did Miss Matty and
I talk.  She had much to tell me of her brother’s life and adventures,
which he had communicated to her as they had sat alone.  She said all
was thoroughly clear to her; but I never quite understood the whole
story; and when in after days I lost my awe of Mr Peter enough to
question him myself, he laughed at my curiosity, and told me stories
that sounded so very much like Baron Munchausen’s, that I was sure he
was making fun of me.  What I heard from Miss Matty was that he had been
a volunteer at the siege of Rangoon; had been taken prisoner by the
Burmese; and somehow obtained favour and eventual freedom from knowing
how to bleed the chief of the small tribe in some case of dangerous
illness; that on his release from years of captivity he had had his
letters returned from England with the ominous word “Dead” marked upon
them; and, believing himself to be the last of his race, he had settled
down as an indigo planter, and had proposed to spend the remainder of
his life in the country to whose inhabitants and modes of life he had
become habituated, when my letter had reached him; and, with the odd
vehemence which characterised him in age as it had done in youth, he had
sold his land and all his possessions to the first purchaser, and come
home to the poor old sister, who was more glad and rich than any
princess when she looked at him.  She talked me to sleep at last, and
then I was awakened by a slight sound at the door, for which she begged
my pardon as she crept penitently into bed; but it seems that when I
could no longer confirm her belief that the long-lost was really
here—under the same roof—she had begun to fear lest it was only a waking
dream of hers; that there never had been a Peter sitting by her all that
blessed evening—but that the real Peter lay dead far away beneath some
wild sea-wave, or under some strange eastern tree. And so strong had
this nervous feeling of hers become, that she was fain to get up and go
and convince herself that he was really there by listening through the
door to his even, regular breathing—I don’t like to call it snoring, but
I heard it myself through two closed doors—and by-and-by it soothed Miss
Matty to sleep.

I don’t believe Mr Peter came home from India as rich as a nabob; he
even considered himself poor, but neither he nor Miss Matty cared much
about that.  At any rate, he had enough to live upon “very genteelly” at
Cranford; he and Miss Matty together.  And a day or two after his
arrival, the shop was closed, while troops of little urchins gleefully
awaited the shower of comfits and lozenges that came from time to time
down upon their faces as they stood up-gazing at Miss Matty’s
drawing-room windows.  Occasionally Miss Matty would say to them
(half-hidden behind the curtains), “My dear children, don’t make
yourselves ill;” but a strong arm pulled her back, and a more rattling
shower than ever succeeded.  A part of the tea was sent in presents to
the Cranford ladies; and some of it was distributed among the old people
who remembered Mr Peter in the days of his frolicsome youth.  The Indian
muslin gown was reserved for darling Flora Gordon (Miss Jessie Brown’s
daughter).  The Gordons had been on the Continent for the last few
years, but were now expected to return very soon; and Miss Matty, in her
sisterly pride, anticipated great delight in the joy of showing them Mr
Peter.  The pearl necklace disappeared; and about that time many
handsome and useful presents made their appearance in the households of
Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester; and some rare and delicate Indian ornaments
graced the drawing-rooms of Mrs Jamieson and Mrs Fitz-Adam.  I myself
was not forgotten.  Among other things, I had the handsomest-bound and
best edition of Dr Johnson’s works that could be procured; and dear Miss
Matty, with tears in her eyes, begged me to consider it as a present
from her sister as well as herself.  In short, no one was forgotten;
and, what was more, every one, however insignificant, who had shown
kindness to Miss Matty at any time, was sure of Mr Peter’s cordial
regard.




CHAPTER XVI.
PEACE TO CRANFORD


IT was not surprising that Mr Peter became such a favourite at Cranford.
The ladies vied with each other who should admire him most; and no
wonder, for their quiet lives were astonishingly stirred up by the
arrival from India—especially as the person arrived told more wonderful
stories than Sindbad the Sailor; and, as Miss Pole said, was quite as
good as an Arabian Night any evening.  For my own part, I had vibrated
all my life between Drumble and Cranford, and I thought it was quite
possible that all Mr Peter’s stories might be true, although wonderful;
but when I found that, if we swallowed an anecdote of tolerable
magnitude one week, we had the dose considerably increased the next, I
began to have my doubts; especially as I noticed that when his sister
was present the accounts of Indian life were comparatively tame; not
that she knew more than we did, perhaps less.  I noticed also that when
the rector came to call, Mr Peter talked in a different way about the
countries he had been in.  But I don’t think the ladies in Cranford
would have considered him such a wonderful traveller if they had only
heard him talk in the quiet way he did to him.  They liked him the
better, indeed, for being what they called “so very Oriental.”

One day, at a select party in his honour, which Miss Pole gave, and from
which, as Mrs Jamieson honoured it with her presence, and had even
offered to send Mr Mulliner to wait, Mr and Mrs Hoggins and Mrs
Fitz-Adam were necessarily excluded—one day at Miss Pole’s, Mr Peter
said he was tired of sitting upright against the hard-backed uneasy
chairs, and asked if he might not indulge himself in sitting
cross-legged.  Miss Pole’s consent was eagerly given, and down he went
with the utmost gravity.  But when Miss Pole asked me, in an audible
whisper, “if he did not remind me of the Father of the Faithful?” I
could not help thinking of poor Simon Jones, the lame tailor, and while
Mrs Jamieson slowly commented on the elegance and convenience of the
attitude, I remembered how we had all followed that lady’s lead in
condemning Mr Hoggins for vulgarity because he simply crossed his legs
as he sat still on his chair.  Many of Mr Peter’s ways of eating were a
little strange amongst such ladies as Miss Pole, and Miss Matty, and Mrs
Jamieson, especially when I recollected the untasted green peas and
two-pronged forks at poor Mr Holbrook’s dinner.

The mention of that gentleman’s name recalls to my mind a conversation
between Mr Peter and Miss Matty one evening in the summer after he
returned to Cranford.  The day had been very hot, and Miss Matty had
been much oppressed by the weather, in the heat of which her brother
revelled. I remember that she had been unable to nurse Martha’s baby,
which had become her favourite employment of late, and which was as much
at home in her arms as in its mother’s, as long as it remained a
light-weight, portable by one so fragile as Miss Matty.  This day to
which I refer, Miss Matty had seemed more than usually feeble and
languid, and only revived when the sun went down, and her sofa was
wheeled to the open window, through which, although it looked into the
principal street of Cranford, the fragrant smell of the neighbouring
hayfields came in every now and then, borne by the soft breezes that
stirred the dull air of the summer twilight, and then died away.  The
silence of the sultry atmosphere was lost in the murmuring noises which
came in from many an open window and door; even the children were abroad
in the street, late as it was (between ten and eleven), enjoying the
game of play for which they had not had spirits during the heat of the
day.  It was a source of satisfaction to Miss Matty to see how few
candles were lighted, even in the apartments of those houses from which
issued the greatest signs of life.  Mr Peter, Miss Matty, and I had all
been quiet, each with a separate reverie, for some little time, when Mr
Peter broke in—

“Do you know, little Matty, I could have sworn you were on the high road
to matrimony when I left England that last time!  If anybody had told me
you would have lived and died an old maid then, I should have laughed in
their faces.”

Miss Matty made no reply, and I tried in vain to think of some subject
which should effectually turn the conversation; but I was very stupid;
and before I spoke he went on—

“It was Holbrook, that fine manly fellow who lived at Woodley, that I
used to think would carry off my little Matty.  You would not think it
now, I dare say, Mary; but this sister of mine was once a very pretty
girl—at least, I thought so, and so I’ve a notion did poor Holbrook.
What business had he to die before I came home to thank him for all his
kindness to a good-for-nothing cub as I was?  It was that that made me
first think he cared for you; for in all our fishing expeditions it was
Matty, Matty, we talked about.  Poor Deborah!  What a lecture she read
me on having asked him home to lunch one day, when she had seen the
Arley carriage in the town, and thought that my lady might call.  Well,
that’s long years ago; more than half a life-time, and yet it seems like
yesterday!  I don’t know a fellow I should have liked better as a
brother-in-law.  You must have played your cards badly, my little Matty,
somehow or another—wanted your brother to be a good go-between, eh,
little one?” said he, putting out his hand to take hold of hers as she
lay on the sofa.  “Why, what’s this? you’re shivering and shaking,
Matty, with that confounded open window.  Shut it, Mary, this minute!”

I did so, and then stooped down to kiss Miss Matty, and see if she
really were chilled.  She caught at my hand, and gave it a hard
squeeze—but unconsciously, I think—for in a minute or two she spoke to
us quite in her usual voice, and smiled our uneasiness away, although
she patiently submitted to the prescriptions we enforced of a warm bed
and a glass of weak negus.  I was to leave Cranford the next day, and
before I went I saw that all the effects of the open window had quite
vanished.  I had superintended most of the alterations necessary in the
house and household during the latter weeks of my stay.  The shop was
once more a parlour: the empty resounding rooms again furnished up to
the very garrets.

There had been some talk of establishing Martha and Jem in another
house, but Miss Matty would not hear of this.  Indeed, I never saw her
so much roused as when Miss Pole had assumed it to be the most desirable
arrangement.  As long as Martha would remain with Miss Matty, Miss Matty
was only too thankful to have her about her; yes, and Jem too, who was a
very pleasant man to have in the house, for she never saw him from
week’s end to week’s end.  And as for the probable children, if they
would all turn out such little darlings as her god-daughter, Matilda,
she should not mind the number, if Martha didn’t.  Besides, the next was
to be called Deborah—a point which Miss Matty had reluctantly yielded to
Martha’s stubborn determination that her first-born was to be Matilda.
So Miss Pole had to lower her colours, and even her voice, as she said
to me that, as Mr and Mrs Hearn were still to go on living in the same
house with Miss Matty, we had certainly done a wise thing in hiring
Martha’s niece as an auxiliary.

I left Miss Matty and Mr Peter most comfortable and contented; the only
subject for regret to the tender heart of the one, and the social
friendly nature of the other, being the unfortunate quarrel between Mrs
Jamieson and the plebeian Hogginses and their following.  In joke, I
prophesied one day that this would only last until Mrs Jamieson or Mr
Mulliner were ill, in which case they would only be too glad to be
friends with Mr Hoggins; but Miss Matty did not like my looking forward
to anything like illness in so light a manner, and before the year was
out all had come round in a far more satisfactory way.

I received two Cranford letters on one auspicious October morning.  Both
Miss Pole and Miss Matty wrote to ask me to come over and meet the
Gordons, who had returned to England alive and well with their two
children, now almost grown up.  Dear Jessie Brown had kept her old kind
nature, although she had changed her name and station; and she wrote to
say that she and Major Gordon expected to be in Cranford on the
fourteenth, and she hoped and begged to be remembered to Mrs Jamieson
(named first, as became her honourable station), Miss Pole and Miss
Matty—could she ever forget their kindness to her poor father and
sister?—Mrs Forrester, Mr Hoggins (and here again came in an allusion to
kindness shown to the dead long ago), his new wife, who as such must
allow Mrs Gordon to desire to make her acquaintance, and who was,
moreover, an old Scotch friend of her husband’s.  In short, every one
was named, from the rector—who had been appointed to Cranford in the
interim between Captain Brown’s death and Miss Jessie’s marriage, and
was now associated with the latter event—down to Miss Betty Barker.  All
were asked to the luncheon; all except Mrs Fitz-Adam, who had come to
live in Cranford since Miss Jessie Brown’s days, and whom I found rather
moping on account of the omission.  People wondered at Miss Betty
Barker’s being included in the honourable list; but, then, as Miss Pole
said, we must remember the disregard of the genteel proprieties of life
in which the poor captain had educated his girls, and for his sake we
swallowed our pride.  Indeed, Mrs Jamieson rather took it as a
compliment, as putting Miss Betty (formerly _her_ maid) on a level with
“those Hogginses.”

But when I arrived in Cranford, nothing was as yet ascertained of Mrs
Jamieson’s own intentions; would the honourable lady go, or would she
not?  Mr Peter declared that she should and she would; Miss Pole shook
her head and desponded.  But Mr Peter was a man of resources.  In the
first place, he persuaded Miss Matty to write to Mrs Gordon, and to tell
her of Mrs Fitz-Adam’s existence, and to beg that one so kind, and
cordial, and generous, might be included in the pleasant invitation.  An
answer came back by return of post, with a pretty little note for Mrs
Fitz-Adam, and a request that Miss Matty would deliver it herself and
explain the previous omission.  Mrs Fitz-Adam was as pleased as could
be, and thanked Miss Matty over and over again.  Mr Peter had said,
“Leave Mrs Jamieson to me;” so we did; especially as we knew nothing
that we could do to alter her determination if once formed.

I did not know, nor did Miss Matty, how things were going on, until Miss
Pole asked me, just the day before Mrs Gordon came, if I thought there
was anything between Mr Peter and Mrs Jamieson in the matrimonial line,
for that Mrs Jamieson was really going to the lunch at the “George.”
She had sent Mr Mulliner down to desire that there might be a footstool
put to the warmest seat in the room, as she meant to come, and knew that
their chairs were very high.  Miss Pole had picked this piece of news
up, and from it she conjectured all sorts of things, and bemoaned yet
more. “If Peter should marry, what would become of poor dear Miss Matty?
 And Mrs Jamieson, of all people!”  Miss Pole seemed to think there were
other ladies in Cranford who would have done more credit to his choice,
and I think she must have had someone who was unmarried in her head, for
she kept saying, “It was so wanting in delicacy in a widow to think of
such a thing.”

When I got back to Miss Matty’s I really did begin to think that Mr
Peter might be thinking of Mrs Jamieson for a wife, and I was as unhappy
as Miss Pole about it.  He had the proof sheet of a great placard in his
hand.  “Signor Brunoni, Magician to the King of Delhi, the Rajah of
Oude, and the great Lama of Thibet,” &c. &c., was going to “perform in
Cranford for one night only,” the very next night; and Miss Matty,
exultant, showed me a letter from the Gordons, promising to remain over
this gaiety, which Miss Matty said was entirely Peter’s doing.  He had
written to ask the signor to come, and was to be at all the expenses of
the affair.  Tickets were to be sent gratis to as many as the room would
hold.  In short, Miss Matty was charmed with the plan, and said that
to-morrow Cranford would remind her of the Preston Guild, to which she
had been in her youth—a luncheon at the “George,” with the dear Gordons,
and the signor in the Assembly Room in the evening.  But I—I looked only
at the fatal words:—

    “_Under the Patronage of the_ HONOURABLE MRS JAMIESON.”

She, then, was chosen to preside over this entertainment of Mr Peter’s;
she was perhaps going to displace my dear Miss Matty in his heart, and
make her life lonely once more!  I could not look forward to the morrow
with any pleasure; and every innocent anticipation of Miss Matty’s only
served to add to my annoyance.

So, angry and irritated, and exaggerating every little incident which
could add to my irritation, I went on till we were all assembled in the
great parlour at the “George.”  Major and Mrs Gordon and pretty Flora
and Mr Ludovic were all as bright and handsome and friendly as could be;
but I could hardly attend to them for watching Mr Peter, and I saw that
Miss Pole was equally busy.  I had never seen Mrs Jamieson so roused and
animated before; her face looked full of interest in what Mr Peter was
saying.  I drew near to listen.  My relief was great when I caught that
his words were not words of love, but that, for all his grave face, he
was at his old tricks.  He was telling her of his travels in India, and
describing the wonderful height of the Himalaya mountains: one touch
after another added to their size, and each exceeded the former in
absurdity; but Mrs Jamieson really enjoyed all in perfect good faith.  I
suppose she required strong stimulants to excite her to come out of her
apathy.  Mr Peter wound up his account by saying that, of course, at
that altitude there were none of the animals to be found that existed in
the lower regions; the game,—everything was different.  Firing one day
at some flying creature, he was very much dismayed when it fell, to find
that he had shot a cherubim!  Mr Peter caught my eye at this moment, and
gave me such a funny twinkle, that I felt sure he had no thoughts of Mrs
Jamieson as a wife from that time.  She looked uncomfortably amazed—

“But, Mr Peter, shooting a cherubim—don’t you think—I am afraid that was
sacrilege!”

Mr Peter composed his countenance in a moment, and appeared shocked at
the idea, which, as he said truly enough, was now presented to him for
the first time; but then Mrs Jamieson must remember that he had been
living for a long time among savages—all of whom were heathens—some of
them, he was afraid, were downright Dissenters.  Then, seeing Miss Matty
draw near, he hastily changed the conversation, and after a little
while, turning to me, he said, “Don’t be shocked, prim little Mary, at
all my wonderful stories.  I consider Mrs Jamieson fair game, and
besides I am bent on propitiating her, and the first step towards it is
keeping her well awake.  I bribed her here by asking her to let me have
her name as patroness for my poor conjuror this evening; and I don’t
want to give her time enough to get up her rancour against the
Hogginses, who are just coming in.  I want everybody to be friends, for
it harasses Matty so much to hear of these quarrels.  I shall go at it
again by-and-by, so you need not look shocked.  I intend to enter the
Assembly Room to-night with Mrs Jamieson on one side, and my lady, Mrs
Hoggins, on the other.  You see if I don’t.”

Somehow or another he did; and fairly got them into conversation
together.  Major and Mrs Gordon helped at the good work with their
perfect ignorance of any existing coolness between any of the
inhabitants of Cranford.

Ever since that day there has been the old friendly sociability in
Cranford society; which I am thankful for, because of my dear Miss
Matty’s love of peace and kindliness.  We all love Miss Matty, and I
somehow think we are all of us better when she is near us.

                                * * * * *

                                PRINTED BY
                           TURNBULL AND SPEARS,
                                EDINBURGH






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRANFORD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Expedition of Humphry Clinker
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Expedition of Humphry Clinker

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: April 1, 2000 [eBook #2160]
                Most recently updated: July 25, 2012

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Martin Adamson, Andreas Philipp, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER ***




Produced by Martin Adamson and  Andreas Philipp






THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER

by TOBIAS SMOLLETT




To Mr HENRY DAVIS, Bookseller, in London.

ABERGAVENNY, Aug. 4.

RESPECTED SIR,

I have received your esteemed favour of the 13th ultimo, whereby it
appeareth, that you have perused those same Letters, the which were
delivered unto you by my friend, the reverend Mr Hugo Behn; and I am
pleased to find you think they may be printed with a good prospect of
success; in as much as the objections you mention, I humbly conceive,
are such as may be redargued, if not entirely removed--And, first, in
the first place, as touching what prosecutions may arise from printing
the private correspondence of persons still living, give me leave, with
all due submission, to observe, that the Letters in question were not
written and sent under the seal of secrecy; that they have no tendency
to the mala fama, or prejudice of any person whatsoever; but rather to
the information and edification of mankind: so that it becometh a sort
of duty to promulgate them in usum publicum. Besides, I have consulted
Mr Davy Higgins, an eminent attorney of this place, who, after due
inspection and consideration, declareth, That he doth not think the said
Letters contain any matter which will be held actionable in the eye of
the law. Finally, if you and I should come to a right understanding, I
do declare in verbo sacerdotis, that, in case of any such prosecution,
I will take the whole upon my own shoulders, even quoad fine and
imprisonment, though, I must confess, I should not care to undergo
flagellation: Tam ad turpitudinem, quam ad amaritudinem poenoe
spectans--Secondly, concerning the personal resentment of Mr Justice
Lismahago, I may say, non flocci facio--I would not willingly vilipend
any Christian, if, peradventure, he deserveth that epithet: albeit, I
am much surprised that more care is not taken to exclude from the
commission all such vagrant foreigners as may be justly suspected of
disaffection to our happy constitution, in church and state--God forbid
that I should be so uncharitable, as to affirm, positively, that the
said Lismahago is no better than a Jesuit in disguise; but this I will
assert and maintain, totis viribus, that, from the day he qualified, he
has never been once seen intra templi parietes, that is to say, within
the parish church.

Thirdly, with respect to what passed at Mr Kendal's table, when the said
Lismahago was so brutal in his reprehensions, I must inform you, my good
Sir, that I was obliged to retire, not by fear arising from his minatory
reproaches, which, as I said above, I value not of a rush; but from the
sudden effect produced, by a barbel's row, which I had eaten at
dinner, not knowing, that the said row is at certain seasons violently
cathartic, as Galen observeth in his chapter Peri ichtos.

Fourthly, and lastly, with reference to the manner in which I got
possession of these Letters, it is a circumstance that concerns my own
conscience only; sufficeth it to say, I have fully satisfied the parties
in whose custody they were; and, by this time, I hope I have also
satisfied you in such ways, that the last hand may be put to our
agreement, and the work proceed with all convenient expedition; in which
I hope I rest,

Respected Sir, Your very humble servant,

JONATHAN DUSTWICH.

P.S. I propose, Deo volente, to have the pleasure of seeing you in the
great city, towards All-hallowtide, when I shall be glad to treat with
you concerning a parcel of MS. sermons, of a certain clergyman deceased;
a cake of the right leaven, for the present taste of the public. Verbum
sapienti, &c.

J.D.




To the Revd. Mr JONATHAN DUSTWICH, at--

SIR,

I received yours in course of post, and shall be glad to treat with you
for the M.S. which I have delivered to your friend Mr Behn; but can
by no means comply with the terms proposed. Those things are so
uncertain--Writing is all a lottery--I have been a loser by the works
of the greatest men of the age--I could mention particulars, and name
names; but don't choose it--The taste of the town is so changeable.
Then there have been so many letters upon travels lately published--What
between Smollett's, Sharp's, Derrick's, Thicknesse's, Baltimore's, and
Baretti's, together with Shandy's Sentimental Travels, the public seems
to be cloyed with that kind of entertainment--Nevertheless, I will,
if you please, run the risque of printing and publishing, and you shall
have half the profits of the impression--You need not take the trouble
to bring up your sermons on my account--No body reads sermons but
Methodists and Dissenters--Besides, for my own part, I am quite a
stranger to that sort of reading; and the two persons, whose judgment I
depended upon in those matters, are out of the way; one is gone abroad,
carpenter of a man of war; and the other, has been silly enough to
abscond, in order to avoid a prosecution for blasphemy--I'm a great
loser by his going off--He has left a manual of devotion half finished
on my hands, after having received money for the whole copy--He was the
soundest divine, and had the most orthodox pen of all my people; and I
never knew his judgment fail, but in flying from his bread and butter on
this occasion.

By owning you was not put in bodily fear by Lismahago, you preclude
yourself from the benefit of a good plea, over and above the advantage
of binding him over. In the late war, I inserted in my evening paper,
a paragraph that came by the post, reflecting upon the behaviour of a
certain regiment in battle. An officer of said regiment came to my shop,
and, in the presence of my wife and journeyman, threatened to cut off
my ears--As I exhibited marks of bodily fear more ways than one, to the
conviction of the byestanders, I bound him over; my action lay, and I
recovered. As for flagellation, you have nothing to fear, and nothing to
hope, on that head--There has been but one printer flogged at the cart's
tail these thirty years; that was Charles Watson; and he assured me it
was no more than a flea-bite. C-- S-- has been threatened several times
by the House of L--; but it came to nothing. If an information should
be moved for, and granted against you, as the editor of those Letters,
I hope you will have honesty and wit enough to appear and take your
trial--If you should be sentenced to the pillory, your fortune is
made--As times go, that's a sure step to honour and preferment. I shall
think myself happy if I can lend you a lift; and am, very sincerely,

Yours,

HENRY DAVIS. LONDON, Aug. 10th.

Please my kind service to your neighbour, my cousin Madoc--I have
sent an Almanack and Court-kalendar, directed for him at Mr Sutton's,
bookseller, in Gloucester, carriage paid, which he will please to accept
as a small token of my regard. My wife, who is very fond of toasted
cheese, presents her compliments to him, and begs to know if there's any
of that kind, which he was so good as to send us last Christmas, to be
sold in London.

H. D.




THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER




To Dr LEWIS.

DOCTOR,

The pills are good for nothing--I might as well swallow snowballs to
cool my reins--I have told you over and over how hard I am to move; and
at this time of day, I ought to know something of my own constitution.
Why will you be so positive? Prithee send me another prescription--I am
as lame and as much tortured in all my limbs as if I was broke upon the
wheel: indeed, I am equally distressed in mind and body--As if I had not
plagues enough of my own, those children of my sister are left me for a
perpetual source of vexation--what business have people to get children
to plague their neighbours? A ridiculous incident that happened
yesterday to my niece Liddy, has disordered me in such a manner, that
I expect to be laid up with another fit of the gout--perhaps, I may
explain myself in my next. I shall set out tomorrow morning for the
Hot Well at Bristol, where I am afraid I shall stay longer than I could
wish. On the receipt of this send Williams thither with my saddle-horse
and the demi pique. Tell Barns to thresh out the two old ricks, and send
the corn to market, and sell it off to the poor at a shilling a bushel
under market price.--I have received a snivelling letter from Griffin,
offering to make a public submission and pay costs. I want none of his
submissions, neither will I pocket any of his money. The fellow is a bad
neighbour, and I desire, to have nothing to do with him: but as he is
purse-proud, he shall pay for his insolence: let him give five pounds to
the poor of the parish, and I will withdraw my action; and in the mean
time you may tell Prig to stop proceedings.--Let Morgan's widow have the
Alderney cow, and forty shillings to clothe her children: but don't say
a syllable of the matter to any living soul--I'll make her pay when she
is able. I desire you will lock up all my drawers, and keep the keys
till meeting; and be sure you take the iron chest with my papers into
your own custody--Forgive all, this trouble from,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate M. BRAMBLE GLOUCESTER, April 2.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWILLIM,

When this cums to hand, be sure to pack up in the trunk male that stands
in my closet; to be sent me in the Bristol waggon without loss of time,
the following articles, viz. my rose collard neglejay with green robins,
my yellow damask, and my black velvets with the short hoop; my bloo
quilted petticot, my green mantel, my laced apron, my French commode,
Macklin head and lappets and the litel box with my jowls. Williams may
bring over my bum-daffee, and the viol with the easings of Dr Hill's
dockwater and Chowder's lacksitif. The poor creature has been terribly
stuprated ever since we left huom. Pray take particular care of the
house while the family is absent. Let there be a fire constantly kept in
my brother's chamber and mine. The maids, having nothing to do, may be
sat a spinning. I desire you'll clap a pad-luck on the wind-seller, and
let none of the men have excess to the strong bear--don't forget to have
the gate shit every evening be dark--The gardnir and the hind may lie
below in the landry, to partake the house, with the blunderbuss and the
great dog; and hope you'll have a watchful eye over the maids. I know
that hussy Mary Jones, loves to be rumping with the men. Let me know
Alderney's calf be sould yet, and what he fought--if the ould goose be
sitting; and if the cobler has cut Dicky, and how pore anemil bore the
operation. No more at present, but rests,

Yours, TABITHA BRAMBLE GLOSTAR, April 2.


TO Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY,

Heaving this importunity, I send, my love to you and Saul, being in good
health, and hoping to hear the same from you; and that you and Saul will
take my poor kitten to bed with you this cold weather. We have been all
in, a sad taking here at Glostar--Miss Liddy had like to have run away
with a player-man, and young master and he would adone themselves a
mischief; but the squire applied to the mare, and they were, bound
over.--Mistress bid me not speak a word of the matter to any Christian
soul--no more I shall; for, we servints should see all and say nothing--
But what was worse than all this, Chowder has had the misfortune to be
worried by a butcher's dog, and came home in a terrible pickle--Mistress
was taken with the asterisks, but they soon went off. The doctor was
sent for to Chowder, and he subscribed a repository which did him great
service--thank God he's now in a fair way to do well--pray take care
of my box and the pillyber and put them under your own bed; for, I do
suppose madam, Gwyllim will be a prying into my secrets, now my back is
turned. John Thomas is in good health, but sulky. The squire gave away
an ould coat to a poor man; and John says as, how 'tis robbing him of
his perquisites.--I told him, by his agreement he was to receive
no vails; but he says as how there's a difference betwixt vails and
perquisites; and so there is for sartain. We are all going to the Hot
Well, where I shall drink your health in a glass of water, being,

Dear Molly, Your humble servant to command, W. JENKINS GLOSTAR, April
2nd.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

As I have nothing more at heart than to convince you I am incapable of
forgetting, or neglecting the friendship I made at college, now begin
that correspondence by letters, which you and I agreed, at parting, to
cultivate. I begin it sooner than I intended, that you may have it in
your power to refute any idle reports which may be circulated to my
prejudice at Oxford, touching a foolish quarrel, in which I have been
involved on account of my sister, who had been some time settled here
in a boarding-school. When I came hither with my uncle and aunt (who
are our guardians) to fetch her away, I found her a fine tall girl, of
seventeen, with an agreeable person; but remarkably simple, and quite
ignorant of the world. This disposition, and want of experience, had
exposed her to the addresses of a person--I know not what to call
him, who had seen her at a play; and, with a confidence and dexterity
peculiar to himself, found means to be recommended to her acquaintance.
It was by the greatest accident I intercepted one of his letters; as
it was my duty to stifle this correspondence in its birth, I made it my
business to find him out, and tell him very freely my sentiments of
the matter. The spark did not like the stile I used, and behaved with
abundance of mettle. Though his rank in life (which, by the bye, I am
ashamed to declare) did not entitle him to much deference; yet as his
behaviour was remarkably spirited, I admitted him to the privilege of
a gentleman, and something might have happened, had not we been
prevented.--In short, the business took air, I know not how, and made
abundance of noise--recourse was had to justice--I was obliged to give
my word and honour, &c. and to-morrow morning we set out for Bristol
Wells, where I expect to hear from you by the return of the post.--I
have got into a family of originals, whom I may one day attempt to
describe for your amusement. My aunt, Mrs Tabitha Bramble, is a maiden
of forty-five, exceedingly starched, vain, and ridiculous.--My uncle is
an odd kind of humorist, always on the fret, and so unpleasant in his
manner, that rather than be obliged to keep him company, I'd resign all
claim to the inheritance of his estate. Indeed his being tortured by the
gout may have soured his temper, and, perhaps, I may like him better on
further acquaintance; certain it is, all his servants and neighbours in
the country are fond of him, even to a degree of enthusiasm, the reason
of which I cannot as yet comprehend. Remember me to Griffy Price, Gwyn,
Mansel, Basset, and all the rest of my old Cambrian companions.--Salute
the bedmaker in my name--give my service to the cook, and pray take care
of poor Ponto, for the sake of his old master, who is, and ever will be,

Dear Phillips, Your affectionate friend, and humble servant, JER.
MELFORD GLOUCESTER, April 2.




To Mrs JERMYN at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Having no mother of my own, I hope you will give me leave to disburden
my poor heart to you, who have always acted the part of a kind parent to
me, ever since I was put under your care. Indeed, and indeed, my worthy
governess may believe me, when I assure her, that I never harboured
a thought that was otherwise than virtuous; and, if God will give me
grace, I shall never behave so as to cast a reflection on the care you
have taken in my education. I confess I have given just cause of offence
by my want of prudence and experience. I ought not to have listened to
what the young man said; and it was my duty to have told you all that
passed, but I was ashamed to mention it; and then he behaved so modest
and respectful, and seemed to be so melancholy and timorous, that
I could not find in my heart to do any thing that should make him
miserable and desperate. As for familiarities, I do declare, I never
once allowed him the favour of a: salute; and as to the few letters that
passed between us, they are all in my uncle's hands, and I hope they
contain nothing contrary to innocence and honour.--I am still persuaded
that he is not what he appears to be: but time will discover--mean while
I will endeavour to forget a connexion, which is so displeasing to my
family. I have cried without ceasing, and have not tasted any thing but
tea, since I was hurried away from you; nor did I once close my eyes for
three nights running.--My aunt continues to chide me severely when we
are by ourselves; but I hope to soften her in time, by humility
and submission.--My uncle, who was so dreadfully passionate in the
beginning, has been moved by my tears and distress; and is now all
tenderness and compassion; and my brother is reconciled to me on my
promise to break off all correspondence with that unfortunate youth;
but, notwithstanding all their indulgence, I shall have no peace of mind
till I know my dear and ever honoured governess has forgiven her poor,
disconsolate, forlorn,

Affectionate humble servant, till death, LYDIA MELFORD CLIFTON, April 6.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

I am in such a fright, lest this should not come safe to hand by the
conveyance of Jarvis the carrier, that I beg you will write me, on the
receipt of it, directing to me, under cover, to Mrs Winifred Jenkins,
my aunt's maid, who is a good girl, and has been so kind to me in my
affliction, that I have made her my confidant; as for Jarvis, he was
very shy of taking charge of my letter and the little parcel, because
his sister Sally had like to have lost her place on my account: indeed
I cannot blame the man for his caution; but I have made it worth his
while.--My dear companion and bed-fellow, it is a grievous addition to
my other misfortunes, that I am deprived of your agreeable company and
conversation, at a time when I need so much the comfort of your good
humour and good sense; but, I hope, the friendship we contracted at
boarding-school, will last for life--I doubt not but on my side it will
daily increase and improve, as I gain experience, and learn to know the
value of a true friend. O, my dear Letty! what shall I say about poor
Mr Wilson? I have promised to break off all correspondence, and, if
possible, to forget him: but, alas! I begin to perceive that will not be
in my power. As it is by no means proper that the picture should remain
in my hands, lest it should be the occasion of more mischief, I have
sent it to you by this opportunity, begging you will either keep it safe
till better times, or return it to Mr Wilson himself, who, I suppose,
will make it his business to see you at the usual place. If he should be
low-spirited at my sending back his picture, you may tell him I have no
occasion for a picture, while the original continues engraved on my--But
no; I would not have you tell him that neither; because there must be an
end of our correspondence--I wish he may forget me, for the sake of
his own peace; and yet if he should, he must be a barbarous--But it is
impossible--poor Wilson cannot be false and inconstant: I beseech
him not to write to me, nor attempt to see me for some time; for,
considering the resentment and passionate temper of my brother Jery,
such an attempt might be attended with consequences which would make
us all miserable for life--let us trust to time and the chapter of
accidents; or rather to that Providence which will not fail, sooner or
later, to reward those that walk in the paths of honour and virtue. I
would offer my love to the young ladies; but it is not fit that any of
them should know you have received this letter.--If we go to Bath,
I shall send you my simple remarks upon that famous center of polite
amusement, and every other place we may chance to visit; and I flatter
myself that my dear Miss Willis will be punctual in answering the
letters of her affectionate,

LYDIA MELFORD CLIFTON, April 6.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

I have followed your directions with some success, and might have
been upon my legs by this time, had the weather permitted me to use my
saddle-horse. I rode out upon the Downs last Tuesday, in the forenoon,
when the sky, as far as the visible horizon, was without a cloud; but
before I had gone a full mile, I was overtaken instantaneously by a
storm of rain that wet me to the skin in three minutes--whence it came
the devil knows; but it has laid me up (I suppose) for one fortnight.
It makes me sick to hear people talk of the fine air upon Clifton-downs:
How can the air be either agreeable or salutary, where the demon of
vapours descends in a perpetual drizzle? My confinement is the more
intolerable, as I am surrounded with domestic vexations. My niece has
had a dangerous fit of illness, occasioned by that cursed incident at
Gloucester, which I mentioned in my last.--She is a poor good-natured
simpleton, as soft as butter, and as easily melted--not that she's a
fool--the girl's parts are not despicable, and her education has not
been neglected; that is to say, she can write and spell, and speak
French, and play upon the harpsichord; then she dances finely, has a
good figure, and is very well inclined; but, she's deficient in spirit,
and so susceptible--and so tender forsooth!--truly, she has got a
languishing eye, and reads romances.--Then there's her brother, 'squire
Jery, a pert jackanapes, full of college-petulance and self-conceit;
proud as a German count, and as hot and hasty as a Welch mountaineer. As
for that fantastical animal, my sister Tabby, you are no stranger to her
qualifications--I vow to God, she is sometimes so intolerable, that I
almost think she's the devil incarnate come to torment me for my
sins; and yet I am conscious of no sins that ought to entail such
family-plagues upon me--why the devil should not I shake off these
torments at once? I an't married to Tabby, thank Heaven! nor did I beget
the other two: let them choose another guardian: for my part I an't in
a condition to take care of myself; much less to superintend the
conduct of giddy-headed boys and girls. You earnestly desire to know the
particulars of our adventure at Gloucester, which are briefly these, and
I hope they will go no further:--Liddy had been so long copped up in a
boarding-school, which, next to a nunnery, is the worst kind of seminary
that ever was contrived for young women, that she became as inflammable
as touch-wood; and going to a play in holiday-time,--'sdeath, I'm
ashamed to tell you! she fell in love with one of the actors--a handsome
young fellow that goes by the name of Wilson. The rascal soon perceived
the impression he had made, and managed matters so as to see her at
a house where she went to drink tea with her governess.--This was the
beginning of a correspondence, which they kept up by means of a jade
of a milliner, who made and dressed caps for the girls at the
boarding-school. When we arrived at Gloucester, Liddy came to stay at
lodgings with her aunt, and Wilson bribed the maid to deliver a letter
into her own hands; but it seems Jery had already acquired so much
credit with the maid (by what means he best knows) that she carried
the letter to him, and so the whole plot was discovered. The rash boy,
without saying a word of the matter to me, went immediately in search
of Wilson; and, I suppose, treated him with insolence enough. The
theatrical hero was too far gone in romance to brook such usage: he
replied in blank verse, and a formal challenge ensued. They agreed to
meet early next morning and decide the dispute with sword and pistol. I
heard nothing at all of the affair, till Mr Morley came to my bed-side
in the morning, and told me he was afraid my nephew was going to fight,
as he had been overheard talking very loud and vehement with Wilson
at the young man's lodgings the night before, and afterwards went
and bought powder and ball at a shop in the neighbourhood. I got up
immediately, and upon inquiry found he was just going out. I begged
Morley to knock up the mayor, that he might interpose as a magistrate,
and in the mean time I hobbled after the squire, whom I saw at a
distance walking at a great pace towards the city gate--in spite of all
my efforts, I could not come up till our two combatants had taken their
ground, and were priming their pistols. An old house luckily screened
me from their view; so that I rushed upon them at once, before I was
perceived. They were both confounded, and attempted to make their escape
different ways; but Morley coming up with constables, at that instant,
took Wilson into custody, and Jery followed him quietly to the mayor's
house. All this time I was ignorant of what had passed the preceding
day; and neither of the parties would discover a tittle of the matter.
The mayor observed that it was great presumption in Wilson, who was a
stroller, to proceed to such extremities with a gentleman of family and
fortune; and threatened to commit him on the vagrant act.--The young
fellow bustled up with great spirit, declaring he was a gentleman, and
would be treated as such; but he refused to explain himself further. The
master of the company being sent for, and examined, touching the said
Wilson, said the young man had engaged with him at Birmingham about six
months ago; but never would take his salary; that he had behaved so well
in his private character, as to acquire the respect and good-will of all
his acquaintance, and that the public owned his merit as an actor was
altogether extraordinary.--After all, I fancy, he will turn out to be a
run-away prentice from London.--The manager offered to bail him for any
sum, provided he would give his word and honour that he would keep the
peace; but the young gentleman was on his high ropes, and would by no
means lay himself under any restrictions: on the other hand, Hopeful was
equally obstinate; till at length the mayor declared, that if they
both refused to be bound over, he would immediately commit Wilson as a
vagrant to hard labour. I own I was much pleased with Jery's behaviour
on this occasion: he said, that rather than Mr Wilson should be treated
in such an ignominious manner, he would give his word and honour
to prosecute the affair no further while they remained at
Gloucester--Wilson thanked him for his generous manner of proceeding,
and was discharged. On our return to our lodgings, my nephew explained
the whole mystery; and I own I was exceedingly incensed--Liddy being
questioned on the subject, and very severely reproached by that wildcat
my sister Tabby, first swooned away, then dissolving in a flood of
tears, confessed all the particulars of the correspondence, at the same
time giving up three letters, which was all she had received from her
admirer. The last, which Jery intercepted, I send you inclosed, and when
you have read it, I dare say you won't wonder at the progress the writer
had made in the heart of a simple girl, utterly unacquainted with the
characters of mankind. Thinking it was high time to remove her from such
a dangerous connexion, I carried her off the very next day to Bristol;
but the poor creature was so frightened and fluttered, by our threats
and expostulations, that she fell sick the fourth day after our arrival
at Clifton, and continued so ill for a whole week, that her life was
despaired of. It was not till yesterday that Dr Rigge declared her out
of danger. You cannot imagine what I have suffered, partly from the
indiscretion of this poor child, but much more from the fear of
losing her entirely. This air is intolerably cold, and the place quite
solitary--I never go down to the Well without returning low-spirited;
for there I meet with half a dozen poor emaciated creatures, with
ghostly looks, in the last stage of a consumption, who have made shift
to linger through the winter like so many exotic plants languishing in a
hot-house; but in all appearance, will drop into their graves before
the sun has warmth enough to mitigate the rigour of this ungenial
spring.--If you think the Bath-water will be of any service to me, I
will go thither so soon as my niece can bear the motion of the coach.
Tell Barns I am obliged to him for his advice; but don't choose to
follow it. If Davis voluntarily offers to give up the farm, the other
shall have it; but I will not begin at this time of day to distress my
tenants, because they are unfortunate, and cannot make regular payments:
I wonder that Barns should think me capable of such oppression--As for
Higgins, the fellow is a notorious poacher, to be sure; and an impudent
rascal to set his snares in my own paddock; but, I suppose, he thought
he had some right (especially in my absence) to partake of what nature
seems to have intended for common use--you may threaten him in my name,
as much as you please, and if he repeats the offence, let me know it
before you have recourse to justice.--I know you are a great sportsman,
and oblige many of your friends: I need not tell you to make use of my
grounds; but it may be necessary to hint, that I am more afraid of my
fowling-piece than of my game. When you can spare two or three brace of
partridges, send them over by the stagecoach, and tell Gwyllim that she
forgot to pack up my flannel and wide shoes in the trunk-mail--I shall
trouble you as usual, from time to time, till at last I suppose you will
be tired of corresponding with

Your assured friend, M. BRAMBLE CLIFTON, April 17.




To Miss LYDIA MELFORD.

Miss Willis has pronounced my doom--you are going away, dear Miss
Melford!--you are going to be removed, I know not whither! what shall I
do? which way shall I turn for consolation? I know not what I say--all
night long have I been tossed in a sea of doubts and fears, uncertainty
and distraction, without being able to connect my thoughts, much less to
form any consistent plan of conduct--I was even tempted to wish that
I had never seen you; or that you had been less amiable, or less
compassionate to your poor Wilson; and yet it would be detestable
ingratitude in me to form such a wish, considering how much I am
indebted to your goodness, and the ineffable pleasure I have derived
from your indulgence and approbation--Good God! I never heard your name
mentioned without emotion! the most distant prospect of being admitted
to your company, filled my whole soul with a kind of pleasing alarm! as
the time approached, my heart beat with redoubled force, and every
nerve thrilled with a transport of expectation; but, when I found myself
actually in your presence;--when I heard you speak;--when I saw you
smile; when I beheld your charming eyes turned favourably upon me; my
breast was filled with such tumults of delight, as wholly deprived me of
the power of utterance, and wrapt me in a delirium of joy!--encouraged
by your sweetness of temper and affability, I ventured to describe the
feelings of my heart--even then you did not check my presumption--you
pitied my sufferings and gave me leave to hope you put a
favourable--perhaps too favourable a construction, on my
appearance--certain it is, I am no player in love--I speak the language
of my own heart; and have no prompter but nature. Yet there is something
in this heart, which I have not yet disclosed.--I flattered myself--But,
I will not--I must not proceed. Dear Miss Liddy! for Heaven's sake,
contrive, if possible, some means of letting me speak to you before you
leave Gloucester; otherwise, I know not what will--But I begin to rave
again.--I will endeavour to bear this trial with fortitude--while I am
capable of reflecting upon your tenderness and truth, I surely have no
cause to despair--a cloud hangs over me, and there is a dreadful weight
upon my spirits! While you stay in this place, I shall continually hover
about your lodgings, as the parted soul is said to linger about the
grave where its mortal comfort lies.--I know, if it is in your power,
you will task your humanity--your compassion--shall I add, your
affection?--in order to assuage the almost intolerable disquiet that
torments the heart of your afflicted,

WILSON GLOUCESTER, March 31.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 18.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I give Mansel credit for his invention, in propagating the report that I
had a quarrel with a mountebank's merry Andrew at Gloucester: but I have
too much respect for every appendage of wit, to quarrel even with the
lowest buffoonery; and therefore I hope Mansel and I shall always be
good friends. I cannot, however, approve of his drowning my poor
dog Ponto, on purpose to convert Ovid's pleonasm into a punning
epitaph,--deerant quoque Littora Ponto: for, that he threw him into the
Isis, when it was so high and impetuous, with no other view than to kill
the fleas, is an excuse that will not hold water--But I leave poor Ponto
to his fate, and hope Providence will take care to accommodate Mansel
with a drier death.

As there is nothing that can be called company at the Well, I am here
in a state of absolute rustication: This, however, gives me leisure to
observe the singularities in my uncle's character, which seems to have
interested your curiosity. The truth is, his disposition and mine,
which, like oil and vinegar, repelled one another at first, have now
begun to mix by dint of being beat up together. I was once apt to
believe him a complete Cynic; and that nothing but the necessity of his
occasions could compel him to get within the pale of society--I am now
of another opinion. I think his peevishness arises partly from bodily
pain, and partly from a natural excess of mental sensibility; for, I
suppose, the mind as well as the body, is in some cases endued with a
morbid excess of sensation.

I was t'other day much diverted with a conversation that passed in the
Pump-room, betwixt him and the famous Dr L--n, who is come to ply at the
Well for patients. My uncle was complaining of the stink, occasioned
by the vast quantity of mud and slime which the river leaves at low ebb
under the windows of the Pumproom. He observed, that the exhalations
arising from such a nuisance, could not but be prejudicial to the weak
lungs of many consumptive patients, who came to drink the water. The
Doctor overhearing this remark, made up to him, and assured him he was
mistaken. He said, people in general were so misled by vulgar prejudices
that philosophy was hardly sufficient to undeceive them. Then humming
thrice, he assumed a most ridiculous solemnity of aspect, and entered
into a learned investigation of the nature of stink. He observed,
that stink, or stench, meant no more than a strong impression on
the olfactory nerves; and might be applied to substances of the most
opposite qualities; that in the Dutch language, stinken signifies the
most agreeable perfume, as well as the most fetid odour, as appears in
Van Vloudel's translation of Horace, in that beautiful ode, Quis multa
gracilis, &c.--The words fiquidis perfusus odoribus, he translates van
civet & moschata gestinken: that individuals differed toto coelo in
their opinion of smells, which, indeed, was altogether as arbitrary
as the opinion of beauty; that the French were pleased with the putrid
effluvia of animal food; and so were the Hottentots in Africa, and the
Savages in Greenland; and that the Negroes on the coast of Senegal would
not touch fish till it was rotten; strong presumptions in favour of what
is generally called stink, as those nations are in a state of nature,
undebauched by luxury, unseduced by whim and caprice: that he had reason
to believe the stercoraceous flavour, condemned by prejudice as a stink,
was, in fact, most agreeable to the organs of smelling; for, that every
person who pretended to nauseate the smell of another's excretions,
snuffed up his own with particular complacency; for the truth of which
he appealed to all the ladies and gentlemen then present: he said, the
inhabitants of Madrid and Edinburgh found particular satisfaction
in breathing their own atmosphere, which was always impregnated with
stercoraceous effluvia: that the learned Dr B--, in his treatise on the
Four Digestions, explains in what manner the volatile effluvia from the
intestines stimulate and promote the operations of the animal economy:
he affirmed, the last Grand Duke of Tuscany, of the Medicis family,
who refined upon sensuality with the spirit of a philosopher, was so
delighted with that odour, that he caused the essence of ordure to be
extracted, and used it as the most delicious perfume: that he himself
(the doctor) when he happened to be low-spirited, or fatigued with
business, found immediate relief and uncommon satisfaction from hanging
over the stale contents of a close-stool, while his servant stirred it
about under his nose; nor was this effect to be wondered at, when we
consider that this substance abounds with the self-same volatile salts
that are so greedily smelled to by the most delicate invalids, after
they have been extracted and sublimed by the chemists.--By this time the
company began to hold their noses; but the doctor, without taking
the least notice of this signal, proceeded to shew, that many fetid
substances were not only agreeable but salutary; such as assa foetida,
and other medicinal gums, resins, roots, and vegetables, over and above
burnt feathers, tan-pits, candle-snuffs, &c. In short, he used many
learned arguments to persuade his audience out of their senses; and from
stench made a transition to filth, which he affirmed was also a mistaken
idea, in as much as objects so called, were no other than certain
modifications of matter, consisting of the same principles that enter
into the composition of all created essences, whatever they may be: that
in the filthiest production of nature, a philosopher considered nothing
but the earth, water, salt and air, of which it was compounded; that,
for his own part, he had no more objections to drinking the dirtiest
ditch-water, than he had to a glass of water from the Hot Well, provided
he was assured there was nothing poisonous in the concrete. Then
addressing himself to my uncle, 'Sir (said he) you seem to be of a
dropsical habit, and probably will soon have a confirmed ascites: if
I should be present when you are tapped, I will give you a convincing
proof of what I assert, by drinking without hesitation the water
that comes out of your abdomen.'--The ladies made wry faces at this
declaration, and my uncle, changing colour, told him he did not desire
any such proof of his philosophy: 'But I should be glad to know (said
he) what makes you think I am of a dropsical habit?' 'Sir, I beg pardon
(replied the Doctor) I perceive your ancles are swelled, and you seem to
have the facies leucophlegmatica. Perhaps, indeed, your disorder may
be oedematous, or gouty, or it may be the lues venerea: If you have any
reason to flatter yourself it is this last, sir, I will undertake
to cure you with three small pills, even if the disease should have
attained its utmost inveteracy. Sir, it is an arcanum, which I have
discovered, and prepared with infinite labour.--Sir, I have lately cured
a woman in Bristol--a common prostitute, sir, who had got all the worst
symptoms of the disorder; such as nodi, tophi, and gummata, verruca,
cristoe Galli, and a serpiginous eruption, or rather a pocky itch
all over her body. By the time she had taken the second pill, sir, by
Heaven! she was as smooth as my hand, and the third made her sound and
as fresh as a new born infant.' 'Sir (cried my uncle peevishly) I have
no reason to flatter myself that my disorder comes within the efficacy
of your nostrum. But this patient you talk of may not be so sound at
bottom as you imagine.' 'I can't possibly be mistaken (rejoined the
philosopher) for I have had communication with her three times--I always
ascertain my cures in that manner.' At this remark, all the ladies
retired to another corner of the room, and some of them began to
spit.--As to my uncle, though he was ruffled at first by the doctor's
saying he was dropsical, he could not help smiling at this ridiculous
confession and, I suppose, with a view to punish this original, told
him there was a wart upon his nose, that looked a little suspicious. 'I
don't pretend to be a judge of those matters (said he) but I understand
that warts are often produced by the distemper; and that one upon your
nose seems to have taken possession of the very keystone of the
bridge, which I hope is in no danger of falling.' L--n seemed a little
confounded at this remark, and assured him it was nothing but a common
excrescence of the cuticula, but that the bones were all sound below;
for the truth of this assertion he appealed to the touch, desiring he
would feel the part. My uncle said it was a matter of such delicacy to
meddle with a gentleman's nose, that he declined the office--upon which,
the Doctor turning to me, intreated me to do him that favour. I complied
with his request, and handled it so roughly, that he sneezed, and the
tears ran down his cheeks, to the no small entertainment of the company,
and particularly of my uncle, who burst out a-laughing for the first
time since I have been with him; and took notice, that the part seemed
to be very tender. 'Sir (cried the Doctor) it is naturally a tender
part; but to remove all possibility of doubt, I will take off the wart
this very night.'

So saying, he bowed, with great solemnity all round, and retired to his
own lodgings, where he applied a caustic to the wart; but it spread in
such a manner as to produce a considerable inflammation, attended with
an enormous swelling; so that when he next appeared, his whole face was
overshadowed by this tremendous nozzle; and the rueful eagerness with
which he explained this unlucky accident, was ludicrous beyond all
description.--I was much pleased with meeting the original of a
character, which you and I have often laughed at in description; and
what surprises me very much, I find the features in the picture, which
has been drawn for him, rather softened than over-charged.

As I have something else to say; and this letter has run to an
unconscionable length, I shall now give you a little respite, and
trouble you again by the very first post. I wish you would take it in
your head to retaliate these double strokes upon

Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 20.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I now sit down to execute the threat in the tail of my last. The truth
is, I am big with the secret, and long to be delivered. It relates to my
guardian, who, you know, is at present our principal object in view.

T'other day, I thought I had detected him in such a state of frailty, as
would but ill become his years and character. There is a decent sort of
woman, not disagreeable in her person, that comes to the Well, with a
poor emaciated child, far gone in a consumption. I had caught my uncle's
eyes several times directed to this person, with a very suspicious
expression in them, and every time he saw himself observed, he hastily
withdrew them, with evident marks of confusion--I resolved to watch him
more narrowly, and saw him speaking to her privately in a corner of the
walk. At length, going down to the Well one day, I met her half way up
the hill to Clifton, and could not help suspecting she was going to our
lodgings by appointment, as it was about one o'clock, the hour when my
sister and I are generally at the Pump-room.--This notion exciting my
curiosity, I returned by a back-way, and got unperceived into my own
chamber, which is contiguous to my uncle's apartment. Sure enough, the
woman was introduced but not into his bedchamber; he gave her audience
in a parlour; so that I was obliged to shift my station to another room,
where, however, there was a small chink in the partition, through which
I could perceive what passed. My uncle, though a little lame, rose up
when she came in, and setting a chair for her, desired she would sit
down: then he asked if she would take a dish of chocolate, which she
declined, with much acknowledgment. After a short pause, he said, in a
croaking tone of voice, which confounded me not a little, 'Madam, I am
truly concerned for your misfortunes; and if this trifle can be of any
service to you, I beg you will accept it without ceremony.' So saying,
he put a bit of paper into her hand, which she opening with great
trepidation, exclaimed in an extacy, 'Twenty pounds! Oh, sir!' and
sinking down upon a settee, fainted away--Frightened at this fit, and,
I suppose, afraid of calling for assistance, lest her situation
should give rise to unfavourable conjectures, he ran about the room in
distraction, making frightful grimaces; and, at length, had recollection
enough to throw a little water in her face; by which application she was
brought to herself: but, then her feeling took another turn. She shed
a flood of tears, and cried aloud, 'I know not who you are: but,
sure--worthy sir--generous sir!--the distress of me and my poor dying
child--Oh! if the widow's prayers--if the orphan's tears of gratitude
can ought avail--gracious Providence--Blessings!--shower down eternal
blessings.'--Here she was interrupted by my uncle, who muttered in
a voice still more and more discordant, 'For Heaven's sake be quiet,
madam--consider--the people of the house--'sdeath! can't you.'--All this
time she was struggling to throw herself on her knees, while he seizing
her by the wrists, endeavoured to seat her upon the settee, saying,
'Prithee--good now--hold your tongue'--At that instant, who should
burst into--the room but our aunt Tabby! of all antiquated maidens the
most diabolically capricious--Ever prying into other people's affairs,
she had seen the woman enter, and followed her to the door, where she
stood listening, but probably could hear nothing distinctly, except my
uncle's, last exclamation; at which she bounded into the parlour in a
violent rage, that dyed the tip of her nose of a purple hue,--'Fy upon
you, Matt! (cried she) what doings are these, to disgrace your own
character, and disparage your family?'--Then, snatching the bank note
out of the stranger's hand, she went on--'How now, twenty
pounds!--here is temptation with a witness!--Good-woman, go about
your business--Brother, brother, I know not which most to admire; your
concupissins, or your extravagance!'--'Good God (exclaimed the poor
woman) shall a worthy gentleman's character suffer for an action
that does honour to humanity?' By this time, uncle's indignation was
effectually roused. His face grew pale, his teeth chattered, and his
eyes flashed--'Sister (cried he, in a voice like thunder) I vow to God,
your impertinence is exceedingly provoking.' With these words, he took
her by the hand, and, opening the door of communication, thrust her into
the chamber where I stood, so affected by the scene, that the tears ran
down my cheeks. Observing these marks of emotion, 'I don't wonder (said
she) to see you concerned at the back-slidings of so near a relation; a
man of his years and infirmities: These are fine doings, truly--This
is a rare example, set by a guardian, for the benefit of his
pupils--Monstrous! incongruous! sophistical!'--I thought it was but
an act of justice to set her to rights; and therefore explained the
mystery. But she would not be undeceived, 'What (said she) would you
go for to offer for to arguefy me out of my senses? Did'n't I hear
him whispering to her to hold her tongue? Did'n't I see her in tears?
Did'n't I see him struggling to throw her upon the couch? 0 filthy!
hideous! abominable! Child, child, talk not to me of charity.--Who gives
twenty pounds in charity?--But you are a stripling--You know nothing of
the world. Besides, charity begins at home--Twenty pounds would buy me a
complete suit of flowered silk, trimmings and all--' In short, I quitted
the room, my contempt for her, and my respect for her brother, being
increased in the same proportion. I have since been informed, that the
person, whom my uncle so generously relieved, is the widow of an ensign,
who has nothing to depend upon but the pension of fifteen pounds a year.
The people of the Well-house give her an excellent character. She lodges
in a garret, and works very hard at plain work, to support her daughter,
who is dying of a consumption. I must own, to my shame, I feel a strong
inclination to follow my uncle's example, in relieving this poor widow;
but, betwixt friends, I am afraid of being detected in a weakness, that
might entail the ridicule of the company, upon,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD

Direct your next to me at Bath; and remember me to all our
fellow-jesuits.




To Dr LEWIS.

HOT WELL, April 20.

I understand your hint. There are mysteries in physic, as well as in
religion; which we of the profane have no right to investigate--A
man must not presume to use his reason, unless he has studied the
categories, and can chop logic by mode and figure--Between friends, I
think every man of tolerable parts ought, at my time of day, to be both
physician and lawyer, as far as his own constitution and property are
concerned. For my own part, I have had an hospital these fourteen years
within myself, and studied my own case with the most painful attention;
consequently may be supposed to know something of the matter, although
I have not taken regular courses of physiology et cetera et cetera.--
In short, I have for some time been of opinion (no offence, dear Doctor)
that the sum of all your medical discoveries amounts to this, that the
more you study the less you know.--I have read all that has been written
on the Hot Wells, and what I can collect from the whole, is, that the
water contains nothing but a little salt, and calcarious earth, mixed in
such inconsiderable proportion, as can have very little, if any, effect
on the animal economy. This being the case, I think the man deserves to
be fitted with a cap and bells, who for such a paultry advantage as this
spring affords, sacrifices his precious time, which might be employed
in taking more effectual remedies, and exposes himself to the dirt, the
stench, the chilling blasts, and perpetual rains, that render this place
to me intolerable. If these waters, from a small degree of astringency,
are of some service in the diabetes, diarrhoea, and night sweats, when
the secretions are too much increased, must not they do harm in the same
proportion, where the humours are obstructed, as in the asthma,
scurvy, gout and dropsy?--Now we talk of the dropsy, here is a strange
fantastical oddity, one of your brethren, who harangues every day in
the Pump-room, as if he was hired to give lectures on all subjects
whatsoever--I know not what to make of him--Sometimes he makes
shrewd remarks; at other times he talks like the greatest simpleton in
nature--He has read a great deal; but without method or judgment, and
digested nothing. He believes every thing he has read; especially if
it has any thing of the marvellous in it and his conversation is a
surprizing hotch-potch of erudition and extravagance. He told me t'other
day, with great confidence, that my case was dropsical; or, as he called
it, leucophlegmatic: A sure sign, that his want of experience is equal
to his presumption--for, you know, there is nothing analogous to the
dropsy in my disorder--I wish those impertinent fellows, with their
ricketty understandings, would keep their advice for those that ask it.
Dropsy, indeed! Sure I have not lived to the age of fifty-five, and had
such experience of my own disorder, and consulted you and other eminent
physicians, so often, and so long, to be undeceived by such a--But,
without all doubt, the man is mad; and, therefore, what he says is of
no consequence. I had, yesterday, a visit from Higgins, who came hither
under the terror of your threats, and brought me in a present a brace of
hares, which he owned he took in my ground; and I could not persuade
the fellow that he did wrong, or that I would ever prosecute him for
poaching--I must desire you will wink hard at the practices of this
rascallion, otherwise I shall be plagued with his presents, which cost
me more than they are worth.--If I could wonder at any thing Fitzowen
does, I should be surprized at his assurance in desiring you to solicit
my vote for him at the next election for the county: for him, who
opposed me, on the like occasion, with the most illiberal competition.
You may tell him civilly, that I beg to be excused. Direct your next for
me at Bath, whither I propose to remove to-morrow; not only on my own
account, but for the sake of my niece, Liddy, who is like to relapse.
The poor creature fell into a fit yesterday, while I was cheapening a
pair of spectacles, with a Jew-pedlar. I am afraid there is something
still lurking in that little heart of hers, which I hope a change of
objects will remove. Let me know what you think of this half-witted
Doctor's impertinent, ridiculous, and absurd notion of my disorder--So
far from being dropsical, I am as lank in the belly as a grey-hound;
and, by measuring my ancle with a pack-thread, I find the swelling
subsides every day. From such doctors, good Lord deliver us!--I have not
yet taken any lodgings in Bath; because there we can be accommodated at
a minute's warning, and I shall choose for myself--I need not say your
directions for drinking and bathing will be agreeable to,

Dear Lewis, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE

P.S. I forgot to tell you, that my right ancle pits, a symptom, as I
take it, of its being oedematous, not leucophlegmatic.




To Miss LETTY WILLIS, at Gloucester

HOT WELL, April 21.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I did not intend to trouble you again, till we should be settled at
Bath; but having the occasion of Jarvis, I could not let it slip,
especially as I have something extraordinary to communicate. O, my dear
companion! What shall I tell you? for several days past there was a
Jew-looking man, that plied at the Wells with a box of spectacles; and
he always eyed me so earnestly, that I began to be very uneasy. At last,
he came to our lodgings at Clifton, and lingered about the door, as
if he wanted to speak to somebody--I was seized with an odd kind of
fluttering, and begged Win to throw herself in his way: but the poor
girl has weak nerves, and was afraid of his beard. My uncle, having
occasion for new glasses, called him up stairs, and was trying a pair
of spectacles, when the man, advancing to me, said in a whisper--O
gracious! what d'ye think he said?--'I am Wilson!' His features struck
me that very moment it was Wilson, sure enough! but so disguised, that
it would have been impossible to know him, if my heart had not assisted
in the discovery. I was so surprised, and so frightened that I fainted
away, but soon recovered; and found myself supported by him on the
chair, while my uncle was running about the room, with the spectacles
on his nose, calling for help. I had no opportunity to speak to him; but
looks were sufficiently expressive. He was payed for his glasses, and
went away. Then I told Win who he was, and sent her after him to the
Pump-room; where she spoke to him, and begged him in my name to withdraw
from the place, that he might not incur the suspicion of my uncle or my
brother, if he did not want to see me die of terror and vexation. The
poor youth declared, with tears in his eyes, that he had something
extraordinary to communicate; and asked, if she would deliver a letter
to me: but this she absolutely refused, by my order.--Finding her
obstinate in her refusal, he desired she would tell me that he was no
longer a player, but a gentleman; in which character he would very soon
avow his passion for me, without fear of censure or reproach--Nay,
he even discovered his name and family, which, to my great grief,
the simple girl forgot, in the confusion occasioned by her being seen
talking to him by my brother, who stopt her on the road, and asked
what business she had with that rascally Jew. She pretended she was
cheapening a stay-hook, but was thrown into such a quandary, that she
forgot the most material part of the information; and when she came
home, went into an hysteric fit of laughing. This transaction happened
three days ago, during which he has not appeared, so that I suppose he
has gone. Dear Letty! you see how Fortune takes pleasure in persecuting
your poor friend. If you should see him at Gloucester--or if you have
seen him, and know his real name and family, pray keep me no longer in
suspence--And yet, if he is under no obligation to keep himself longer
concealed, and has a real affection for me, I should hope he will, in a
little time, declare himself to my relations. Sure, if there is
nothing unsuitable in the match, they won't be so cruel as to thwart my
inclinations--O what happiness would then be my portion! I can't help
indulging the thought, and pleasing my fancy with such agreeable ideas;
which after all, perhaps, will never be realized--But, why should I
despair? who knows what will happen?--We set out for Bath to-morrow, and
I am almost sorry for it; as I begin to be in love with solitude, and
this is a charming romantic place. The air is so pure; the Downs are so
agreeable; the furz in full blossom; the ground enamelled with daisies,
and primroses, and cowslips; all the trees bursting into leaves, and the
hedges already clothed with their vernal livery; the mountains covered
with flocks of sheep and tender bleating wanton lambkins playing,
frisking, and skipping from side to side; the groves resound with
the notes of blackbird, thrush, and linnet; and all night long sweet
Philomel pours forth her ravishingly delightful song. Then, for
variety, we go down to the nymph of Bristol spring, where the company is
assembled before dinner; so good natured, so free, so easy; and there we
drink the water so clear, so pure, so mild, so charmingly maukish. There
the fun is so chearful and reviving; the weather so soft; the walk so
agreeable; the prospect so amusing; and the ships and boats going up and
down the river, close under the windows of the Pump-room, afford such an
enchanting variety of Moving Pictures, as require a much abler pen than
mine to describe. To make this place a perfect paradise to me, nothing
is wanting but an agreeable companion and sincere friend; such as
my dear miss Willis hath been, and I hope still will be, to her ever
faithful.

LYDIA MELFORD

Direct for me, still under cover, to Win; and Jarvis will take care to
convey it safe. Adieu.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

BATH, April 24.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

You have, indeed, reason to be surprised, that I should have concealed
my correspondence with miss Blackerby from you, to whom I disclosed all
my other connexions of that nature; but the truth is, I never dreamed
of any such commerce, till your last informed me, that it had produced
something which could not be much longer concealed. It is a lucky
circumstance, however, that her reputation will not suffer any
detriment, but rather derive advantage from the discovery; which
will prove, at least, that it is not quite so rotten as most people
imagined--For my own part, I declare to you, in all the sincerity of
friendship, that, far from having any amorous intercourse with the
object in question, I never had the least acquaintance with her person;
but, if she is really in the condition you describe, I suspect Mansel to
be at the bottom of the whole. His visits to that shrine were no secret;
and this attachment, added to some good offices, which you know he has
done me, since I left Alma-mater, give me a right to believe him capable
of saddling me with this scandal, when my back was turned--Nevertheless,
if my name can be of any service to him, he is welcome to make use of
it; and if the woman should be abandoned enough to swear his banding to
me, I must beg the favour of you to compound with the parish: I shall
pay the penalty without repining; and you will be so good as to draw
upon me immediately for the sum required--On this occasion, I act by the
advice of my uncle; who says I shall have good-luck if I pass through
life without being obliged to make many more compositions of the same
kind. The old gentleman told me last night, with great good-humour, that
betwixt the age of twenty and forty, he had been obliged to provide for
nine bastards, sworn to him by women whom he never saw--Mr Bramble's
character, which seems to interest you greatly, opens and improves upon
me every day. His singularities afford a rich mine of entertainment;
his understanding, so far as I can judge, is well cultivated; his
observations on life are equally just, pertinent, and uncommon. He
affects misanthropy, in order to conceal the sensibility of a heart,
which is tender, even to a degree of weakness. This delicacy of feeling,
or soreness of the mind, makes him timorous and fearful; but then he
is afraid of nothing so much as of dishonour; and although he is
exceedingly cautious of giving offence, he will fire at the least hint
of insolence or ill-breeding.--Respectable as he is, upon the whole,
I can't help being sometimes diverted by his little distresses; which
provoke him to let fly the shafts of his satire, keen and penetrating
as the arrows of Teucer--Our aunt, Tabitha, acts upon him as a perpetual
grind-stone--She is, in all respects, a striking contrast to her
brother--But I reserve her portrait for another occasion.

Three days ago we came hither from the Hot Well, and took possession
of the first floor of a lodging-house, on the South Parade; a situation
which my uncle chose, for its being near the Bath, and remote from the
noise of carriages. He was scarce warm in the lodgings when he called
for his night-cap, his wide shoes, and flannel; and declared himself
invested with the gout in his right foot; though, I believe it had as
yet reached no farther than his imagination. It was not long before he
had reason to repent his premature declaration; for our aunt Tabitha
found means to make such a clamour and confusion, before the flannels
could be produced from the trunk, that one would have imagined the house
was on fire. All this time, uncle sat boiling with impatience, biting
his fingers, throwing up his eyes, and muttering ejaculations; at length
he burst into a kind of convulsive laugh, after which he hummed a song;
and when the hurricane was over, exclaimed 'Blessed be God for all
things!' This, however, was but the beginning of his troubles. Mrs
Tabitha's favourite dog Chowder, having paid his compliments to a female
turnspit of his own species, in the kitchen, involved himself in a
quarrel with no fewer than five rivals, who set upon him at once, and
drove him up stairs to the dining room door, with hideous noise: there
our aunt and her woman, taking arms in his defence, joined the
concert; which became truly diabolical. This fray being with difficulty
suppressed, by the intervention of our own footman and the cook-maid
of the house, the squire had just opened his mouth, to expostulate with
Tabby, when the town-waits, in the passage below, struck up their music
(if music it may be called) with such a sudden burst of sound, as made
him start and stare, with marks of indignation and disquiet. He had
recollection enough to send his servant with some money to silence those
noisy intruders; and they were immediately dismissed, though not without
some opposition on the part of Tabitha, who thought it but reasonable
that he should have more music for his money. Scarce had he settled this
knotty point, when a strange kind of thumping and bouncing was heard
right over-head, in the second story, so loud and violent, as to shake
the whole building. I own I was exceedingly provoked at this new alarm;
and before my uncle had time to express himself on the subject, I ran
up stairs, to see what was the matter. Finding the room-door open, I
entered without ceremony, and perceived an object, which I can not now
recollect without laughing to excess--It was a dancing master, with his
scholar, in the act of teaching. The master was blind of one eye, and
lame of one foot, and led about the room his pupil; who seemed to be
about the age of threescore, stooped mortally, was tall, raw-boned,
hard-favoured, with a woollen night-cap on his head; and he had stript
off his coat, that he might be more nimble in his motions--Finding
himself intruded upon, by a person he did not know, he forthwith girded
himself with a long iron sword, and advancing to me, with a peremptory
air, pronounced, in a true Hibernian accent, 'Mister What d'ye callum,
by my saoul and conscience, I am very glad to sea you, if you are after
coming in the way of friendship; and indeed, and indeed now, I believe
you are my friend sure enough, gra; though I never had the honour to sea
your face before, my dear; for becaase you come like a friend, without
any ceremony at all, at all'--I told him the nature of my visit would
not admit of ceremony; that I was come to desire he would make less
noise, as there was a sick gentleman below, whom he had no right
to disturb with such preposterous doings. 'Why, look-ye now, young
gentleman (replied this original) perhaps, upon another occasion, I
might shivilly request you to explain the maining of that hard word,
prepasterous: but there's a time for all things, honey'--So saying,
he passed me with great agility, and, running down stairs, found our
foot-man at the dining-room door, of whom he demanded admittance, to
pay his respects to the stranger. As the fellow did not think proper
to refuse the request of such a formidable figure, he was immediately
introduced, and addressed himself to my uncle in these words: 'Your
humble servant, good sir,--I'm not so prepasterous, as your son calls
it, but I know the rules of shivility--I'm a poor knight of Ireland,
my name is sir Ulic Mackilligut, of the county of Galway; being your
fellow-lodger, I'm come to pay my respects, and to welcome you to the
South Parade, and to offer my best services to you, and your good lady,
and your pretty daughter; and even to the young gentleman your son,
though he thinks me a prepasterous fellow--You must know I am to have
the honour to open a ball next door to-morrow with lady Mac Manus; and
being rusted in my dancing, I was refreshing my memory with a little
exercise; but if I had known there was a sick person below, by Christ!
I would have sooner danced a hornpipe upon my own head, than walk the
softest minuet over yours.'--My uncle, who was not a little startled at
his first appearance, received his compliment with great complacency,
insisted upon his being seated, thanked him for the honour of his visit,
and reprimanded me for my abrupt expostulation with a gentleman of his
rank and character. Thus tutored, I asked pardon of the knight, who,
forthwith starting up, embraced me so close, that I could hardly
breathe; and assured me, he loved me as his own soul. At length,
recollecting his night-cap, he pulled it off in some confusion; and,
with his bald-pate uncovered, made a thousand apologies to the ladies,
as he retired--At that instant, the Abbey bells, began to ring so
loud, that we could not hear one another speak; and this peal, as
we afterwards learned, was for the honour of Mr Bullock, an eminent
cowkeeper of Tottenham, who had just arrived at Bath, to drink the
waters for indigestion. Mr Bramble had not time to make his remarks upon
the agreeable nature of this serenade, before his ears were saluted with
another concert that interested him more nearly. Two negroes, belonging
to a Creole gentleman, who lodged in the same house, taking their
station at a window in the stair-case, about ten feet from our
dining-room door, began to practise upon the French-horn; and being in
the very first rudiments of execution, produced such discordant sounds,
as might have discomposed the organs of an ass. You may guess what
effect they had upon the irritable nerves of uncle; who, with the most
admirable expression of splenetic surprize in his countenance, sent
his man to silence these dreadful blasts, and desire the musicians to
practise in some other place, as they had no right to stand there and
disturb all the lodgers in the house. Those sable performers, far from
taking the hint, and withdrawing, treated the messenger with great
insolence; bidding him carry his compliments to their master, colonel
Rigworm, who would give him a proper answer, and a good drubbing into
the bargain; in the mean time they continued their noise, and even
endeavoured to make it more disagreeable; laughing between whiles, at
the thoughts of being able to torment their betters with impunity. Our
'squire, incensed at the additional insult, immediately dispatched the
servant, with his compliments to colonel Rigworm, requesting that
he would order his blacks to be quiet, as the noise they made was
altogether intolerable--To this message, the Creole colonel replied,
that his horns had a right to sound on a common staircase; that there
they should play for his diversion; and that those who did not like the
noise, might look for lodgings elsewhere. Mr Bramble no sooner received
this reply, than his eyes began to glisten, his face grew pale, and his
teeth chattered. After a moment's pause, he slipt on his shoes, without
speaking a word, or seeming to feel any further disturbance from the
gout in his toes. Then snatching his cane, he opened the door and
proceeded to the place where the black trumpeters were posted. There,
without further hesitation, he began to belabour them both; and exerted
himself with such astonishing vigour and agility, that both their heads
and horns were broken in a twinkling, and they ran howling down stairs
to their master's parlour-door. The squire, following them half way,
called aloud, that the colonel might hear him, 'Go, rascals, and tell
your master what I have done; if he thinks himself injured, he knows
where to come for satisfaction. As for you, this is but an earnest of
what you shall receive, if ever you presume to blow a horn again here,
while I stay in the house.' So saying, he retired to his apartment, in
expectation of hearing from the West Indian; but the colonel prudently
declined any farther prosecution of the dispute. My sister Liddy was
frighted into a fit, from which she was no sooner recovered, than Mrs
Tabitha began a lecture upon patience; which her brother interrupted
with a most significant grin, 'True, sister, God increase my patience
and your discretion. I wonder (added he) what sort of sonata we are to
expect from this overture, in which the devil, that presides over horrid
sounds, hath given us such variations of discord--The trampling of
porters, the creaking and crashing of trunks, the snarling of curs, the
scolding of women, the squeaking and squalling of fiddles and hautboys
out of tune, the bouncing of the Irish baronet over-head, and the
bursting, belching, and brattling of the French-horns in the passage
(not to mention the harmonious peal that still thunders from the Abbey
steeple) succeeding one another without interruption, like the different
parts of the same concert, have given me such an idea of what a poor
invalid has to expect in this temple, dedicated to Silence and Repose,
that I shall certainly shift my quarters to-morrow, and endeavour to
effectuate my retreat before Sir Ulic opens the ball with my lady Mac
Manus; a conjunction that bodes me no good.' This intimation was by no
means agreeable to Mrs Tabitha, whose ears were not quite so delicate as
those of her brother--She said it would be great folly to move from
such agreeable lodgings, the moment they were comfortably settled. She
wondered he should be such an enemy to music and mirth. She heard no
noise but of his own making: it was impossible to manage a family in
dumb-shew. He might harp as long as he pleased upon her scolding; but
she never scolded, except for his advantage; but he would never be
satisfied, even tho'f she should sweat blood and water in his service--I
have a great notion that our aunt, who is now declining into the most
desperate state of celibacy, had formed some design upon the heart of
Sir Ulic Mackilligut, which she feared might be frustrated by our abrupt
departure from these lodgings. Her brother, eyeing her askance, 'Pardon
me, sister (said he) I should be a savage, indeed, were I insensible of
my own felicity, in having such a mild, complaisant, good-humoured, and
considerate companion and housekeeper; but as I have got a weak head,
and my sense of hearing is painfully acute, before I have recourse to
plugs of wool and cotton, I'll try whether I can't find another lodging,
where I shall have more quiet and less music.' He accordingly dispatched
his man upon this service; and next day he found a small house in
Milsham-street, which he hires by the week. Here, at least, we enjoy
convenience and quiet within doors, as much as Tabby's temper will
allow; but the squire still complains of flying pains in the stomach
and head, for which he bathes and drinks the waters. He is not so bad,
however, but that he goes in person to the pump, the rooms, and the
coffeehouses; where he picks up continual food for ridicule and satire.
If I can glean any thing for your amusement, either from his observation
or my own, you shall have it freely, though I am afraid it will poorly
compensate the trouble of reading these tedious insipid letters of,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS. BATH, April 23. DEAR DOCTOR,

If I did not know that the exercise of your profession has habituated
you to the hearing of complaints, I should make a conscience of
troubling you with my correspondence, which may be truly called the
lamentations of Matthew Bramble. Yet I cannot help thinking I have
some right to discharge the overflowings of my spleen upon you, whose
province it is to remove those disorders that occasioned it; and let
me tell you, it is no small alleviation of my grievances, that I have a
sensible friend, to whom I can communicate my crusty humours, which, by
retention, would grow intolerably acrimonious.

You must know, I find nothing but disappointment at Bath; which is
so altered, that I can scarce believe it is the same place that I
frequented about thirty years ago. Methinks I hear you say, 'Altered it
is, without all doubt: but then it is altered for the better; a truth
which, perhaps, you would own without hesitation, if you yourself was
not altered for the worse.' The reflection may, for aught I know, be
just. The inconveniences which I overlooked in the high-day of health,
will naturally strike with exaggerated impression on the irritable
nerves of an invalid, surprised by premature old age, and shattered with
long-suffering--But, I believe, you will not deny, that this place,
which Nature and Providence seem to have intended as a resource
from distemper and disquiet, is become the very centre of racket and
dissipation. Instead of that peace, tranquillity, and case, so necessary
to those who labour under bad health, weak nerves, and irregular
spirits; here we have nothing but noise, tumult, and hurry; with the
fatigue and slavery of maintaining a ceremonial, more stiff, formal, and
oppressive, than the etiquette of a German elector. A national hospital
it may be, but one would imagine that none but lunatics are admitted;
and truly, I will give you leave to call me so, if I stay much longer at
Bath.--But I shall take another opportunity to explain my sentiments
at greater length on this subject--I was impatient to see the boasted
improvements in architecture, for which the upper parts of the town have
been so much celebrated and t'other day I made a circuit of all the new
buildings. The Square, though irregular, is, on the whole, pretty well
laid out, spacious, open, and airy; and, in my opinion, by far the most
wholesome and agreeable situation in Bath, especially the upper side of
it; but the avenues to it are mean, dirty, dangerous, and indirect. Its
communication with the Baths, is through the yard of an inn, where the
poor trembling valetudinarian is carried in a chair, betwixt the heels
of a double row of horses, wincing under the curry-combs of grooms and
postilions, over and above the hazard of being obstructed, or overturned
by the carriages which are continually making their exit or their
entrance--I suppose after some chairmen shall have been maimed, and
a few lives lost by those accidents, the corporation will think, in
earnest, about providing a more safe and commodious passage. The Circus
is a pretty bauble, contrived for shew, and looks like Vespasian's
amphitheatre turned outside in. If we consider it in point of
magnificence, the great number of small doors belonging to the separate
houses, the inconsiderable height of the different orders, the affected
ornaments of the architrave, which are both childish and misplaced,
and the areas projecting into the street, surrounded with iron rails,
destroy a good part of its effect upon the eye; and, perhaps, we shall
find it still more defective, if we view it in the light of convenience.
The figure of each separate dwelling-house, being the segment of a
circle, must spoil the symmetry of the rooms, by contracting them
towards the street windows, and leaving a larger sweep in the space
behind. If, instead of the areas and iron rails, which seem to be of
very little use, there had been a corridore with arcades all round,
as in Covent-garden, the appearance of the whole would have been more
magnificent and striking; those arcades would have afforded an agreeable
covered walk, and sheltered the poor chairmen and their carriages from
the rain, which is here almost perpetual. At present, the chairs stand
soaking in the open street, from morning to night, till they become so
many boxes of wet leather, for the benefit of the gouty and rheumatic,
who are transported in them from place to place. Indeed this is a
shocking inconvenience that extends over the whole city; and, I am
persuaded, it produces infinite mischief to the delicate and infirm;
even the close chairs, contrived for the sick, by standing in the open
air, have their frize linings impregnated like so many spunges, with the
moisture of the atmosphere, and those cases of cold vapour must give
a charming check to the perspiration of a patient, piping hot from the
Bath, with all his pores wide open.

But, to return to the Circus; it is inconvenient from its situation, at
so great a distance from all the markets, baths, and places of public
entertainment. The only entrance to it, through Gay-street, is so
difficult, steep, and slippery, that in wet weather, it must be
exceedingly dangerous, both for those that ride in carriages, and those
that walk a-foot; and when the street is covered with snow, as it was
for fifteen days successively this very winter, I don't see how any
individual could go either up or down, without the most imminent hazard
of broken bones. In blowing weather, I am told, most of the houses in
this hill are smothered with smoke, forced down the chimneys, by the
gusts of wind reverberated from the hill behind, which (I apprehend
likewise) must render the atmosphere here more humid and unwholesome
than it is in the square below; for the clouds, formed by the constant
evaporation from the baths and rivers in the bottom, will, in their
ascent this way, be first attracted and detained by the hill that rises
close behind the Circus, and load the air with a perpetual succession of
vapours: this point, however, may be easily ascertained by means of an
hygrometer, or a paper of salt of tartar exposed to the action of
the atmosphere. The same artist who planned the Circus, has likewise
projected a Crescent; when that is finished, we shall probably have a
Star; and those who are living thirty years hence, may, perhaps, see
all the signs of the Zodiac exhibited in architecture at Bath. These,
however fantastical, are still designs that denote some ingenuity and
knowledge in the architect; but the rage of building has laid hold on
such a number of adventurers, that one sees new houses starting up in
every out-let and every corner of Bath; contrived without judgment,
executed without solidity, and stuck together with so little regard
to plan and propriety, that the different lines of the new rows and
buildings interfere with, and intersect one another in every different
angle of conjunction. They look like the wreck of streets and squares
disjointed by an earthquake, which hath broken the ground into a variety
of holes and hillocks; or as if some Gothic devil had stuffed them
altogether in a bag, and left them to stand higgledy piggledy, just as
chance directed. What sort of a monster Bath will become in a few years,
with those growing excrescences, may be easily conceived: but the want
of beauty and proportion is not the worst effect of these new mansions;
they are built so slight, with the soft crumbling stone found in this
neighbourhood, that I shall never sleep quietly in one of them, when
it blowed (as the sailors say) a cap-full of wind; and, I am persuaded,
that my hind, Roger Williams, or any man of equal strength, would be
able to push his foot through the strongest part of their walls, without
any great exertion of his muscles. All these absurdities arise from the
general tide of luxury, which hath overspread the nation, and swept
away all, even the very dregs of the people. Every upstart of fortune,
harnessed in the trappings of the mode, presents himself at Bath, as in
the very focus of observation--Clerks and factors from the East Indies,
loaded with the spoil of plundered provinces; planters, negro-drivers,
and hucksters from our American plantations, enriched they know not
how; agents, commissaries, and contractors, who have fattened, in two
successive wars, on the blood of the nation; usurers, brokers, and
jobbers of every kind; men of low birth, and no breeding, have found
themselves suddenly translated into a state of affluence, unknown to
former ages; and no wonder that their brains should be intoxicated with
pride, vanity, and presumption. Knowing no other criterion of greatness,
but the ostentation of wealth, they discharge their affluence without
taste or conduct, through every channel of the most absurd extravagance;
and all of them hurry to Bath, because here, without any further
qualification, they can mingle with the princes and nobles of the land.
Even the wives and daughters of low tradesmen, who, like shovel-nosed
sharks, prey upon the blubber of those uncouth whales of fortune, are
infected with the same rage of displaying their importance; and the
slightest indisposition serves them for a pretext to insist upon being
conveyed to Bath, where they may hobble country-dances and cotillons
among lordlings, squires, counsellors, and clergy. These delicate
creatures from Bedfordbury, Butcher-row, Crutched-friers, and
Botolph-lane, cannot breathe in the gross air of the Lower Town, or
conform to the vulgar rules of a common lodging-house; the husband,
therefore, must provide an entire house, or elegant apartments in the
new buildings. Such is the composition of what is called the fashionable
company at Bath; where a very inconsiderable proportion of genteel
people are lost in a mob of impudent plebeians, who have neither
understanding nor judgment, nor the least idea of propriety and decorum;
and seem to enjoy nothing so much as an opportunity of insulting their
betters.

Thus the number of people, and the number of houses continue to
increase; and this will ever be the case, till the streams that swell
this irresistible torrent of folly and extravagance, shall either be
exhausted, or turned into other channels, by incidents and events which
I do not pretend to foresee. This, I own, is a subject on which I cannot
write with any degree of patience; for the mob is a monster I never
could abide, either in its head, tail, midriff, or members; I detest the
whole of it, as a mass of ignorance, presumption, malice and brutality;
and, in this term of reprobation, I include, without respect of rank,
station, or quality, all those of both sexes, who affect its manners,
and court its society.

But I have written till my fingers are crampt, and my nausea begins to
return--By your advice, I sent to London a few days ago for half a pound
of Gengzeng; though I doubt much, whether that which comes from America
is equally efficacious with what is brought from the East Indies. Some
years ago a friend of mine paid sixteen guineas for two ounces of
it; and, in six months after, it was sold in the same shop for five
shillings the pound. In short, we live in a vile world of fraud and
sophistication; so that I know nothing of equal value with the genuine
friendship of a sensible man; a rare jewel! which I cannot help thinking
myself in possession of, while I repeat the old declaration, that I am,
as usual,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate M. BRAMBLE,

After having been agitated in a short hurricane, on my first arrival,
I have taken a small house in Milsham-street, where I am tolerably well
lodged, for five guineas a week. I was yesterday at the Pump-room, and
drank about a pint of water, which seems to agree with my stomach; and
to-morrow morning I shall bathe, for the first time; so that in a few
posts you may expect farther trouble; mean while, I am glad to find that
the inoculation has succeeded so well with poor Joyce, and that her face
will be but little marked. If my friend Sir Thomas was a single man,
I would not trust such a handsome wench in his family; but as I have
recommended her, in a particular manner, to the protection of lady G--,
who is one of the best women in the world, she may go thither without
hesitation as soon as she is quite recovered and fit for service--Let
her mother have money to provide her with necessaries, and she may ride
behind her brother on Bucks; but you must lay strong injunctions
on Jack, to take particular care of the trusty old veteran, who has
faithfully earned his present ease by his past services.




To Miss WILLIS at Gloucester. BATH, April 26. MY DEAREST COMPANION,

The pleasure I received from yours, which came to hand yesterday, is
not to be expressed. Love and friendship are, without doubt, charming
passions; which absence serves only to heighten and improve. Your kind
present of the garnet bracelets, I shall keep as carefully as I preserve
my own life; and I beg you will accept, in return, my heart-housewife,
with the tortoise-shell memorandum-book, as a trifling pledge of my
unalterable affection.

Bath is to me a new world--All is gayety, good-humour, and diversion.
The eye is continually entertained with the splendour of dress and
equipage; and the ear with the sound of coaches, chairs, and other
carriages. The merry bells ring round, from morn till night. Then we
are welcomed by the city-waits in our own lodgings; we have music in the
Pump-room every morning, cotillons every forenoon in the rooms, balls
twice a week, and concerts every other night, besides private assemblies
and parties without number--As soon as we were settled in lodgings, we
were visited by the Master of the Ceremonies; a pretty little gentleman,
so sweet, so fine, so civil, and polite, that in our country he might
pass for the prince of Wales; then he talks so charmingly, both in verse
and prose, that you would be delighted to hear him discourse; for you
must know he is a great writer, and has got five tragedies ready for the
stage. He did us the favour to dine with us, by my uncle's invitation;
and next day squired my aunt and me to every part of Bath; which, to be
sure, is an earthly paradise. The Square, the Circus, and the Parades,
put you in mind of the sumptuous palaces represented in prints and
pictures; and the new buildings, such as Princes-row, Harlequin's-row,
Bladud's-row, and twenty other rows, look like so many enchanted
castles, raised on hanging terraces.

At eight in the morning, we go in dishabille to the Pump-room which is
crowded like a Welsh fair; and there you see the highest quality,
and the lowest trades folks, jostling each other, without ceremony,
hail-fellow well-met. The noise of the music playing in the gallery,
the heat and flavour of such a crowd, and the hum and buz of their
conversation, gave me the head-ach and vertigo the first day; but,
afterwards, all these things became familiar, and even agreeable.--Right
under the Pump-room windows is the King's Bath; a huge cistern, where
you see the patients up to their necks in hot water. The ladies wear
jackets and petticoats of brown linen with chip hats, in which they
fix their handkerchiefs to wipe the sweat from their faces; but, truly,
whether it is owing to the steam that surrounds them, or the heat of the
water, or the nature of the dress, or to all these causes together, they
look so flushed, and so frightful, that I always turn my eyes another
way--My aunt, who says every person of fashion should make her
appearance in the bath, as well as in the abbey church, contrived a cap
with cherry-coloured ribbons to suit her complexion, and obliged Win to
attend her yesterday morning in the water. But, really, her eyes were so
red, that they made mine water as I viewed her from the Pump-room; and
as for poor Win, who wore a hat trimmed with blue, what betwixt her wan
complexion and her fear, she looked like the ghost of some pale maiden,
who had drowned herself for love. When she came out of the bath, she
took assafoetida drops, and was fluttered all day; so that we could
hardly keep her from going into hysterics: but her mistress says it will
do her good; and poor Win curtsies, with the tears in her eyes. For
my part, I content myself with drinking about half a pint of the water
every morning.

The pumper, with his wife and servant, attend within a bar; and the
glasses, of different sizes, stand ranged in order before them, so you
have nothing to do but to point at that which you choose, and it is
filled immediately, hot and sparkling from the pump. It is the only
hot water I could ever drink, without being sick--Far from having that
effect, it is rather agreeable to the taste, grateful to the stomach,
and reviving to the spirits. You cannot imagine what wonderful cures it
performs--My uncle began with it the other day; but he made wry faces in
drinking, and I'm afraid he will leave it off--The first day we came to
Bath, he fell into a violent passion; beat two black-a-moors, and I was
afraid he would have fought with their master; but the stranger proved
a peaceable man. To be sure, the gout had got into his head, as my aunt
observed; but, I believe, his passion drove it away; for he has been
remarkably well ever since. It is a thousand pities he should ever be
troubled with that ugly distemper; for, when he is free from pain, he is
the best tempered man upon earth; so gentle, so generous, so charitable,
that every body loves him; and so good to me, in particular, that I
shall never be able to shew the deep sense I have of his tenderness and
affection.

Hard by the Pump-room, is a coffee-house for the ladies; but my aunt
says, young girls are not admitted, insomuch as the conversation
turns upon politics, scandal, philosophy, and other subjects above
our capacity; but we are allowed to accompany them to the booksellers'
shops, which are charming places of resort; where we read novels, plays,
pamphlets, and newspapers, for so small a subscription as a crown a
quarter; and in these offices of intelligence (as my brother calls them)
all the reports of the day, and all the private transactions of the
Bath, are first entered and discussed. From the bookseller's shop, we
make a tour through the milliners and toymen; and commonly stop at Mr
Gill's, the pastry-cook, to take a jelly, a tart, or a small bason of
vermicelli. There is, moreover, another place of entertainment on the
other side of the water, opposite to the Grove, to which the company
cross over in a boat--It is called Spring-garden; a sweet retreat,
laid out in walks and ponds, and parterres of flowers; and there is
a long-room for breakfasting and dancing. As the situation is low and
damp, and the season has been remarkably wet, my uncle won't suffer me
to go thither, lest I should catch cold: but my aunt says it is all a
vulgar prejudice; and, to be sure, a great many gentlemen and ladies of
Ireland frequent the place, without seeming to be the worse for it. They
say, dancing at Spring-gardens, when the air is moist, is recommended to
them as an excellent cure for the rheumatism. I have been twice at
the play; where, notwithstanding the excellence of the performers, the
gayety of the company, and the decorations of the theatre, which are
very fine, I could not help reflecting, with a sigh, upon our poor
homely representations at Gloucester--But this, in confidence to my dear
Willis--You know my heart, and will excuse its weakness.

After all, the great scenes of entertainment at Bath, are the two
public rooms; where the company meet alternately every evening. They are
spacious, lofty, and, when lighted up, appear very striking. They are
generally crowded with well-dressed people, who drink tea in separate
parties, play at cards, walk, or sit and chat together, just as they are
disposed. Twice a-week there is a ball; the expence of which is defrayed
by a voluntary subscription among the gentlemen; and every subscriber
has three tickets. I was there Friday last with my aunt, under the care
of my brother, who is a subscriber; and Sir Ulic Mackilligut recommended
his nephew, captain O Donaghan, to me as a partner; but Jery excused
himself, by saying I had got the head-ach; and, indeed, it was really
so, though I can't imagine how he knew it. The place was so hot, and the
smell so different from what we are used to in the country, that I was
quite feverish when we came away. Aunt says it is the effect of a vulgar
constitution, reared among woods and mountains; and, that as I become
accustomed to genteel company, it will wear off.--Sir Ulic was very
complaisant, made her a great many high-flown compliments; and, when
we retired, handed her with great ceremony to her chair. The captain, I
believe, would have done me the same favour; but my brother seeing him
advance, took me under his arm, and wished him good night. The Captain
is a pretty man, to be sure; tall and strait, and well made; with
light-grey eyes, and a Roman nose; but there is a certain boldness in
his look and manner, that puts one out of countenance--But I am afraid
I have put you out of all patience with this long unconnected scrawl;
which I shall therefore conclude, with assuring you, that neither Bath,
nor London, nor all the diversions of life, shall ever be able to efface
the idea of my dear Letty, from the heart of her ever affectionate

LYDIA MELFORD




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY JONES,

Heaving got a frank, I now return your fever, which I received by Mr
Higgins, at the Hot Well, together with the stockings, which his wife
footed for me; but now they are of no survice. No body wears such things
in this place--O Molly! you that live in the country have no deception
of our doings at Bath. Here is such dressing, and fidling, and dancing,
and gadding, and courting and plotting--O gracious! if God had not
given me a good stock of discretion, what a power of things might not
I reveal, consarning old mistress and young mistress; Jews with beards
that were no Jews; but handsome Christians, without a hair upon their
sin, strolling with spectacles, to get speech of Miss Liddy. But she's
a dear sweet soul, as innocent as the child unborn. She has tould me all
her inward thoughts, and disclosed her passion for Mr Wilson; and that's
not his name neither; and thof he acted among the player-men, he is meat
for their masters; and she has gi'en me her yallow trollopea; which Mrs
Drab, the mantymaker, says will look very well when it is scowred and
smoaked with silfur--You knows as how, yallow fitts my fizzogmony. God
he knows what havock I shall make among the mail sex, when I make my
first appearance in this killing collar, with a full soot of gaze, as
good as new, that I bought last Friday of madam Friponeau, the French
mullaner--Dear girl, I have seen all the fine shews of Bath; the Prades,
the Squires, and the Circlis, the Crashit, the Hottogon, and Bloody
Buildings, and Harry King's row; and I have been twice in the Bath with
mistress, and na'r a smoak upon our backs, hussy. The first time I was
mortally afraid, and flustered all day; and afterwards made believe that
I had got the heddick; but mistress said, if I didn't go I should take
a dose of bumtaffy; and so remembering how it worked Mrs Gwyllim a
pennorth, I chose rather to go again with her into the Bath, and then I
met with an axident. I dropt my petticoat, and could not get it up from
the bottom.--But what did that signify; they mought laff but they could
see nothing; for I was up to the sin in water. To be sure, it threw me
into such a gumbustion, that I know not what I said, nor what I did, nor
how they got me out, and rapt me in a blanket--Mrs Tabitha scoulded a
little when we got home; but she knows as I know what's what Ah Laud
help you!--There is Sir Yury Micligut, of Balnaclinch, in the cunty of
Kalloway--I took down the name from his gentleman, Mr 0 Frizzle, and he
has got an estate of fifteen hundred a year--I am sure he is both rich
and generous--But you nose, Molly, I was always famous for keeping
secrets; and so he was very safe in trusting me with his flegm for
mistress; which, to be sure is very honourable; for Mr O Frizzle assures
me, he values not her portion a brass varthing--And, indeed, what's poor
ten thousand pounds to a Baron Knight of his fortune? and, truly, I told
Mr 0 Frizzle that was all she had trust to--As for John Thomas, he's
a morass fellor--I vow, I thought he would a fit with Mr 0 Frizzle,
because he axed me to dance with him at Spring Garden--But God he knows
I have no thoughts eyther of wan or t'other.

As for house news, the worst is, Chowder has fallen off greatly from
his stomick--He cats nothing but white meats, and not much of that;
and wheezes, and seems to be much bloated. The doctors think he
is threatened with a dropsy--Parson Marrofat, who has got the same
disorder, finds great benefit from the waters; but Chowder seems to like
them no better than the squire; and mistress says, if his case don't
take a favourable turn, she will sartinly carry him to Aberga'ny, to
drink goat's whey--To be sure, the poor dear honymil is lost for want of
axercise; for which reason, she intends to give him an airing once a-day
upon the Downs, in a post-chaise--I have already made very creditable
connexions in this here place; where, to be sure, we have the very
squintasense of satiety--Mrs Patcher, my lady Kilmacullock's woman, and
I are sworn sisters. She has shewn me all her secrets, and learned me to
wash gaze, and refrash rusty silks and bumbeseens, by boiling them with
winegar, chamberlye, and stale beer. My short sack and apron luck as
good as new from the shop, and my pumpydoor as fresh as a rose, by
the help of turtle-water--But this is all Greek and Latten to you,
Molly--If we should come to Aberga'ny, you'll be within a day's ride of
us; and then we shall see wan another, please God--If not, remember
me in your prayers, as I shall do by you in mine; and take care of my
kitten, and give my kind sarvice to Sall; and this is all at present,
from your beloved friend and sarvent,

W. JENKINS BATH, April 26.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

I am astonished that Dr Lewis should take upon him to give away
Alderney, without my privity and concurrants--What signifies my
brother's order? My brother is little better than Noncompush. He would
give away the shirt off his back, and the teeth out of his head; nay, as
for that matter; he would have ruinated the family with his ridiculous
charities, if it had not been for my four quarters--What between his
willfullness and his waste, his trumps, and his frenzy, I lead the life
of an indented slave. Alderney gave four gallons a-day, ever since the
calf was sent to market. There is so much milk out of my dairy, and the
press must stand still: but I won't loose a cheese pairing; and the milk
shall be made good, if the sarvents should go without butter. If they
must needs have butter, let them make it of sheep's milk; but then my
wool will suffer for want of grace; so that I must be a loser on all
sides. Well, patience is like a stout Welsh poney; it bears a great
deal, and trots a great way; but it will tire at the long run. Before
its long, perhaps I may shew Matt, that I was not born to be the
household drudge to my dying day--Gwyn rites from Crickhowel, that the
price of flannel is fallen three-farthings an ell; and that's another
good penny out of my pocket. When I go to market to sell, my commodity
stinks; but when I want to buy the commonest thing, the owner pricks
it up under my nose; and it can't be had for love nor money--I think
everything runs cross at Brambleton-hall--You say the gander has broke
the eggs; which is a phinumenon I don't understand: for when the fox
carried off the old goose last year, he took her place, and hatched the
eggs, and partected the goslings like a tender parent--Then you tell me
the thunder has soured two barrels of beer in the seller. But how the
thunder should get there, when the seller was double-locked, I can't
comprehend. Howsomever, I won't have the beer thrown out, till I see it
with my own eyes. Perhaps, it will recover--At least it will serve for
vinegar to the servants.--You may leave off the fires in my brother's
chamber and mine, as it is unsartain when we return.--I hope, Gwyllim,
you'll take care there is no waste; and have an eye to the maids, and
keep them to their spinning. I think they may go very well without beer
in hot weather--it serves only to inflame the blood, and set them
a-gog after the men. Water will make them fair and keep them cool and
tamperit. Don't forget to put up in the portmantel, that cums with
Williams, along with my riding-habit, hat, and feather, the viol of purl
water, and the tincktur for my stomach; being as how I am much troubled
with flutterencies. This is all at present, from

Yours, TABITHA BRAMBLE BATH, April 26.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

I have done with the waters; therefore your advice comes a day too late
I grant that physic is no mystery of your making. I know it is a mystery
in its own nature; and, like other mysteries, requires a strong gulp of
faith to make it go down--Two days ago, I went into the King's Bath,
by the advice of our friend Ch--, in order to clear the strainer of the
skin, for the benefit of a free perspiration; and the first object that
saluted my eye, was a child full of scrophulous ulcers, carried in the
arms of one of the guides, under the very noses of the bathers. I was
so shocked at the sight, that I retired immediately with indignation
and disgust--Suppose the matter of those ulcers, floating on the water,
comes in contact with my skin, when the pores are all open, I would ask
you what must be the consequence?--Good Heaven, the very thought makes
my blood run cold! we know not what sores may be running into the water
while we are bathing, and what sort of matter we may thus imbibe; the
king's-evil, the scurvy, the cancer, and the pox; and, no doubt, the
heat will render the virus the more volatile and penetrating. To purify
myself from all such contamination, I went to the duke of Kingston's
private Bath, and there I was almost suffocated for want of free air;
the place was so small, and the steam so stifling.

After all, if the intention is no more than to wash the skin, I
am convinced that simple element is more effectual than any water
impregnated with salt and iron; which, being astringent, will certainly
contract the pores, and leave a kind of crust upon the surface of the
body. But I am now as much afraid of drinking, as of bathing; for, after
a long conversation with the Doctor, about the construction of the
pump and the cistern, it is very far from being clear with me, that the
patients in the Pump-room don't swallow the scourings of the bathers. I
can't help suspecting, that there is, or may be, some regurgitation from
the bath into the cistern of the pump. In that case, what a delicate
beveridge is every day quaffed by the drinkers; medicated with the sweat
and dirt, and dandriff; and the abominable discharges of various kinds,
from twenty different diseased bodies, parboiling in the kettle below.
In order to avoid this filthy composition, I had recourse to the spring
that supplies the private baths on the Abbey-green; but I at once
perceived something extraordinary in the taste and smell; and, upon
inquiry, I find that the Roman baths in this quarter, were found covered
by an old burying ground, belonging to the Abbey; through which, in all
probability, the water drains in its passage; so that as we drink the
decoction of living bodies at the Pump-room, we swallow the strainings
of rotten bones and carcasses at the private bath. I vow to God, the
very idea turns my stomach! Determined, as I am, against any farther use
of the Bath waters, this consideration would give me little disturbance,
if I could find any thing more pure, or less pernicious, to quench my
thirst; but, although the natural springs of excellent water are seen
gushing spontaneous on every side, from the hills that surround us, the
inhabitants, in general, make use of well-water, so impregnated with
nitre, or alum, or some other villainous mineral, that it is equally
ungrateful to the taste, and mischievous to the constitution. It must
be owned, indeed, that here, in Milsham-street, we have a precarious and
scanty supply from the hill; which is collected in an open bason in
the Circus, liable to be defiled with dead dogs, cats, rats, and every
species of nastiness, which the rascally populace may throw into it,
from mere wantonness and brutality. Well, there is no nation that drinks
so hoggishly as the English.

What passes for wine among us, is not the juice of the grape. It is an
adulterous mixture, brewed up of nauseous ingredients, by dunces,
who are bunglers in the art of poison-making; and yet we, and our
forefathers, are and have been poisoned by this cursed drench, without
taste or flavour--The only genuine and wholesome beveridge in England,
is London porter, and Dorchester table-beer; but as for your ale and
your gin, your cyder and your perry, and all the trashy family of
made wines, I detest them as infernal compositions, contrived for the
destruction of the human species--But what have I to do with the human
species? except a very few friends, I care not if the whole was--.

Heark ye, Lewis, my misanthropy increases every day--The longer I
live, I find the folly and the fraud of mankind grow more and more
intolerable--I wish I had not come from Brambletonhall; after having
lived in solitude so long, I cannot bear the hurry and impertinence of
the multitude; besides, every thing is sophisticated in these crowded
places. Snares are laid for our lives in every thing we cat or drink:
the very air we breathe, is loaded with contagion. We cannot even
sleep, without risque of infection. I say, infection--This place is
the rendezvous of the diseased--You won't deny, that many diseases are
infectious; even the consumption itself, is highly infectious. When a
person dies of it in Italy, the bed and bedding are destroyed; the other
furniture is exposed to the weather and the apartment white-washed,
before it is occupied by any other living soul. You'll allow, that
nothing receives infection sooner, or retains it longer, than blankets,
feather-beds, and matrasses--'Sdeath! how do I know what miserable
objects have been stewing in the bed where I now lie!--I wonder, Dick,
you did not put me in mind of sending for my own matrasses--But, if I
had not been an ass, I should not have needed a remembrancer--There is
always some plaguy reflection that rises up in judgment against me, and
ruffles my spirits--Therefore, let us change the subject.

I have other reasons for abridging my stay at Bath--You know sister
Tabby's complexion--If Mrs Tabitha Bramble had been of any other race,
I should certainly have considered her as the most--. But, the truth
is, she has found means to interest my affection; or, rather, she is
beholden to the force of prejudice, commonly called the ties of
blood. Well, this amiable maiden has actually commenced a flirting
correspondence with an Irish baronet of sixty-five. His name is Sir Ulic
Mackilligut. He is said to be much out at elbows; and, I believe, has
received false intelligence with respect to her fortune. Be that as
it may, the connexion is exceedingly ridiculous, and begins already
to excite whispers. For my part, I have no intention to dispute her
free-agency; though I shall fall upon some expedient to undeceive her
paramour, as to the point which he has principally in view. But I don't
think her conduct is a proper example for Liddy, who has also attracted
the notice of some coxcombs in the Rooms; and Jery tells me, he suspects
a strapping fellow, the knight's nephew, of some design upon the girl's
heart. I shall, therefore, keep a strict eye over her aunt and her,
and even shift the scene, if I find the matter grow more serious--You
perceive what an agreeable task it must be, to a man of my kidney, to
have the cure of such souls as these.--But, hold, You shall not have
another peevish word (till the next occasion) from

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE BATH, April 28.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I think those people are unreasonable, who complain that Bath is a
contracted circle, in which the same dull scenes perpetually revolve,
without variation--I am, on the contrary, amazed to find so small a
place so crowded with entertainment and variety. London itself can
hardly exhibit one species of diversion, to which we have not something
analogous at Bath, over and above those singular advantages that are
peculiar to the place. Here, for example, a man has daily opportunities
of seeing the most remarkable characters of the community. He sees
them in their natural attitudes and true colours; descended from their
pedestals, and divested of their formal draperies, undisguised by art
and affectation--Here we have ministers of state, judges, generals,
bishops, projectors, philosophers, wits, poets, players, chemists,
fiddlers, and buffoons. If he makes any considerable stay in the place,
he is sure of meeting with some particular friend, whom he did not
expect to see; and to me there is nothing more agreeable than such
casual reencounters. Another entertainment, peculiar to Bath, arises
from the general mixture of all degrees assembled in our public
rooms, without distinction of rank or fortune. This is what my uncle
reprobates, as a monstrous jumble of heterogeneous principles; a vile
mob of noise and impertinence, without decency or subordination. But
this chaos is to me a source of infinite amusement.

I was extremely diverted last ball-night to see the Master of the
Ceremonies leading, with great solemnity, to the upper end of the room,
an antiquated Abigail, dressed in her lady's cast-clothes; whom he (I
suppose) mistook for some countess just arrived at the Bath. The
ball was opened by a Scotch lord, with a mulatto heiress from St
Christopher's; and the gay colonel Tinsel danced all the evening
with the daughter of an eminent tinman from the borough of Southwark.
Yesterday morning, at the Pump-room, I saw a broken-winded
Wapping landlady squeeze through a circle of peers, to salute her
brandy-merchant, who stood by the window, propped upon crutches; and a
paralytic attorney of Shoe-lane, in shuffling up to the bar, kicked the
shins of the chancellor of England, while his lordship, in a cut bob,
drank a glass of water at the pump. I cannot account for my being
pleased with these incidents, any other way, than by saying they are
truly ridiculous in their own nature, and serve to heighten the humour
in the farce of life, which I am determined to enjoy as long as I can.

Those follies, that move my uncle's spleen, excite my laughter. He is
as tender as a man without a skin; who cannot bear the slightest touch
without flinching. What tickles another would give him torment; and
yet he has what we may call lucid intervals, when he is remarkably
facetious--Indeed, I never knew a hypochondriac so apt to be infected
with good-humour. He is the most risible misanthrope I ever met with.
A lucky joke, or any ludicrous incident, will set him a-laughing
immoderately, even in one of his most gloomy paroxysms; and, when the
laugh is over, he will curse his own imbecility. In conversing with
strangers, he betrays no marks of disquiet--He is splenetic with his
familiars only; and not even with them, while they keep his attention
employed; but when his spirits are not exerted externally, they seem
to recoil and prey upon himself--He has renounced the waters with
execration; but he begins to find a more efficacious, and, certainly,
a much more palatable remedy in the pleasures of society. He has
discovered some old friends, among the invalids of Bath; and, in
particular, renewed his acquaintance with the celebrated James Quin, who
certainly did not come here to drink water. You cannot doubt, but that I
had the strongest curiosity to know this original; and it was gratified
by Mr Bramble, who has had him twice at our house to dinner.

So far as I am able to judge, Quin's character is rather more
respectable than it has been generally represented. His bon mots are in
every witling's mouth; but many of them have a rank flavour, which one
would be apt to think was derived from a natural grossness of idea.
I suspect, however, that justice has not been done the author, by the
collectors of those Quiniana; who have let the best of them slip through
their fingers, and only retained such as were suited to the taste and
organs of the multitude. How far he may relax in his hours of jollity, I
cannot pretend to say; but his general conversation is conducted by the
nicest rules of Propriety; and Mr James Quin is, certainly, one of the
best bred men in the kingdom. He is not only a most agreeable companion
but (as I am credibly informed) a very honest man; highly susceptible
of friendship, warm, steady, and even generous in his attachments,
disdaining flattery, and incapable of meanness and dissimulation. Were I
to judge, however, from Quin's eye alone, I should take him to be proud,
insolent, and cruel. There is something remarkably severe and forbidding
in his aspect; and, I have been told, he was ever disposed to insult his
inferiors and dependants.--Perhaps that report has influenced my opinion
of his looks--You know we are the fools of prejudice. Howsoever that may
be, I have as yet seen nothing but his favourable side, and my uncle,
who frequently confers with him, in a corner, declares he is one of the
most sensible men he ever knew--He seems to have a reciprocal regard for
old Squaretoes, whom he calls by the familiar name of Matthew, and often
reminds of their old tavern-adventures: on the other hand, Matthew's
eyes sparkle whenever Quin makes his appearance--Let him be never so
jarring and discordant, Quin puts him in tune; and, like treble and bass
in the same concert, they make excellent music together--. T'other day,
the conversation turning upon Shakespeare, I could not help saying, with
some emotion, that I would give an hundred guineas to see Mr Quin act
the part of Falstaff; upon which, turning to me with a smile, 'And I
would give a thousand, young gentleman (said he) that I could gratify
your longing.' My uncle and he are perfectly agreed in their estimate of
life; which Quin says, would stink in his nostrils, if he did not steep
it in claret.

I want to see this phenomenon in his cups; and have almost prevailed
upon uncle to give him a small turtle at the Bear. In the mean time, I
must entertain you with an incident, that seems to confirm the judgment
of those two cynic philosophers. I took the liberty to differ in opinion
from Mr Bramble, when he observed, that the mixture of people in the
entertainments of this place was destructive of all order and urbanity;
that it rendered the plebeians insufferably arrogant and troublesome,
and vulgarized the deportment and sentiments of those who moved in the
upper spheres of life. He said such a preposterous coalition would bring
us into contempt with all our neighbours; and was worse, in fact, than
debasing the gold coin of the nation. I argued, on the contrary, that
those plebeians who discovered such eagerness to imitate the dress and
equipage of their superiors, would likewise, in time, adopt their maxims
and their manners, be polished by their conversation, and refined by
their example; but when I appealed to Mr Quin, and asked if he did not
think that such an unreserved mixture would improve the whole mass? 'Yes
(said he) as a plate of marmalade would improve a pan of sirreverence.'

I owned I was not much conversant in high-life, but I had seen what were
called polite assemblies in London and elsewhere; that those of Bath
seemed to be as decent as any; and that, upon the whole, the individuals
that composed it, would not be found deficient in good manners and
decorum. 'But let us have recourse to experience (said I)--Jack Holder,
who was intended for a parson, has succeeded to an estate of two
thousand a year, by the death of his elder brother. He is now at the
Bath, driving about in a phaeton and four, with French horns. He has
treated with turtle and claret at all the taverns in Bath and Bristol,
till his guests are gorged with good chear: he has bought a dozen suits
of fine clothes, by the advice of the Master of the Ceremonies, under
whose tuition he has entered himself. He has lost hundreds at billiards
to sharpers, and taken one of the nymphs of Avon-street into keeping;
but, finding all these channels insufficient to drain him of his current
cash, his counsellor has engaged him to give a general tea-drinking
to-morrow at Wiltshire's room. In order to give it the more eclat, every
table is to be furnished with sweet-meats and nosegays; which, however,
are not to be touched till notice is given by the ringing of a bell, and
then the ladies may help themselves without restriction. This will be no
bad way of trying the company's breeding.'

'I will abide by that experiment (cried my uncle) and if I could find
a place to stand secure, without the vortex of the tumult, which I know
will ensue, I would certainly go thither and enjoy the scene.' Quin
proposed that we should take our station in the music-gallery, and
we took his advice. Holder had got thither before us, with his horns
perdue, but we were admitted. The tea-drinking passed as usual, and the
company having risen from the tables, were sauntering in groupes, in
expectation of the signal for attack, when the bell beginning to
ring, they flew with eagerness to the dessert, and the whole place was
instantly in commotion. There was nothing but justling, scrambling,
pulling, snatching, struggling, scolding, and screaming. The nosegays
were torn from one another's hands and bosoms; the glasses and china
went to wreck; the tables and floors were strewed with comfits. Some
cried; some swore; and the tropes and figures of Billingsgate were used
without reserve in all their native zest and flavour; nor were those
flowers of rhetoric unattended with significant gesticulation. Some
snapped their fingers; some forked them out; some clapped their hands,
and some their back-sides; at length, they fairly proceeded to pulling
caps, and every thing seemed to presage a general battle; when Holder
ordered his horns to sound a charge, with a view to animate the
combatants, and inflame the contest; but this manoeuvre produced an
effect quite contrary to what he expected. It was a note of reproach
that roused them to an immediate sense of their disgraceful situation.
They were ashamed of their absurd deportment, and suddenly desisted.
They gathered up their caps, ruffles, and handkerchiefs; and great part
of them retired in silent mortification.

Quin laughed at this adventure; but my uncle's delicacy was hurt. He
hung his head in manifest chagrin, and seemed to repine at the triumph
of his judgment--Indeed, his victory was more complete than he imagined;
for, as we afterwards learned, the two amazons who singularized
themselves most in the action, did not come from the purlieus of
Puddle-dock, but from the courtly neighbourhood of St James's palace.
One was a baroness, and the other, a wealthy knight's dowager--My uncle
spoke not a word, till we had made our retreat good to the coffee-house;
where, taking off his hat and wiping his forehead, 'I bless God (said
he) that Mrs Tabitha Bramble did not take the field today!' 'I would pit
her for a cool hundred (cried Quin) against the best shake-bag of the
whole main.' The truth is, nothing could have kept her at home but the
accident of her having taken physic before she knew the nature of the
entertainment. She has been for some days furbishing up an old suit of
black velvet, to make her appearance as Sir Ulic's partner at the next
ball.

I have much to say of this amiable kinswoman; but she has not been
properly introduced to your acquaintance. She is remarkably civil to
Mr Quin; of whose sarcastic humour she seems to stand in awe; but her
caution is no match for her impertinence. 'Mr Gwynn (said she the other
day) I was once vastly entertained with your playing the Ghost of Gimlet
at Drury-lane, when you rose up through the stage, with a white face and
red eyes, and spoke of quails upon the frightful porcofine--Do, pray,
spout a little the Ghost of Gimlet.' 'Madam (said Quin, with a glance of
ineffable disdain) the Ghost of Gimlet is laid, never to rise again'--
Insensible of this check, she proceeded: 'Well, to be sure, you looked
and talked so like a real ghost; and then the cock crowed so natural.
I wonder how you could teach him to crow so exact, in the very nick of
time; but, I suppose, he's game--An't he game, Mr Gwynn?' 'Dunghill,
madam.'--'Well, dunghill, or not dunghill, he has got such a clear
counter-tenor, that I wish I had such another at Brambleton-hall, to
wake the maids of a morning. Do you know where I could find one of his
brood?' 'Probably in the work-house at St Giles's parish, madam; but I
protest I know not his particular mew!' My uncle, frying with vexation,
cried, 'Good God, sister, how you talk! I have told you twenty times,
that this gentleman's name is not Gwynn.'--'Hoity toity, brother mine
(she replied) no offence, I hope--Gwynn is an honorable name, of true
old British extraction--I thought the gentleman had been come of Mrs
Helen Gwynn, who was of his own profession; and if so be that were the
case, he might be of king Charles's breed, and have royal blood in his
veins.'--'No, madam (answered Quin, with great solemnity) my mother was
not a whore of such distinction--True it is, I am sometimes tempted
to believe myself of royal descent; for my inclinations are often
arbitrary--If I was an absolute prince, at this instant, I believe I
should send for the head of your cook in a charger--She has committed
felony, on the person of that John Dory, which is mangled in a cruel
manner, and even presented without sauce--O tempora! O mores!'

This good-humoured sally turned the conversation into a less
disagreeable channel--But, lest you should think my scribble as tedious
as Mrs Tabby's clack, I shall not add another word, but that I am as
usual

Yours, J. MELFORD BATH, April 30.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

I received your bill upon Wiltshire, which was punctually honoured; but
as I don't choose to keep so much cash by me, in a common lodging house,
I have deposited 250l. in the bank of Bath, and shall take their bills
for it in London, when I leave this place, where the season draws to an
end--You must know, that now being a-foot, I am resolved to give Liddy a
glimpse of London. She is one of the best hearted creatures I ever knew,
and gains upon my affection every day--As for Tabby, I have dropt such
hints to the Irish baronet, concerning her fortune, as, I make no doubt,
will cool the ardour of his addresses. Then her pride will take the
alarm; and the rancour of stale maidenhood being chafed, we shall hear
nothing but slander and abuse of Sir Ulic Mackilligut--This rupture,
I foresee, will facilitate our departure from Bath; where, at present,
Tabby seems to enjoy herself with peculiar satisfaction. For my part, I
detest it so much, that I should not have been able to stay so long in
the place if I had not discovered some old friends; whose conversation
alleviates my disgust--Going to the coffeehouse one forenoon, I
could not help contemplating the company, with equal surprize and
compassion--We consisted of thirteen individuals; seven lamed by the
gout, rheumatism, or palsy; three maimed by accident; and the rest
either deaf or blind. One hobbled, another hopped, a third dragged his
legs after him like a wounded snake, a fourth straddled betwixt a pair
of long crutches, like the mummy of a felon hanging in chains; a fifth
was bent into a horizontal position, like a mounted telescope, shoved in
by a couple of chairmen; and a sixth was the bust of a man, set upright
in a wheel machine, which the waiter moved from place to place.

Being struck with some of their faces, I consulted the
subscription-book; and, perceiving the names of several old friends,
began to consider the groupe with more attention. At length I discovered
rear-admiral Balderick, the companion of my youth, whom I had not seen
since he was appointed lieutenant of the Severn. He was metamorphosed
into an old man, with a wooden leg and a weatherbeaten face, which
appeared the more ancient from his grey locks, that were truly
venerable--Sitting down at the table, where he was reading a news-paper,
I gazed at him for some minutes, with a mixture of pleasure and regret,
which made my heart gush with tenderness; then, taking him by the hand,
'Ah, Sam (said I) forty years ago I little thought'--I was too much
moved to proceed. 'An old friend, sure enough! (cried he, squeezing my
hand, and surveying me eagerly through his glasses) I know the looming
of the vessel, though she has been hard strained since we parted; but I
can't heave up the name'--The moment I told him who I was, he exclaimed,
'Ha! Matt, my old fellow cruizer, still afloat!' And, starting up,
hugged me in his arms. His transport, however, boded me no good; for, in
saluting me, he thrust the spring of his spectacles into my eye, and,
at the same time, set his wooden stump upon my gouty toe; an attack that
made me shed tears in sad earnest--After the hurry of our recognition
was over, he pointed out two of our common friends in the room: the bust
was what remained of colonel Cockril, who had lost the use of his
limbs in making an American campaign; and the telescope proved to be
my college chum, sir Reginald Bently; who, with his new title, and
unexpected inheritance, commenced fox-hunter, without having served
his apprenticeship to the mystery; and, in consequence of following the
hounds through a river, was seized with an inflammation of his bowels,
which has contracted him into his present attitude.

Our former correspondence was forthwith renewed, with the most hearty
expressions of mutual good-will, and as we had met so unexpectedly, we
agreed to dine together that very day at the tavern. My friend Quin,
being luckily unengaged, obliged us with his company; and, truly, this
the most happy day I have passed these twenty years. You and I, Lewis,
having been always together, never tasted friendship in this high gout,
contracted from long absence. I cannot express the half of what I felt
at this casual meeting of three or four companions, who had been so
long separated, and so roughly treated by the storms of life. It was a
renovation of youth; a kind of resuscitation of the dead, that realized
those interesting dreams, in which we sometimes retrieve our ancient
friends from the grave. Perhaps my enjoyment was not the less pleasing
for being mixed with a strain of melancholy, produced by the remembrance
of past scenes, that conjured up the ideas of some endearing connexions,
which the hand of Death has actually dissolved.

The spirits and good humour of the company seemed to triumph over the
wreck of their constitutions. They had even philosophy enough to
joke upon their own calamities; such is the power of friendship, the
sovereign cordial of life--I afterwards found, however, that they were
not without their moments, and even hours of disquiet. Each of them
apart, in succeeding conferences, expatiated upon his own particular
grievances; and they were all malcontents at bottom--Over and above
their personal disasters, they thought themselves unfortunate in the
lottery of life. Balderick complained, that all the recompence he
had received for his long and hard service, was the half-pay of a
rear-admiral. The colonel was mortified to see himself over-topped by
upstart generals, some of whom he had once commanded; and, being a man
of a liberal turn, could ill put up with a moderate annuity, for which
he had sold his commission. As for the baronet, having run himself
considerably in debt, on a contested election, he has been obliged to
relinquish his seat in parliament, and his seat in the country at the
same time, and put his estate to nurse; but his chagrin, which is the
effect of his own misconduct, does not affect me half so much as that of
the other two, who have acted honourable and distinguished parts on the
great theatre, and are now reduced to lead a weary life in this stew-pan
of idleness and insignificance. They have long left off using the
waters, after having experienced their inefficacy. The diversions of the
place they are not in a condition to enjoy. How then do they make shift
to pass their time? In the forenoon they crawl out to the Rooms or
the coffeehouse, where they take a hand at whist, or descant upon the
General Advertiser; and their evenings they murder in private parties,
among peevish invalids, and insipid old women--This is the case with
a good number of individuals, whom nature seems to have intended for
better purposes.

About a dozen years ago, many decent families, restricted to small
fortunes, besides those that came hither on the score of health, were
tempted to settle at Bath, where they could then live comfortably, and
even make a genteel appearance, at a small expence: but the madness of
the times has made the place too hot for them, and they are now obliged
to think of other migrations--Some have already fled to the mountains
of Wales, and others have retired to Exeter. Thither, no doubt, they
will be followed by the flood of luxury and extravagance, which will
drive them from place to place to the very Land's End; and there, I
suppose, they will be obliged to ship themselves to some other country.
Bath is become a mere sink of profligacy and extortion. Every article of
house-keeping is raised to an enormous price; a circumstance no longer
to be wondered at, when we know that every petty retainer of fortune
piques himself upon keeping a table, and thinks it is for the honour
of his character to wink at the knavery of his servants, who are in a
confederacy with the market-people; and, of consequence, pay whatever
they demand. Here is now a mushroom of opulence, who pays a cook seventy
guineas a week for furnishing him with one meal a day. This portentous
frenzy is become so contagious, that the very rabble and refuse of
mankind are infected. I have known a negro-driver, from Jamaica, pay
over-night, to the master of one of the rooms, sixty-five guineas for
tea and coffee to the company, and leave Bath next morning, in such
obscurity, that not one of his guests had the slightest idea of his
person, or even made the least inquiry about his name. Incidents of this
kind are frequent; and every day teems with fresh absurdities, which are
too gross to make a thinking man merry.

--But I feel the spleen creeping on me apace; and therefore will indulge
you with a cessation, that you may have no unnecessary cause to curse
your correspondence with,

Dear Dick, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE BATH, May 5.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I wrote you at great length by the post, the twenty-sixth of last month,
to which I refer you for an account of our proceedings at Bath; and I
expect your answer with impatience. But, having this opportunity of a
private hand, I send you two dozen of Bath rings; six of the best of
which I desire you will keep for yourself, and distribute the rest among
the young ladies, our common friends, as you shall think proper--I don't
know how you will approve of the mottoes; some of them are not much
to my own liking; but I was obliged to take such as I could find ready
manufactured--I am vexed, that neither you nor I have received any
further information of a certain person--Sure it cannot be wilful
neglect!--O my dear Willis! I begin to be visited by strange fancies,
and to have some melancholy doubts; which, however, it would be
ungenerous to harbour without further inquiry--My uncle, who has made
me a present of a very fine set of garnets, talks of treating us with a
jaunt to London; which, you may imagine, will be highly agreeable; but
I like Bath so well, that I hope he won't think of leaving it till the
season is quite over; and yet, betwixt friends, something has happened
to my aunt, which will probably shorten our stay in this place.

Yesterday, in the forenoon, she went by herself to a breakfasting in one
of the rooms; and, in half an hour, returned in great agitation, having
Chowder along with her in the chair. I believe some accident must have
happened to that unlucky animal, which is the great source of all her
troubles. Dear Letty! what a pity it is, that a woman of her years
and discretion, should place her affection upon such an ugly,
ill-conditioned cur, that snarls and snaps at every body. I asked John
Thomas, the footman who attended her, what was the matter? and he did
nothing but grin. A famous dog-doctor was sent for, and undertook to
cure the patient, provided he might carry him home to his own house; but
his mistress would not part with him out of her own sight--She ordered
the cook to warm cloths, which she applied to his bowels, with her own
hand. She gave up all thoughts of going to the ball in the evening; and
when Sir Ulic came to drink tea, refused to be seen; so that he went
away to look for another partner. My brother Jery whistles and dances.
My uncle sometimes shrugs up his shoulders, and sometimes bursts out
a-laughing. My aunt sobs and scolds by turns; and her woman, Win.
Jenkins, stares and wonders with a foolish face of curiosity; and, for
my part, I am as curious as she, but ashamed to ask questions.

Perhaps time will discover the mystery; for if it was any thing that
happened in the Rooms, it cannot be long concealed--All I know is, that
last night at supper, miss Bramble spoke very disdainfully of Sir Ulic
Mackilligut, and asked her brother if he intended to keep us sweltering
all the summer at Bath? 'No, sister Tabitha (said he, with an arch
smile) we shall retreat before the Dog-days begin; though I make no
doubt, that with a little temperance and discretion, our constitutions
might be kept cool enough all the year, even at Bath.' As I don't know
the meaning of this insinuation, I won't pretend to make any remarks
upon it at present: hereafter, perhaps, I may be able to explain it more
to your satisfaction--In the mean time, I beg you will be punctual in
your correspondence, and continue to love your ever faithful

LYDIA MELFORD BATH, May 6.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

So then Mrs Blackerby's affair has proved a false alarm, and I have
saved my money? I wish, however, her declaration had not been so
premature; for though my being thought capable of making her a mother,
might have given me some credit, the reputation of an intrigue with such
a cracked pitcher does me no honour at all In my last I told you I had
hopes of seeing Quin, in his hours of elevation at the tavern which is
the temple of mirth and good fellowship; where he, as priest of Comus,
utters the inspirations of wit and humour--I have had that satisfaction.
I have dined with his club at the Three Tuns, and had the honour to sit
him out. At half an hour past eight in the evening, he was carried
home with six good bottles of claret under his belt; and it being then
Friday, he gave orders that he should not be disturbed till Sunday at
noon--You must not imagine that this dose had any other effect upon his
conversation, but that of making it more extravagantly entertaining--He
had lost the use of his limbs, indeed, several hours before we parted,
but he retained all his other faculties in perfection; and as he gave
vent to every whimsical idea as it rose, I was really astonished at the
brilliancy of his thoughts, and the force of his expression. Quin is a
real voluptuary in the articles of eating and drinking; and so confirmed
an epicure, in the common acceptation of the term, that he cannot put up
with ordinary fare. This is a point of such importance with him, that he
always takes upon himself the charge of catering; and a man admitted
to his mess, is always sure of eating delicate victuals, and drinking
excellent wine--He owns himself addicted to the delights of the stomach,
and often jokes upon his own sensuality; but there is nothing selfish in
this appetite--He finds that good chear unites good company, exhilerates
the spirits, opens the heart, banishes all restraint from conversation,
and promotes the happiest purposes of social life. But Mr James Quin
is not a subject to be discussed in the compass of one letter; I shall
therefore, at present, leave him to his repose, and call another of a
very different complexion.

You desire to have further acquaintance with the person of our aunt,
and promise yourself much entertainment from her connexion with Sir Ulic
Mackilligut: but in this hope you are baulked already; that connexion is
dissolved. The Irish baronet is an old hound, that, finding her carrion,
has quitted the scent--I have already told you, that Mrs Tabitha Bramble
is a maiden of forty-five. In her person, she is tall, raw-boned,
aukward, flat-chested, and stooping; her complexion is sallow and
freckled; her eyes are not grey, but greenish, like those of a cat, and
generally inflamed; her hair is of a sandy, or rather dusty hue; her
forehead low; her nose long, sharp, and, towards the extremity, always
red in cool weather; her lips skinny, her mouth extensive, her teeth
straggling and loose, of various colours and conformation; and her long
neck shrivelled into a thousand wrinkles--In her temper, she is proud,
stiff, vain, imperious, prying, malicious, greedy, and uncharitable. In
all likelihood, her natural austerity has been soured by disappointment
in love; for her long celibacy is by no means owing to her dislike of
matrimony: on the contrary, she has left no stone unturned to avoid the
reproachful epithet of old maid.

Before I was born, she had gone such lengths in the way of flirting
with a recruiting officer, that her reputation was a little singed. She
afterwards made advances to the curate of the parish, who dropped some
distant hints about the next presentation to the living, which was in
her brother's gift; but finding that was already promised to another, he
flew off at a tangent; and Mrs Tabby, in revenge, found means to deprive
him of his cure. Her next lover was lieutenant of a man of war, a
relation of the family, who did not understand the refinements of the
passion, and expressed no aversion to grapple with cousin Tabby in the
way of marriage; but before matters could be properly adjusted, he went
out on a cruise, and was killed in an engagement with a French frigate.
Our aunt, though baffled so often, did not yet despair. She layed all
her snares for Dr Lewis, who is the fidus Achates of my uncle. She even
fell sick upon the occasion, and prevailed with Matt to interpose in her
behalf with his friend; but the Doctor, being a shy cock, would not be
caught with chaff, and flatly rejected the proposal: so that Mrs Tabitha
was content to exert her patience once more, after having endeavoured
in vain to effect a rupture betwixt the two friends; and now she thinks
proper to be very civil to Lewis, who is become necessary to her in the
way of his profession.

These, however, are not the only efforts she has made towards a nearer
conjunction with our sex. Her fortune was originally no more than a
thousand pounds; but she gained an accession of five hundred by the
death of a sister, and the lieutenant left her three hundred in his
will. These sums she has more than doubled, by living free of all
expence, in her brother's house; and dealing in cheese and Welsh
flannel, the produce of his flocks and dairy. At present her capital is
increased to about four thousand pounds; and her avarice seems to grow
every day more and more rapacious: but even this is not so intolerable
as the perverseness of her nature, which keeps the whole family
in disquiet and uproar. She is one of those geniuses who find
some diabolical enjoyment in being dreaded and detested by their
fellow-creatures.

I once told my uncle, I was surprised that a man of his disposition
could bear such a domestic plague, when it could be so easily removed.
The remark made him sore, because it seemed to tax him with want of
resolution--Wrinkling up his nose, and drawing down his eye-brows, 'A
young fellow (said he) when he first thrusts his snout into the world,
is apt to be surprised at many things which a man of experience knows
to be ordinary and unavoidable--This precious aunt of yours is become
insensibly a part of my constitution--Damn her! She's a noli me tangere
in my flesh, which I cannot bear to be touched or tampered with.' I made
no reply; but shifted the conversation. He really has an affection for
this original; which maintains its ground in defiance of common sense,
and in despite of that contempt which he must certainly feel for her
character and understanding. Nay, I am convinced, that she has likewise
a most virulent attachment to his person; though her love never shews
itself but in the shape of discontent; and she persists in tormenting
him out of pure tenderness--The only object within doors upon which she
bestows any marks of affection, in the usual stile, is her dog Chowder;
a filthy cur from Newfoundland, which she had in a present from the wife
of a skipper in Swansey. One would imagine she had distinguished this
beast with her favour on account of his ugliness and ill-nature, if it
was not, indeed, an instinctive sympathy, between his disposition and
her own. Certain it is, she caresses him without ceasing; and even
harasses the family in the service of this cursed animal, which, indeed,
has proved the proximate cause of her breach with Sir Ulic Mackilligut.

You must know, she yesterday wanted to steal a march of poor Liddy, and
went to breakfast in the Room without any other companion than her dog,
in expectation of meeting with the Baronet, who had agreed to dance with
her in the evening--Chowder no sooner made his appearance in the Room,
than the Master of the Ceremonies, incensed at his presumption, ran
up to drive him away, and threatened him with his foot; but the other
seemed to despise his authority, and displaying a formidable case of
long, white, sharp teeth, kept the puny monarch at bay--While he stood
under some trepidation, fronting his antagonist, and bawling to the
waiter, Sir Ulic Mackilligut came to his assistance; and seeming
ignorant of the connexion between this intruder and his mistress, gave
the former such a kick in the jaws, as sent him howling to the door--Mrs
Tabitha, incensed at this outrage, ran after him, squalling in a tone
equally disagreeable; while the Baronet followed her on one side,
making apologies for his mistake; and Derrick on the other, making
remonstrances upon the rules and regulations of the place.

Far from being satisfied with the Knight's excuses, she said she was
sure he was no gentleman; and when the Master of the Ceremonies offered
to hand her into the chair, she rapped him over the knuckles with her
fan. My uncle's footman being still at the door, she and Chowder got
into the same vehicle, and were carried off amidst the jokes of the
chairmen and other populace--I had been riding out on Clerkendown, and
happened to enter just as the fracas was over--The Baronet, coming up to
me with an affected air of chagrin, recounted the adventure; at which
I laughed heartily, and then his countenance cleared up. 'My dear soul
(said he) when I saw a sort of a wild baist, snarling with open mouth
at the Master of the Ceremonies, like the red cow going to devour Tom
Thumb, I could do no less than go to the assistance of the little man;
but I never dreamt the baist was one of Mrs Bramble's attendants--O! if
I had, he might have made his breakfast upon Derrick and welcome--But
you know, my dear friend, how natural it is for us Irishmen to blunder,
and to take the wrong sow by the ear--However, I will confess judgment,
and cry her mercy; and it is to be hoped, a penitent sinner may be
forgiven.' I told him, that as the offence was not voluntary of his
side, it was to be hoped he would not find her implacable.

But, in truth, all this concern was dissembled. In his approaches of
gallantry to Mrs Tabitha, he had been misled by a mistake of at least
six thousand pounds, in the calculation of her fortune; and in this
particular he was just undeceived. He, therefore, seized the first
opportunity of incurring her displeasure decently, in such a manner as
would certainly annihilate the correspondence; and he could not have
taken a more effectual method, than that of beating her dog. When he
presented himself at our door, to pay his respects to the offended fair,
he was refused admittance, and given to understand that he should never
find her at home for the future. She was not so inaccessible to Derrick,
who came to demand satisfaction for the insult she had offered to him,
even in the verge of his own court. She knew it was convenient to be
well with the Master of the Ceremonies, while she continued to frequent
the Rooms; and, having heard he was a poet, began to be afraid of making
her appearance in a ballad or lampoon.--She therefore made excuses
for what she had done, imputing it to the flutter of her spirits; and
subscribed handsomely for his poems: so that he was perfectly appeased,
and overwhelmed her with a profusion of compliment. He even solicited a
reconciliation with Chowder; which, however, the latter declined; and he
declared, that if he could find a precedent in the annals of the Bath,
which he would carefully examine for that purpose, her favourite should
be admitted to the next public breakfasting--But, I, believe, she will
not expose herself or him to the risque of a second disgrace--Who will
supply the place of Mackilligut in her affections, I cannot foresee;
but nothing in the shape of man can come amiss. Though she is a violent
church-woman, of the most intolerant zeal, I believe in my conscience
she would have no objection, at present, to treat on the score of
matrimony with an Anabaptist, Quaker, or Jew; and even ratify the treaty
at the expense of her own conversion. But, perhaps, I think too hardly
of this kinswoman; who, I must own, is very little beholden to the good
opinion of

Yours, J. MELFORD BATH, May 6.




To Dr LEWIS.

You ask me, why I don't take the air a-horseback, during this fine
weather?--In which of the avenues of this paradise would you have me
take that exercise? Shall I commit myself to the high-roads of London
or Bristol, to be stifled with dust, or pressed to death in the midst
of post-chaises, flying-machines, waggons, and coal-horses; besides
the troops of fine gentlemen that take to the highway, to shew their
horsemanship; and the coaches of fine ladies, who go thither to shew
their equipages? Shall I attempt the Downs, and fatigue myself to death
in climbing up an eternal ascent, without any hopes of reaching the
summit? Know then, I have made divers desperate leaps at those upper
regions; but always fell backward into this vapour-pit, exhausted
and dispirited by those ineffectual efforts; and here we poor
valetudinarians pant and struggle, like so many Chinese gudgeons,
gasping in the bottom of a punch-bowl. By Heaven it is a kind of
enchantment! If I do not speedily break the spell, and escape, I may
chance to give up the ghost in this nauseous stew of corruption--It was
but two nights ago, that I had like to have made my public exit, at a
minute's warning. One of my greatest weaknesses is that of suffering
myself to be over-ruled by the opinion of people, whose judgment I
despise--I own, with shame and confusion of face, that importunity
of any kind I cannot resist. This want of courage and constancy is an
original flaw in my nature, which you must have often observed with
compassion, if not with contempt. I am afraid some of our boasted
virtues maybe traced up to this defect.

Without further preamble, I was persuaded to go to a ball, on purpose to
see Liddy dance a minuet with a young petulant jackanapes, the only
son of a wealthy undertaker from London, whose mother lodges in our
neighbourhood, and has contracted an acquaintance with Tabby. I sat a
couple of long hours, half stifled, in the midst of a noisome crowd;
and could not help wondering that so many hundreds of those that rank as
rational creatures, could find entertainment in seeing a succession of
insipid animals, describing the same dull figure for a whole evening, on
an area, not much bigger than a taylor's shop-board. If there had been
any beauty, grace, activity, magnificent dress, or variety of any kind
howsoever absurd, to engage the attention, and amuse the fancy, I should
not have been surprised; but there was no such object: it was a tiresome
repetition of the same languid, frivolous scene, performed by actors
that seemed to sleep in all their motions. The continual swimming of
these phantoms before my eyes, gave me a swimming of the head; which was
also affected by the fouled air, circulating through such a number of
rotten human bellows. I therefore retreated towards the door, and stood
in the passage to the next room, talking to my friend Quin; when an end
being put to the minuets, the benches were removed to make way for the
country-dances; and the multitude rising at once, the whole atmosphere
was put in commotion. Then, all of a sudden, came rushing upon me an
Egyptian gale, so impregnated with pestilential vapours, that my nerves
were overpowered, and I dropt senseless upon the floor.

You may easily conceive what a clamour and confusion this accident must
have produced, in such an assembly--I soon recovered, however, and found
myself in an easy chair, supported by my own people--Sister Tabby, in
her great tenderness, had put me to the torture, squeezing my hand under
her arm, and stuffing my nose with spirit of hartshorn, till the whole
inside was excoriated. I no sooner got home, than I sent for Doctor
Ch--, who assured me I needed not be alarmed, for my swooning was
entirely occasioned by an accidental impression of fetid effluvia upon
nerves of uncommon sensibility. I know not how other people's nerves
are constructed; but one would imagine they must be made of very coarse
materials, to stand the shock of such a torrid assault. It was, indeed,
a compound of villainous smells, in which the most violent stinks,
and the most powerful perfumes, contended for the mastery. Imagine to
yourself a high exalted essence of mingled odours, arising from putrid
gums, imposthumated lungs, sour flatulencies, rank armpits, sweating
feet, running sores and issues, plasters, ointments, and embrocations,
hungary-water, spirit of lavender, assafoetida drops, musk, hartshorn,
and sal volatile; besides a thousand frowzy steams, which I could not
analyse. Such, O Dick! is the fragrant aether we breathe in the polite
assemblies of Bath--Such is the atmosphere I have exchanged for the
pure, elastic, animating air of the Welsh mountains--O Rus, quando te
aspiciam!---I wonder what the devil possessed me--

But few words are best: I have taken my resolution--You may well suppose
I don't intend to entertain the company with a second exhibition--I have
promised, in an evil hour, to proceed to London, and that promise shall
be performed, but my stay in the metropolis shall be brief. I have, for
the benefit of my health, projected an expedition to the North, which, I
hope, will afford some agreeable pastime. I have never travelled farther
that way than Scarborough; and, I think, it is a reproach upon me, as a
British freeholder, to have lived so long without making an excursion to
the other side of the Tweed. Besides, I have some relations settled in
Yorkshire, to whom it may not be improper to introduce my nephew and
his sister--At present, I have nothing to add, but that Tabby is happily
disentangled from the Irish Baronet; and that I will not fail to make
you acquainted, from time to time, with the sequel of our adventures: a
mark of consideration, which, perhaps, you would willingly dispense with
in

Your humble servant, M. BRAMBLE BATH, May 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

A few days ago we were terribly alarmed by my uncle's fainting at the
ball--He has been ever since cursing his own folly, for going thither at
the request of an impertinent woman. He declares, he will sooner visit
a house infected with the plague, than trust himself in such a nauseous
spital for the future, for he swears the accident was occasioned by the
stench of the crowd; and that he would never desire a stronger proof of
our being made of very gross materials, than our having withstood the
annoyance, by which he was so much discomposed. For my part, I am very
thankful for the coarseness of my organs, being in no danger of
ever falling a sacrifice to the delicacy of my nose. Mr Bramble is
extravagantly delicate in all his sensations, both of soul and body. I
was informed by Dr Lewis, that he once fought a duel with an officer
of the horseguards, for turning aside to the Park-wall, on a necessary
occasion, when he was passing with a lady under his protection. His
blood rises at every instance of insolence and cruelty, even where he
himself is no way concerned; and ingratitude makes his teeth chatter. On
the other hand, the recital of a generous, humane, or grateful action,
never fails to draw from him tears of approbation, which he is often
greatly distressed to conceal.

Yesterday, one Paunceford gave tea, on particular invitation--This man,
after having been long buffetted by adversity, went abroad; and Fortune,
resolved to make him amends for her former coyness, set him all at once
up to the very ears in affluence. He has now emerged from obscurity,
and blazes out in all the tinsel of the times. I don't find that he is
charged with any practices that the law deems dishonest, or that his
wealth has made him arrogant and inaccessible; on the contrary, he
takes great pains to appear affable and gracious. But, they say, he
is remarkable for shrinking from his former friendships, which were
generally too plain and home-spun to appear amidst his present brilliant
connexions; and that he seems uneasy at sight of some old benefactors,
whom a man of honour would take pleasure to acknowledge--Be that as it
may, he had so effectually engaged the company at Bath, that when I went
with my uncle to the coffeehouse in the evening, there was not a soul
in the room but one person, seemingly in years, who sat by the fire,
reading one of the papers. Mr Bramble, taking his station close by
him, 'There is such a crowd and confusion of chairs in the passage to
Simpson's (said he) that we could hardly get along--I wish those
minions of fortune would fall upon more laudable ways of spending their
money.--I suppose, Sir, you like this kind of entertainment as little as
I do?' 'I cannot say I have any great relish for such entertainments,'
answered the other, without taking his eyes off the paper--'Mr Serle
(resumed my uncle) I beg pardon for interrupting you; but I can't resist
the curiosity I have to know if you received a card on this occasion?'

The man seemed surprised at this address, and made some pause, as
doubtful what answer he should make. 'I know my curiosity is impertinent
(added my uncle) but I have a particular reason for asking the favour.'
'If that be the case (replied Mr Serle) I shall gratify you without
hesitation, by owning that I have had no card. But, give me leave,
Sir, to ask in my turn, what reason you think I have to expect such an
invitation from the gentleman who gives tea?' 'I have my own reasons
(cried Mr Bramble, with some emotion) and am convinced, more than ever,
that this Paunceford is a contemptible fellow.' 'Sir (said the other,
laying down the paper) I have not the honour to know you; but your
discourse is a little mysterious, and seems to require some explanation.
The person you are pleased to treat so cavalierly, is a gentleman of
some consequence in the community; and, for aught you know, I may also
have my particular reasons for defending his character'--'If I was not
convinced of the contrary (observed the other) I should not have gone so
far'--'Let me tell you, Sir (said the stranger, raising his voice) you
have gone too far, in hazarding such reflections'.

Here he was interrupted by my uncle; who asked peevishly if he was
Don Quixote enough, at this time of day, to throw down his gauntlet as
champion for a man who had treated him with such ungrateful neglect.
'For my part (added he) I shall never quarrel with you again upon this
subject; and what I have said now, has been suggested as much by my
regard for you, as by my contempt of him'--Mr Serle, then pulling off
his spectacles, eyed uncle very earnestly, saying, in a mitigated
tone, 'Surely I am much obliged--Ah, Mr Bramble! I now recollect your
features, though I have not seen you these many years.' 'We might
have been less strangers to one another (answered the squire) if
our correspondence had not been interrupted, in consequence of a
misunderstanding, occasioned by this very--, but no matter--Mr Serle, I
esteem your character; and my friendship, such as it is, you may freely
command.' 'The offer is too agreeable to be declined (said he); I
embrace it very cordially; and, as the first fruits of it, request that
you will change this subject, which, with me, is a matter of peculiar
delicacy.'

My uncle owned he was in the right, and the discourse took a more
general turn. Mr Serle passed the evening with us at our lodgings; and
appeared to be intelligent, and even entertaining; but his disposition
was rather of a melancholy hue. My uncle says he is a man of uncommon
parts, and unquestioned probity: that his fortune, which was originally
small, has been greatly hurt by a romantic spirit of generosity, which
he has often displayed, even at the expence of his discretion, in favour
of worthless individuals--That he had rescued Paunceford from the lowest
distress, when he was bankrupt, both in means and reputation--That
he had espoused his interests with a degree of enthusiasm, broke with
several friends, and even drawn his sword against my uncle, who had
particular reasons for questioning the moral character of the said
Paunceford: that, without Serle's countenance and assistance, the other
never could have embraced the opportunity, which has raised him to this
pinnacle of wealth: that Paunceford, in the first transports of his
success, had written, from abroad, letters to different correspondents,
owning his obligations to Mr Serle, in the warmest terms of
acknowledgement, and declared he considered himself only as a factor
for the occasions of his best friend: that, without doubt, he had made
declarations of the same nature to his benefactor himself, though this
last was always silent and reserved on the subject; but for some years,
those tropes and figures of rhetoric had been disused; that, upon his
return to England, he had been lavish in his caresses to Mr Serle,
invited him to his house, and pressed him to make it his own: that he
had overwhelmed him with general professions, and affected to express
the warmest regard for him, in company of their common acquaintance; so
that every body believed his gratitude was liberal as his fortune; and
some went so far as to congratulate Mr Serle on both.

All this time Paunceford carefully and artfully avoided particular
discussions with his old patron, who had too much spirit to drop
the most distant hint of balancing the account of obligation: that,
nevertheless, a man of his feelings could not but resent this shocking
return for all his kindness: and, therefore, he withdrew himself from
the connexion, without coming to the least explanation or speaking
a syllable on the subject to any living soul; so that now their
correspondence is reduced to a slight salute with the hat, when they
chance to meet in any public place; an accident that rarely happens, for
their walks lie different ways. Mr Paunceford lives in a palace, feeds
upon dainties, is arrayed in sumptuous apparel, appears in all the pomp
of equipage, and passes his time among the nobles of the land. Serle
lodges in Stall-street, up two pair of stairs backwards, walks a-foot
in a Bath-rug, eats for twelve shillings a-week, and drinks water
as preservative against the gout and gravel--Mark the vicissitude.
Paunceford once resided in a garret; where he subsisted upon
sheep's-trotters and cow-heel, from which commons he was translated to
the table of Serle, that ever abounded with good-chear; until want of
economy and retention reduced him to a slender annuity in his decline of
years, that scarce affords the bare necessaries of life.--Paunceford,
however, does him the honour to speak of him still, with uncommon
regard; and to declare what pleasure it would give him to contribute in
any shape to his convenience: 'But you know (he never fails to add) he's
a shy kind of a man--And then such a perfect philosopher, that he looks
upon all superfluities with the most sovereign contempt. Having given
you this sketch of squire Paunceford, I need not make any comment on his
character, but leave it at the mercy of your own reflection; from which
I dare say, it will meet with as little quarter as it has found with

Yours always, J. MELFORD BATH, May 10.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY,

We are all upon the ving--Hey for London, girl!--Fecks! we have been
long enough here; for we're all turned tipsy turvy--Mistress has
excarded Sir Ulic for kicking of Chowder; and I have sent O Frizzle
away, with a flea in his ear--I've shewn him how little I minded his
tinsy and his long tail--A fellor, who would think for to go, for to
offer, to take up with a dirty trollop under my nose--I ketched him in
the very feet, coming out of the housemaids garret.--But I have gi'en
the dirty slut a siserary. O Molly! the sarvants at Bath are devils
in garnet. They lite the candle at both ends--Here's nothing but
ginketting, and wasting, and thieving and tricking, and trigging; and
then they are never content--They won't suffer the 'squire and mistress
to stay any longer; because they have been already above three weeks in
the house; and they look for a couple of ginneys a-piece at our going
away; and this is a parquisite they expect every month in the season;
being as how no family has a right to stay longer than four weeks in
the same lodgings; and so the cuck swears she will pin the dish-clout to
mistress's tail; and the house-maid vows, she'll put cowitch in master's
bed, if so be he don't discamp without furder ado--I don't blame
them for making the most of their market, in the way of vails and
parquisites; and I defy the devil to say I am a tail-carrier, or ever
brought a poor sarvant into trouble--But then they oft to have some
conscience, in vronging those that be sarvants like themselves--For you
must no, Molly, I missed three-quarters of blond lace, and a remnant
of muslin, and my silver thimble; which was the gift of true love;
they were all in my workbasket, that I left upon the table in the
sarvants-hall, when mistresses bell rung; but if they had been under
lock and kay, 'twould have been all the same; for there are double keys
to all the locks in Bath; and they say as how the very teeth an't
safe in your head, if you sleep with your mouth open--And so says I to
myself, them things could not go without hands; and so I'll watch
their waters: and so I did with a vitness; for then it was I found Bett
consarned with O Frizzle. And as the cuck had thrown her slush at me,
because I had taken part with Chowder, when he fit, with the turnspit,
I resolved to make a clear kitchen, and throw some of her fat into the
fire. I ketched the chare-woman going out with her load in the morning,
before she thought I was up, and brought her to mistress with her whole
cargo--Marry, what do'st think she had got in the name of God? Her
buckets were foaming full of our best bear, and her lap was stuffed with
a cold tongue, part of a buttock of beef, half a turkey, and a swinging
lump of butter, and the matter of ten mould kandles, that had scarce
ever been lit. The cuck brazened it out, and said it was her rite to
rummage the pantry; and she was ready for to go before the mare: that
he had been her potticary many years, and would never think of hurting a
poor sarvant, for giving away the scraps of the kitchen. I went another
way to work with madam Betty, because she had been saucy, and called me
skandelus names; and said O Frizzle couldn't abide me, and twenty other
odorous falsehoods. I got a varrant from the mare, and her box being
sarched by the constable, my things came out sure enuff; besides a full
pound of vax candles, and a nite-cap of mistress, that I could sware to
on my cruperal oaf--O! then madam Mopstick came upon her merry
bones; and as the squire wouldn't hare of a pursecution, she scaped a
skewering: but the longest day she has to live, she'll remember your

Humble sarvant, W. JENKINS BATH, May 15.

If the hind should come again, before we be gone, pray send me the shift
and apron, with the vite gallow manky shoes; which you'll find in my
pillowber--Sarvice to Saul--




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

You are in the right, dear Phillips; I don't expect regular answers
to every letter--I know a college-life is too circumscribed to afford
materials for such quick returns of communication. For my part, I am
continually shifting the scene, and surrounded with new objects; some
of which are striking enough. I shall therefore conclude my journal for
your amusement; and, though, in all appearance, it will not treat of
very important or interesting particulars, it may prove, perhaps, not
altogether uninstructive and unentertaining.

The music and entertainments of Bath are over for this season; and
all our gay birds of passage have taken their flight to Bristolwell,
Tunbridge, Brighthelmstone, Scarborough, Harrowgate, &c. Not a soul is
seen in this place, but a few broken-winded parsons, waddling like so
many crows along the North Parade. There is always a great shew of
the clergy at Bath: none of your thin, puny, yellow, hectic figures,
exhausted with abstinence, and hardy study, labouring under the morbi
eruditorum, but great overgrown dignitaries and rectors, with rubicund
noses and gouty ancles, or broad bloated faces, dragging along great
swag bellies; the emblems of sloth and indigestion.

Now we are upon the subject of parsons, I must tell you a ludicrous
adventure, which was achieved the other day by Tom Eastgate, whom you
may remember on the foundation of Queen's. He had been very assiduous
to pin himself upon George Prankley, who was a gentleman-commoner of
Christchurch, knowing the said Prankley was heir to a considerable
estate, and would have the advowson of a good living, the incumbent of
which was very old and infirm. He studied his passions, and flattered
them so effectually, as to become his companion and counsellor; and,
at last, obtained of him a promise of the presentation, when the living
should fall. Prankley, on his uncle's death, quitted Oxford, and made
his first appearance in the fashionable world at London; from whence
he came lately to Bath, where he has been exhibiting himself among the
bucks and gamesters of the place. Eastgate followed him hither; but he
should not have quitted him for a moment, at his first emerging into
life. He ought to have known he was a fantastic, foolish, fickle
fellow, who would forget his college-attachments the moment they ceased
appealing to his senses. Tom met with a cold reception from his old
friend; and was, moreover, informed, that he had promised the living to
another man, who had a vote in the county, where he proposed to offer
himself a candidate at the next general election. He now remembered
nothing of Eastgate, but the freedoms he had used to take with him,
while Tom had quietly stood his butt, with an eye to the benefice; and
those freedoms he began to repeat in common-place sarcasms on his person
and his cloth, which he uttered in the public coffeehouse, for the
entertainment of the company. But he was egregiously mistaken in
giving his own wit credit for that tameness of Eastgate, which had been
entirely owing to prudential considerations. These being now removed,
he retorted his repartee with interest, and found no great difficulty in
turning the laugh upon the aggressor; who, losing his temper, called him
names, and asked, If he knew whom he talked to? After much altercation,
Prankley, shaking his cane, bid him hold his tongue, otherwise he could
dust his cassock for him. 'I have no pretensions to such a valet (said
Tom) but if you should do me that office, and overheat yourself, I have
here a good oaken towel at your service.'

Prankley was equally incensed and confounded at this reply. After a
moment's pause, he took him aside towards die window; and, pointing to
the clump of firs, on Clerken-down, asked in a whisper, if he had
spirit enough to meet him there, with a case of pistols, at six o'clock
tomorrow morning. Eastgate answered in the affirmative; and, with a
steady countenance, assured him, he would not fail to give him the
rendezvous at the hour he mentioned. So saying, he retired; and the
challenger stayed some time in manifest agitation. In the morning,
Eastgate, who knew his man, and had taken his resolution, went to
Prankley's lodgings, and roused him by five o'clock.

The squire, in all probability, cursed his punctuality in his heart, but
he affected to talk big; and having prepared his artillery overnight,
they crossed the water at the end of the South Parade. In their progress
up the hill, Prankley often eyed the parson, in hopes of perceiving
some reluctance in his countenance; but as no such marks appeared, he
attempted to intimidate him by word of mouth. 'If these flints do their
office (said he) I'll do thy business in a few minutes.' 'I desire you
will do your best (replied the other); for my part, I come not here to
trifle. Our lives are in the hands of God; and one of us already totters
on the brink of eternity' This remark seemed to make some impression
upon the squire, who changed countenance, and with a faultering accent
observed, 'That it ill became a clergyman to be concerned in quarrels
and bloodshed'--'Your insolence to me (said Eastgate) I should have bore
with patience, had not you cast the most infamous reflections upon my
order, the honour of which I think myself in duty bound to maintain,
even at the expence of my heart's blood; and surely it can be no crime
to put out of the world a profligate wretch, without any sense of
principle, morality, or religion'--'Thou may'st take away my life (cried
Prankley, in great perturbation) but don't go to murder my character.
What! has't got no conscience?' 'My conscience is perfectly quiet
(replied the other); and now, Sir, we are upon the spot--Take your
ground as near as you please; prime your pistol; and the Lord, of his
infinite mercy, have compassion upon your miserable soul!'

This ejaculation he pronounced in a loud solemn tone, with his hat off,
and his eyes lifted up; then drawing a large horse-pistol, he presented,
and put himself in a posture of action. Prankley took his distance, and
endeavoured to prime, but his hand shook with such violence, that he
found this operation impracticable--His antagonist, seeing how it was
with him, offered his assistance, and advanced for that purpose; when
the poor squire, exceedingly alarmed at what he had heard and seen,
desired the action might be deferred till next day, as he had not
settled his affairs. 'I ha'n't made my will (said he); my sisters are
not provided for; and I just now recollect an old promise, which my
conscience tells me I ought to perform--I'll first convince thee,
that I'm not a wretch without principle, and then thou shalt have an
opportunity to take my life, which thou seem'st to thirst after so
eagerly.'

Eastgate understood the hint; and told him, that one day should break no
squares: adding, 'God forbid that I should be the means of hindering you
from acting the part of an honest man, and a dutiful brother'--By virtue
of this cessation, they returned peaceably together. Prankley forthwith
made out the presentation of the living, and delivered it to Eastgate,
telling him at the same time, he had now settled his affairs, and was
ready to attend him to the Fir-grove; but Tom declared he could not
think of lifting his hand against the life of so great a benefactor--He
did more: when they next met at the coffeehouse, he asked pardon of Mr
Prankley, if in his passion he had said any thing to give him offence;
and the squire was so gracious as to forgive him with a cordial shake of
the hand, declaring, that he did not like to be at variance with an old
college companion--Next day, however, he left Bath abruptly; and then
Eastgate told me all these particulars, not a little pleased with the
effects of his own sagacity, by which he has secured a living worth
160l. per annum.

Of my uncle, I have nothing at present to say; but that we set out
tomorrow for London en famille. He and the ladies, with the maid and
Chowder in a coach; I and the man-servant a-horseback. The particulars
of our journey you shall have in my next, provided no accident happens
to prevent,

Yours ever, J. MELFORD BATH May 17.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

I shall to-morrow set out for London, where I have bespoke lodgings, at
Mrs Norton's in Golden-square. Although I am no admirer of Bath, I shall
leave it with regret; because I must part with some old friends,
whom, in all probability, I shall never see again. In the course of
coffeehouse conversation, I had often heard very extraordinary encomiums
passed on the performances of Mr T--, a gentleman residing in this
place, who paints landscapes for his amusement. As I have no great
confidence in the taste and judgment of coffeehouse connoisseurs, and
never received much pleasure from this branch of the art, those general
praises made no impression at all on my curiosity; but, at the request
of a particular friend, I went yesterday to see the pieces, which had
been so warmly commended--I must own I am no judge of painting, though
very fond of pictures. I don't imagine that my senses would play me so
false, as to betray me into admiration of any thing that was very bad;
but, true it is, I have often overlooked capital beauties, in pieces of
extraordinary merit.--If I am not totally devoid of taste, however, this
young gentleman of Bath is the best landscape-painter now living: I was
struck with his performances in such a manner, as I had never been
by painting before. His trees not only have a richness of foliage
and warmth of colouring, which delights the view; but also a certain
magnificence in the disposition and spirit in the expression, which
I cannot describe. His management of the chiaro oscuro, or light and
shadow, especially gleams of sunshine, is altogether wonderful, both in
the contrivance and execution; and he is so happy in his perspective,
and marking his distances at sea, by a progressive series of ships,
vessels, capes, and promontories, that I could not help thinking, I had
a distant view of thirty leagues upon the back-ground of the picture. If
there is any taste for ingenuity left in a degenerate age, fast sinking
into barbarism, this artist, I apprehend, will make a capital figure, as
soon as his works are known.

Two days ago, I was favoured with a visit by Mr Fitzowen; who, with
great formality, solicited my vote and interest at the general election.
I ought not to have been shocked at the confidence of this man; though
it was remarkable, considering what had passed between him and me on a
former occasion--These visits are mere matter of form, which a candidate
makes to every elector; even to those who, he knows, are engaged in
the interest of his competitor, lest he should expose himself to the
imputation of pride, at a time when it is expected he should appear
humble. Indeed, I know nothing so abject as the behaviour of a
man canvassing for a seat in parliament--This mean prostration (to
borough-electors, especially) has, I imagine, contributed in a great
measure to raise that spirit of insolence among the vulgar; which, like
the devil, will be found very difficult to lay. Be that as it may, I was
in some confusion at the effrontery of Fitzowen; but I soon recollected
myself, and told him, I had not yet determined for whom I should give my
vote, nor whether I should give it for any.--The truth is, I look upon
both candidates in the same light; and should think myself a traitor to
the constitution of my country, if I voted for either. If every elector
would bring the same consideration home to his conscience, we should not
have such reason to exclaim against the venality of p--ts. But we all
are a pack of venal and corrupted rascals; so lost to all sense of
honesty, and all tenderness of character, that, in a little time, I am
fully persuaded, nothing will be infamous but virtue and public-spirit.

G. H--, who is really an enthusiast in patriotism, and represented the
capital in several successive parliaments, declared to me t'other day,
with the tears in his eyes, that he had lived above thirty years in the
city of London, and dealt in the way of commerce with all the citizens
of note in their turns; but that, as he should answer to God, he had
never, in the whole course of his life, found above three or four
whom he could call thoroughly honest: a declaration which was rather
mortifying than surprising to me; who have found so few men of worth
in the course of my acquaintance, that they serve only as exceptions;
which, in the grammarian's phrase, confirm and prove a general canon--I
know you will say, G. H-- saw imperfectly through the mist of prejudice,
and I am rankled by the spleen--Perhaps, you are partly in the right;
for I have perceived that my opinion of mankind, like mercury in the
thermometer, rises and falls according to the variations of the weather.

Pray settle accompts with Barnes; take what money of mine is in his
hands, and give him acquittance. If you think Davis has stock or credit
enough to do justice to the farm, give him a discharge for the rent that
is due, this will animate his industry; for I know that nothing is so
discouraging to a farmer as the thoughts of being in arrears with his
landlord. He becomes dispirited, and neglects his labour; and so the
farm goes to wreck. Tabby has been clamouring for some days about the
lamb's skin, which Williams, the hind, begged of me, when he was last at
Bath. Prithee take it back, paying the fellow the full value of it, that
I may have some peace in my own house; and let him keep his own counsel,
if he means to keep his place--O! I shall never presume to despise or
censure any poor man, for suffering himself to be henpecked; conscious
how I myself am obliged to truckle to a domestic demon; even though
(blessed be God) she is not yoked with me for life, in the matrimonial
waggon--She has quarrelled with the servants of the house about vails;
and such intolerable scolding ensued on both sides, that I have been
fain to appease the cook and chambermaid by stealth. Can't you find some
poor gentleman of Wales, to take this precious commodity off the hands
of

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE BATH, May 19.




To Dr LEWIS.

DOCTER LEWS,

Give me leaf to tell you, methinks you mought employ your talons better,
than to encourage servants to pillage their masters. I find by Gwyllim,
that Villiams has got my skin; for which he is an impotent rascal. He
has not only got my skin, but, moreover, my butter-milk to fatten his
pigs; and, I suppose, the next thing he gets, will be my pad to carry
his daughter to church and fair: Roger gets this, and Roger gets
that; but I'd have you to know, I won't be rogered at this rate by any
ragmatical fellow in the kingdom--And I am surprised, docter Lews, you
would offer to put my affairs in composition with the refuge and skim
of the hearth. I have toiled and moyled to a good purpuss, for the
advantage of Matt's family, if I can't safe as much owl as will make me
an under petticoat. As for the butter-milk, ne'er a pig in the parish
shall thrust his snout in it, with my good-will. There's a famous
physician at the Hot Well, that prescribes it to his patience, when
the case is consumptive; and the Scots and Irish have begun to drink it
already, in such quantities, that there is not a drop left for the
hogs in the whole neighbourhood of Bristol. I'll have our butter-milk
barrelled up, and sent twice a-week to Aberginny, where it may be sold
for a half-penny the quart; and so Roger may carry his pigs to another
market--I hope, Docter, you will not go to put any more such phims in my
brother's head, to the prejudice of my pockat; but rather give me some
raisins (which hitherto you have not done) to subscribe myself

Your humble servant, TAB. BRAMBLE BATH, May 19.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

Without waiting for your answer to my last, I proceed to give you an
account of our journey to London, which has not been wholly barren of
adventure. Tuesday last the 'squire took his place in a hired coach and
four, accompanied by his sister and mine, and Mrs Tabby's maid, Winifrid
Jenkins, whose province it was to support Chowder on a cushion in
her lap. I could scarce refrain from laughing when I looked into the
vehicle, and saw that animal sitting opposite to my uncle, like any
other passenger. The squire, ashamed of his situation, blushed to the
eyes: and, calling to the postilions to drive on, pulled the glass up in
my face. I, and his servant, John Thomas, attended them on horseback.

Nothing worth mentioning occurred, till we arrived on the edge of
Marlborough Downs. There one of the four horses fell, in going down
hill at a round trot; and the postilion behind, endeavouring to stop
the carriage, pulled it on one side into a deep rut, where it was fairly
overturned. I had rode on about two hundred yards before; but, hearing
a loud scream, galloped back and dismounted, to give what assistance
was in my power. When I looked into the coach, I could see nothing
distinctly, but the nether end of Jenkins, who was kicking her heels and
squalling with great vociferation. All of a sudden, my uncle thrust
up his bare pate, and bolted through the window, as nimble as a
grasshopper, having made use of poor Win's posteriors as a step to rise
in his ascent--The man (who had likewise quitted his horse) dragged this
forlorn damsel, more dead than alive, through the same opening. Then
Mr Bramble, pulling the door off its hinges with a jerk, laid hold
on Liddy's arm, and brought her to the light; very much frighted, but
little hurt. It fell to my share to deliver our aunt Tabitha, who had
lost her cap in the struggle, and being rather more than half frantic,
with rage and terror, was no bad representation of one of the sister
Furies that guard the gates of hell--She expressed no sort of concern
for her brother, who ran about in the cold, without his periwig, and
worked with the most astonishing agility, in helping to disentangle
the horses from the carriage: but she cried, in a tone of distraction,
'Chowder! Chowder! my dear Chowder! my poor Chowder is certainly
killed!'

This was not the case--Chowder, after having tore my uncle's leg in the
confusion of the fall, had retreated under the scat, and from thence the
footman drew him by the neck; for which good office, he bit his fingers
to the bone. The fellow, who is naturally surly, was so provoked at this
assault, that he saluted his ribs with a hearty kick, exclaiming, 'Damn
the nasty son of a bitch, and them he belongs to!' A benediction,
which was by no means lost upon the implacable virago his mistress--Her
brother, however, prevailed upon her to retire into a peasant's house,
near the scene of action, where his head and hers were covered, and poor
Jenkins had a fit. Our next care was to apply some sticking plaister to
the wound in his leg, which exhibited the impression of Chowder's teeth;
but he never opened his lips against the delinquent--Mrs Tabby, alarmed
at this scene, 'You say nothing, Matt (cried she); but I know your
mind--I know the spite you have to that poor unfortunate animal! I know
you intend to take his life away!' 'You are mistaken, upon my honour!
(replied the squire, with a sarcastic smile) I should be incapable
of harbouring any such cruel design against an object so amiable and
inoffensive; even if he had not the happiness to be your favourite.'

John Thomas was not so delicate. The fellow, whether really alarmed for
his life, or instigated by the desire of revenge, came in, and bluntly
demanded, that the dog should be put to death; on the supposition, that
if ever he should run mad hereafter, he, who had been bit by him, would
be infected--My uncle calmly argued upon the absurdity of his opinion,
observing, that he himself was in the same predicament, and would
certainly take the precaution he proposed, if he was not sure he ran no
risque of infection. Nevertheless, Thomas continued obstinate; and, at
length declared, that if the dog was not shot immediately, he himself
would be his executioner--This declaration opened the flood-gates of
Tabby's eloquence, which would have shamed the first-rate oratress of
Billingsgate. The footman retorted in the same stile; and the squire
dismissed him from his service, after having prevented me from giving
him a good horse-whipping for his insolence.

The coach being adjusted, another difficulty occurred--Mrs Tabitha
absolutely refused to enter it again, unless another driver could
be found to take the place of the postilion; who, she affirmed, had
overturned the carriage from malice aforethought--After much dispute,
the man resigned his place to a shabby country fellow, who undertook to
go as far as Marlborough, where they could be better provided; and at
that place we arrived about one O'clock, without farther impediment. Mrs
Bramble, however, found new matter of offence; which, indeed, she has a
particular genius for extracting at will from almost every incident in
life. We had scarce entered the room at Marlborough, where we stayed to
dine, when she exhibited a formal complaint against the poor fellow who
had superseded the postilion. She said he was such a beggarly rascal
that he had ne'er a shirt to his back, and had the impudence to shock
her sight by shewing his bare posteriors, for which act of indelicacy
he deserved to be set in the stocks. Mrs Winifred Jenkins confirmed the
assertion, with respect to his nakedness, observing, at the same time,
that he had a skin as fair as alabaster.

'This is a heinous offence, indeed (cried my uncle) let us hear what the
fellow has to say in his own vindication.' He was accordingly summoned,
and made his appearance, which was equally queer and pathetic. He seemed
to be about twenty years of age, of a middling size, with bandy legs,
stooping shoulders, high forehead, sandy locks, pinking eyes, flat nose,
and long chin--but his complexion was of a sickly yellow; his looks
denoted famine, and the rags that he wore could hardly conceal
what decency requires to be covered--My uncle, having surveyed him
attentively, said, with an ironical expression in his countenance, 'An't
you ashamed, fellow, to ride postilion without a shirt to cover your
backside from the view of the ladies in the coach?' 'Yes, I am, an
please your noble honour (answered the man) but necessity has no law,
as the saying is--And more than that, it was an accident. My breeches
cracked behind, after I had got into the saddle' 'You're an impudent
varlet (cried Mrs Tabby) for presuming to ride before persons of fashion
without a shirt'--'I am so, an please your worthy ladyship (said he)
but I am a poor Wiltshire lad--I ha'n't a shirt in the world, that I can
call my own, nor a rag of clothes, and please your ladyship, but what
you see--I have no friend nor relation upon earth to help me out--I
have had the fever and ague these six months, and spent all I had in the
world upon doctors, and to keep soul and body together; and, saving
your ladyship's good presence, I han't broke bread these four and twenty
hours.'

Mrs Bramble, turning from him, said, she had never seen such a filthy
tatterdemalion, and bid him begone; observing, that he would fill the
room full of vermin--Her brother darted a significant glance at her, as
she retired with Liddy into another apartment, and then asked the man if
he was known to any person in Marlborough?--When he answered, that
the landlord of the inn had known him from his infancy; mine host was
immediately called, and being interrogated on the subject, declared that
the young fellow's name was Humphry Clinker. That he had been a love
begotten babe, brought up in the work-house, and put out apprentice by
the parish to a country black-smith, who died before the boy's time was
out: that he had for some time worked under his ostler, as a helper and
extra postilion, till he was taken ill of the ague, which disabled him
from getting his bread: that, having sold or pawned every thing he had
in the world for his cure and subsistence, he became so miserable and
shabby, that he disgraced the stable, and was dismissed; but that
he never heard any thing to the prejudice of his character in other
respects. 'So that the fellow being sick and destitute (said my uncle)
you turned him out to die in the streets.' 'I pay the poor's rate
(replied the other) and I have no right to maintain idle vagrants,
either in sickness or health; besides, such a miserable object would
have brought a discredit upon my house.'

'You perceive (said the 'squire, turning to me) our landlord is a
Christian of bowels--Who shall presume to censure the morals of the age,
when the very publicans exhibit such examples of humanity?--Heark ye,
Clinker, you are a most notorious offender--You stand convicted of
sickness, hunger, wretchedness, and want--But, as it does not belong to
me to punish criminals, I will only take upon me the task of giving you
a word of advice. Get a shirt with all convenient dispatch, that your
nakedness may not henceforward give offence to travelling gentlewomen,
especially maidens in years.'

So saying, he put a guinea into the hand of the poor fellow, who stood
staring at him in silence, with his mouth wide open, till the landlord
pushed him out of the room.

In the afternoon, as our aunt stept into the coach, she observed, with
some marks of satisfaction, that the postilion, who rode next to
her, was not a shabby wretch like the ragamuffin who had them into
Marlborough. Indeed, the difference was very conspicuous: this was a
smart fellow, with a narrow brimmed hat, with gold cording, a cut bob,
a decent blue jacket, leather-breaches, and a clean linen shirt, puffed
above the waist-band. When we arrived at the Castle, on Spin-hill, where
we lay, this new postilion was remarkably assiduous in bringing in the
loose parcels; and, at length, displayed the individual countenance
of Humphry Clinker, who had metamorphosed himself in this manner, by
relieving from pawn part of his own clothes, with the money he had
received from Mr Bramble.

Howsoever pleased the rest of the company were with such a favourable
change in the appearance of this poor creature it soured on the
stomach of Mrs Tabby, who had not yet digested the affront of his naked
skin--She tossed her nose in disdain, saying, she supposed her brother
had taken him into favour, because he had insulted her with his
obscenity: that a fool and his money were soon parted; but that if Matt
intended to take the fellow with him to London, she would not go a foot
further that way--My uncle said nothing with his tongue, though his
looks were sufficiently expressive; and next morning Clinker did not
appear, so that we proceeded without further altercation to Salthill,
where we proposed to dine--There, the first person that came to the
side of the coach, and began to adjust the footboard, was no other than
Humphry Clinker--When I handed out Mrs Bramble, she eyed him with a
furious look, and passed into the house--My uncle was embarrassed, and
asked him peevishly, what had brought him hither? The fellow said, his
honour had been so good to him, that he had not the heart to part with
him; that he would follow him to the world's end, and serve him all the
days of his life, without fee or reward.

Mr Bramble did not know whether to chide or laugh at this
declaration--He foresaw much contradiction on the side of Tabby; and
on the other hand, he could not but be pleased with the gratitude of
Clinker, as well as with the simplicity of his character--'Suppose I
was inclined to take you into my service (said he) what are your
qualifications? what are you good for?' 'An please your honour (answered
this original) I can read and write, and do the business of the stable
indifferent well--I can dress a horse, and shoe him, and bleed and rowel
him; and, as for the practice of sow-gelding, I won't turn my back on
e'er a he in the county of Wilts--Then I can make hog's puddings and
hob-nails, mend kettles and tin sauce-pans.'--Here uncle burst out
a-laughing; and inquired what other accomplishments he was master of--'I
know something of single-stick, and psalmody (proceeded Clinker); I can
play upon the jew's-harp, sing Black-ey'd Susan, Arthur-o'Bradley, and
divers other songs; I can dance a Welsh jig, and Nancy Dawson; wrestle a
fall with any lad of my inches, when I'm in heart; and, under correction
I can find a hare when your honour wants a bit of game.' 'Foregad! thou
are a complete fellow (cried my uncle, still laughing) I have a good
mind to take thee into my family--Prithee, go and try if thou can'st
make peace with my sister--Thou ha'st given her much offence by shewing
her thy naked tail.'

Clinker accordingly followed us into the room, cap in hand, where,
addressing himself to Mrs Tabitha, 'May it please your ladyship's
worship (cried he) to pardon and forgive my offences, and, with God's
assistance, I shall take care that my tail shall never rise up in
judgment against me, to offend your ladyship again. Do, pray, good,
sweet, beautiful lady, take compassion on a poor sinner--God bless your
noble countenance; I am sure you are too handsome and generous to bear
malice--I will serve you on my bended knees, by night and by day, by
land and by water; and all for the love and pleasure of serving such an
excellent lady.'

This compliment and humiliation had some effect upon Tabby; but she made
no reply; and Clinker, taking silence for consent, gave his attendance
at dinner. The fellow's natural aukwardness and the flutter of his
spirits were productive of repeated blunders in the course of his
attendance--At length, he spilt part of a custard upon her right
shoulder; and, starting back, trod upon Chowder, who set up a dismal
howl--Poor Humphry was so disconcerted at this double mistake, that he
dropt the china dish, which broke into a thousand pieces; then, falling
down upon his knees, remained in that posture gaping, with a most
ludicrous aspect of distress. Mrs Bramble flew to the dog, and,
snatching him in her arms, presented him to her brother saying, 'This is
all a concerted scheme against this unfortunate animal, whose only crime
is its regard for me--Here it is, kill it at once, and then you'll be
satisfied.'

Clinker, hearing these words, and taking them in the literal
acceptation, got up in some hurry, and seizing a knife from the
side-board, cried, 'Not here, an please your ladyship--It will daub the
room--Give him to me, and I'll carry him to the ditch by the roadside'
To this proposal he received no other answer, than a hearty box on the
ear, that made him stagger to the other side of the room. 'What! (said
she to her brother) am I to be affronted by every mangy hound that you
pick up on the highway? I insist upon your sending this rascallion about
his business immediately' 'For God's sake, sister, compose yourself
(said my uncle) and consider that the poor fellow is innocent of any
intention to give you offence' 'Innocent as the babe unborn' (cried
Humphry). 'I see it plainly (exclaimed this implacable maiden), he acts
by your direction; and you are resolved to support him in his impudence
This is a bad return for all the services I have done you; for nursing
you in your sickness, managing your family, and keeping you from ruining
yourself by your own imprudence--But now you shall part with that rascal
or me, upon the spot, without farther loss of time; and the world shall
see whether you have more regard for your own flesh and blood, or for a
beggarly foundling taken from the dunghill.'

Mr Bramble's eyes began to glisten, and his teeth to chatter. 'If stated
fairly (said he, raising his voice) the question is, whether I have
spirit to shake off an intolerable yoke, by one effort of resolution,
or meanness enough to do an act of cruelty and injustice, to gratify the
rancour of a capricious woman--Heark ye, Mrs Tabitha Bramble, I will
now propose an alternative in my turn. Either discard your four-footed
favourite, or give me leave to bid you eternally adieu--For I am
determined that he and I shall live no longer under the same roof;
and to dinner with what appetite you may'--Thunderstruck at this
declaration, she sat down in a corner; and, after a pause of some
minutes, 'Sure I don't understand you, Matt! (said she)' 'And yet I
spoke in plain English' answered the 'squire, with a peremptory look.
'Sir (resumed this virago, effectually humbled), it is your prerogative
to command, and my duty to obey. I can't dispose of the dog in this
place; but if you'll allow him to go in the coach to London, I give you
my word, he shall never trouble you again.'

Her brother, entirely disarmed by this mild reply, declared, she could
ask him nothing in reason that he would refuse; adding, 'I hope, sister,
you have never found me deficient in natural affection.'

Mrs Tabitha immediately rose, and, throwing her arms about his neck,
kissed him on the cheek: he returned her embrace with great emotion.
Liddy sobbed, Win. Jenkins cackled, Chowder capered, and Clinker skipped
about, rubbing his hands for joy of this reconciliation.

Concord being thus restored, we finished our meal with comfort; and
in the evening arrived at London, without having met with any other
adventure. My aunt seems to be much mended by the hint she received from
her brother. She has been graciously pleased to remove her displeasure
from Clinker, who is now retained as a footman; and in a day or two
will make his appearance in a new suit of livery; but as he is little
acquainted with London, we have taken an occasional valet, whom I intend
hereafter to hire as my own servant. We lodge in Goldensquare, at the
house of one Mrs Notion, a decent sort of a woman, who takes great pains
to make us all easy. My uncle proposes to make a circuit of all the
remarkable scenes of this metropolis, for the entertainment of his
pupils; but as both you and I are already acquainted with most of those
he will visit, and with some others he little dreams of, I shall only
communicate what will be in some measure new to your observation.
Remember me to our Jesuitical friends, and believe me ever,

Dear knight, Yours affectionately, J. MELFORD LONDON, May 24.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

London is literally new to me; new in its streets, houses, and even in
its situation; as the Irishman said, 'London is now gone out of town.'
What I left open fields, producing hay and corn, I now find covered with
streets and squares, and palaces, and churches. I am credibly informed,
that in the space of seven years, eleven thousand new houses have been
built in one quarter of Westminster, exclusive of what is daily added to
other parts of this unwieldy metropolis. Pimlico and Knightsbridge are
now almost joined to Chelsea and Kensington; and if this infatuation
continues for half a century, I suppose the whole county of Middlesex
will be covered with brick.

It must be allowed, indeed, for the credit of the present age, that
London and Westminster are much better paved and lighted than they
were formerly. The new streets are spacious, regular, and airy; and
the houses generally convenient. The bridge at Blackfriars is a noble
monument of taste and public-spirit.--I wonder how they stumbled upon
a work of such magnificence and utility. But, notwithstanding these
improvements, the capital is become an overgrown monster; which, like
a dropsical head, will in time leave the body and extremities without
nourishment and support. The absurdity will appear in its full force,
when we consider that one sixth part of the natives of this whole
extensive kingdom is crowded within the bills of mortality. What
wonder that our villages are depopulated, and our farms in want of
day-labourers? The abolition of small farms is but one cause of the
decrease of population. Indeed, the incredible increase of horses and
black cattle, to answer the purposes of luxury, requires a prodigious
quantity of hay and grass, which are raised and managed without much
labour; but a number of hands will always be wanted for the different
branches of agriculture, whether the farms be large or small. The tide
of luxury has swept all the inhabitants from the open country--The
poorest squire, as well as the richest peer, must have his house in
town, and make a figure with an extraordinary number of domestics. The
plough-boys, cow-herds, and lower hinds are debauched and seduced by
the appearance and discourse of those coxcombs in livery, when they make
their summer excursions. They desert their dirt and drudgery, and swarm
up to London, in hopes of getting into service, where they can live
luxuriously and wear fine clothes, without being obliged to work; for
idleness is natural to man--Great numbers of these, being disappointed
in their expectation, become thieves and sharpers; and London being
an immense wilderness, in which there is neither watch nor ward of any
signification, nor any order or police, affords them lurking-places as
well as prey.

There are many causes that contribute to the daily increase of this
enormous mass; but they may be all resolved into the grand source of
luxury and corruption--About five and twenty years ago, very few, even
of the most opulent citizens of London, kept any equipage, or even any
servants in livery. Their tables produced nothing but plain boiled and
roasted, with a bottle of port and a tankard of beer. At present, every
trader in any degree of credit, every broker and attorney, maintains a
couple of footmen, a coachman, and postilion. He has his town-house,
and his country-house, his coach, and his post-chaise. His wife and
daughters appear in the richest stuffs, bespangled with diamonds. They
frequent the court, the opera, the theatre, and the masquerade. They
hold assemblies at their own houses: they make sumptuous entertainments,
and treat with the richest wines of Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne.
The substantial tradesman, who wont to pass his evenings at the
ale-house for fourpence half-penny, now spends three shillings at the
tavern, while his wife keeps card-tables at home; she must likewise have
fine clothes, her chaise, or pad, with country lodgings, and go three
times a week to public diversions. Every clerk, apprentice, and even
waiter of tavern or coffeehouse, maintains a gelding by himself, or
in partnership, and assumes the air and apparel of a petit maitre--The
gayest places of public entertainment are filled with fashionable
figures; which, upon inquiry, will be found to be journeymen taylors,
serving-men, and abigails, disguised like their betters.

In short, there is no distinction or subordination left--The different
departments of life are jumbled together--The hod-carrier, the low
mechanic, the tapster, the publican, the shopkeeper, the pettifogger,
the citizen, and courtier, all tread upon the kibes of one another:
actuated by the demons of profligacy and licentiousness, they are
seen every where rambling, riding, rolling, rushing, justling, mixing,
bouncing, cracking, and crashing in one vile ferment of stupidity
and corruption--All is tumult and hurry; one would imagine they were
impelled by some disorder of the brain, that will not suffer them to
be at rest. The foot-passengers run along as if they were pursued by
bailiffs. The porters and chairmen trot with their burthens. People, who
keep their own equipages, drive through the streets at full speed. Even
citizens, physicians, and apothecaries, glide in their chariots like
lightening. The hackney-coachmen make their horses smoke, and the
pavement shakes under them; and I have actually seen a waggon pass
through Piccadilly at the hand-gallop. In a word, the whole nation seems
to be running out of their wits.

The diversions of the times are not ill suited to the genius of this
incongruous monster, called the public. Give it noise, confusion, glare,
and glitter; it has no idea of elegance and propriety--What are the
amusements of Ranelagh? One half of the company are following at the
other's tails, in an eternal circle; like so many blind asses in an
olive-mill, where they can neither discourse, distinguish, nor be
distinguished; while the other half are drinking hot water, under the
denomination of tea, till nine or ten o'clock at night, to keep them
awake for the rest of the evening. As for the orchestra, the vocal music
especially, it is well for the performers that they cannot be heard
distinctly. Vauxhall is a composition of baubles, overcharged with
paltry ornaments, ill conceived, and poorly executed; without any unity
of design, or propriety of disposition. It is an unnatural assembly of
objects, fantastically illuminated in broken masses; seemingly contrived
to dazzle the eyes and divert the imagination of the vulgar--Here a
wooden lion, there a stone statue; in one place, a range of things like
coffeehouse boxes, covered a-top; in another, a parcel of ale-house
benches; in a third, a puppet-show representation of a tin cascade; in
a fourth, a gloomy cave of a circular form, like a sepulchral vault half
lighted; in a fifth, a scanty flip of grass-plat, that would not afford
pasture sufficient for an ass's colt. The walks, which nature seems to
have intended for solitude, shade, and silence, are filled with crowds
of noisy people, sucking up the nocturnal rheums of an aguish climate;
and through these gay scenes, a few lamps glimmer like so many farthing
candles.

When I see a number of well dressed people, of both sexes, sitting
on the covered benches, exposed to the eyes of the mob; and, which is
worse, to the cold, raw, night-air, devouring sliced beef, and swilling
port, and punch, and cyder, I can't help compassionating their temerity;
white I despise their want of taste and decorum; but, when they course
along those damp and gloomy walks, or crowd together upon the wet
gravel, without any other cover than the cope of Heaven, listening to
a song, which one half of them cannot possibly hear, how can I help
supposing they are actually possessed by a spirit, more absurd and
pernicious than any thing we meet with in the precincts of Bedlam? In
all probability, the proprietors of this, and other public gardens of
inferior note, in the skirts of the metropolis, are, in some shape,
connected with the faculty of physic, and the company of undertakers;
for, considering that eagerness in the pursuit of what is called
pleasure, which now predominates through every rank and denomination
of life, I am persuaded that more gouts, rheumatisms, catarrhs, and
consumptions are caught in these nocturnal pastimes, sub dio, than from
all the risques and accidents to which a life of toil and danger is
exposed.

These, and other observations, which I have made in this excursion, will
shorten my stay at London, and send me back with a double relish to my
solitude and mountains; but I shall return by a different route from
that which brought me to town. I have seen some old friends, who
constantly resided in this virtuous metropolis, but they are so
changed in manners and disposition, that we hardly know or care for one
another--In our journey from Bath, my sister Tabby provoked me into a
transport of passion; during which, like a man who has drank himself
pot-valiant, I talked to her in such a stile of authority and
resolution, as produced a most blessed effect. She and her dog have been
remarkably quiet and orderly ever since this expostulation. How long
this agreeable calm will last, Heaven above knows--I flatter myself, the
exercise of travelling has been of service to my health; a circumstance
which encourages me to-proceed in my projected expedition to the North.
But I must, in the mean time, for the benefit and amusement of my
pupils, explore the depths of this chaos; this misshapen and monstrous
capital, without head or tail, members or proportion.

Thomas was so insolent to my sister on the road, that I was obliged to
turn him off abruptly, betwixt Chippenham and Marlborough, where our
coach was overturned. The fellow was always sullen and selfish; but,
if he should return to the country, you may give him a character for
honesty and sobriety; and, provided he behaves with proper respect to
the family, let him have a couple of guineas in the name of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, May 20.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

Inexpressible was the pleasure I received from yours of the 25th, which
was last night put into my hands by Mrs Brentford, the milliner, from
Gloucester--I rejoice to hear that my worthy governess is in good
health, and, still more, that she no longer retains any displeasure
towards her poor Liddy. I am sorry you have lost the society of the
agreeable Miss Vaughn; but, I hope you won't have cause much longer to
regret the departure of your school companions, as I make no doubt but
your parents will, in a little time, bring you into the world, where you
are so well qualified to make a distinguished figure. When that is
the case, I flatter myself you and I shall meet again, and be happy
together; and even improve the friendship which we contracted in our
tender years. This at least I can promise--It shall not be for the want
of my utmost endeavours, if our intimacy does not continue for life.

About five days ago we arrived in London, after an easy journey from
Bath; during which, however, we were overturned, and met with some other
little incidents, which, had like to have occasioned a misunderstanding
betwixt my uncle and aunt; but now, thank God, they are happily
reconciled: we live in harmony together, and every day make parties
to see the wonders of this vast metropolis, which, however, I cannot
pretend to describe; for I have not as yet seen one hundredth part of
its curiosities, and I am quite in a maze of admiration.

The cities of London and Westminster are spread out into an incredible
extent. The streets, squares, rows, lanes, and alleys, are innumerable.
Palaces, public buildings, and churches rise in every quarter;
and, among these last, St Paul's appears with the most astonishing
pre-eminence. They say it is not so large as, St Peter's at Rome; but,
for my own part, I can have no idea of any earthly temple more grand and
magnificent.

But even these superb objects are not so striking as the crowds of
people that swarm in the streets. I at first imagined that some
great assembly was just dismissed, and wanted to stand aside till the
multitude should pass; but this human tide continues to flow, without
interruption or abatement, from morn till night. Then there is such
an infinity of gay equipages, coaches, chariots, chaises, and other
carriages, continually rolling and shifting before your eyes, that
one's head grows giddy looking at them; and the imagination is quite
confounded with splendour and variety. Nor is the prospect by water
less grand and astonishing than that by land: you see three stupendous
bridges, joining the opposite banks of a broad, deep, and rapid river;
so vast, so stately, so elegant, that they seem to be the work of the
giants; betwixt them, the whole surface of the Thames is covered with
small vessels, barges, boats, and wherries, passing to and fro; and
below the three bridges, such a prodigious forest of masts, for miles
together, that you would think all the ships in the universe were here
assembled. All that you read of wealth and grandeur in the Arabian
Nights' Entertainment, and the Persian Tales, concerning Bagdad,
Diarbekir, Damascus, Ispahan, and Samarkand, is here realized.

Ranelagh looks like the inchanted palace of a genie, adorned with
the most exquisite performances of painting, carving, and gilding,
enlightened with a thousand golden lamps, that emulate the noon-day
sun; crowded with the great, the rich, the gay, the happy, and the fair;
glittering with cloth of gold and silver, lace, embroidery, and precious
stones. While these exulting sons and daughters of felicity tread this
round of pleasure, or regale in different parties, and separate lodges,
with fine imperial tea and other delicious refreshments, their ears are
entertained with the most ravishing delights of music, both instrumental
and vocal. There I heard the famous Tenducci, a thing from Italy--It
looks for all the world like a man, though they say it is not. The
voice, to be sure, is neither man's nor woman's; but it is more
melodious than either; and it warbled so divinely, that, while I
listened, I really thought myself in paradise.

At nine o'clock, in a charming moonlight evening, we embarked at
Ranelagh for Vauxhall, in a wherry so light and slender that we looked
like so many fairies sailing in a nutshell. My uncle, being apprehensive
of catching cold upon the water, went round in the coach, and my aunt
would have accompanied him, but he would not suffer me to go by water if
she went by land; and therefore she favoured us with her company, as she
perceived I had a curiosity to make this agreeable voyage--After all,
the vessel was sufficiently loaded; for, besides the waterman, there
was my brother Jery, and a friend of his, one Mr Barton, a country
gentleman, of a good fortune, who had dined at our house--The pleasure
of this little excursion was, however, damped, by my being sadly
frighted at our landing; where there was a terrible confusion of
wherries and a crowd of people bawling, and swearing, and quarrelling,
nay, a parcel of ugly-looking fellows came running into the water, and
laid hold of our boat with great violence, to pull it a-shore; nor would
they quit their hold till my brother struck one of them over the head
with his cane. But this flutter was fully recompensed by the pleasures
of Vauxhall; which I no sooner entered, than I was dazzled and
confounded with the variety of beauties that rushed all at once upon my
eye. Image to yourself, my dear Letty, a spacious garden, part laid out
in delightful walks, bounded with high hedges and trees, and paved with
gravel; part exhibiting a wonderful assemblage of the most picturesque
and striking objects' pavilions, lodges, groves, grottoes, lawns,
temples and cascades; porticoes, colonades, and rotundos; adorned with
pillars, statues, and painting: the whole illuminated with an infinite
number of lamps, disposed in different figures of suns, stars, and
constellations; the place crowded with the gayest company, ranging
through those blissful shades, or supping in different lodges on cold
collations, enlivened with mirth, freedom, and good humour, and animated
by an excellent band of music. Among the vocal performers I had the
happiness to hear the celebrated Mrs--, whose voice was loud and shrill,
that it made my head ake through excess of pleasure.

In about half an hour after we arrived we were joined by my uncle, who
did not seem to relish the place. People of experience and infirmity, my
dear Letty, see with very different eyes from those that such as you and
I make use of--Our evening's entertainment was interrupted by an unlucky
accident. In one of the remotest walks we were surprised with a sudden
shower, that set the whole company a-running, and drove us in heaps,
one upon another, into the rotunda; where my uncle, finding himself wet,
began to be very peevish and urgent to be gone. My brother went to look
for the coach, and found it with much difficulty; but as it could
not hold us all, Mr Barton stayed behind. It was some time before
the carriage could be brought up to the gate, in the confusion,
notwithstanding the utmost endeavours of our new footman, Humphry
Clinker, who lost his scratch periwig, and got a broken head in the
scuffle. The moment we were seated, my aunt pulled off my uncle's shoes,
and carefully wrapped his poor feet in her capuchin; then she gave him
a mouth-ful of cordial, which she always keeps in her pocket, and his
clothes were shifted as soon as we arrived at lodgings; so that, blessed
be God, he escaped a severe cold, of which he was in great terror.

As for Mr Barton, I must tell you in confidence, he was a little
particular; but, perhaps, I mistake his complaisance; and I wish I may,
for his sake--You know the condition of my poor heart: which, in spite
of hard usage--And yet I ought not to complain: nor will I, till farther
information.

Besides Ranelagh and Vauxhall, I have been at Mrs Cornelys' assembly,
which, for the rooms, the company, the dresses, and decorations,
surpasses all description; but as I have no great turn for card playing,
I have not yet entered thoroughly into the spirit of the place: indeed I
am still such a country hoyden, that I could hardly find patience to be
put in a condition to appear, yet, as I was not above six hours under
the hands of the hair-dresser, who stuffed my head with as much black
wool as would have made a quilted petticoat; and, after all, it was the
smallest head in the assembly, except my aunt's--She, to be sure, was
so particular with her rumpt gown and petticoat, her scanty curls, her
lappethead, deep triple ruffles, and high stays, that every body looked
at her with surprise: some whispered, and some tittered; and lady
Griskin, by whom we were introduced, flatly told her, she was twenty
good years behind the fashion.

Lady Griskin is a person of fashion, to whom we have the honour to be
related. She keeps a small rout at her own house, never exceeding ten
or a dozen card-tables, but these are frequented by the best company in
town--She has been so obliging as to introduce my aunt and me to some of
her particular friends of quality, who treat us with the most familiar
good-humour: we have once dined with her, and she takes the trouble
to direct us in all our motions. I am so happy as to have gained her
goodwill to such a degree, that she sometimes adjusts my cap with her
own hands; and she has given me a kind invitation to stay with her all
the winter. This, however, has been cruelly declined by my uncle who
seems to be (I know not how) prejudiced against the good lady; for,
whenever my aunt happens to speak in her commendation, I observe that he
makes wry faces, though he says nothing--Perhaps, indeed, these grimaces
may be the effect of pain arising from the gout and rheumatism, with
which he is sadly distressed--To me, however, he is always good-natured
and generous, even beyond my wish. Since we came hither, he has made
me a present of a suit of clothes, with trimmings and laces, which cost
more money than I shall mention; and Jery, at his desire, has given me
my mother's diamond crops, which are ordered to be set a-new; so that it
won't be his fault if I do not glitter among the stars of the fourth or
fifth magnitude. I wish my weak head may not grow giddy in the midst
of all this gallantry and dissipation; though, as yet, I can safely
declare, I could gladly give up all these tumultuous pleasures, for
country solitude, and a happy retreat with those we love; among whom, my
dear Willis will always possess the first place in the breast of her

Ever affectionate, LYDIA MELFORD LONDON, May 31.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I send you this letter, franked by our old friend Barton; who is as much
altered as it was possible for a man of his kidney to be. Instead of
the careless, indolent sloven we knew at Oxford, I found him a busy
talkative politician; a petit-maitre in his dress, and a ceremonious
courtier in his manners. He has not gall enough in his constitution
to be enflamed with the rancour of party, so as to deal in scurrilous
invectives; but, since he obtained a place, he is become a warm partizan
of the ministry, and sees every thing through such an exaggerating
medium, as to me, who am happily of no party, is altogether
incomprehensible--Without all doubt, the fumes of faction not only
disturb the faculty of reason, but also pervert the organs of sense; and
I would lay a hundred guineas to ten, that if Barton on one side, and
the most conscientious patriot in the opposition on the other, were to
draw, upon honour, the picture of the k[ing] or m[inisters], you and I,
who are still uninfected, and unbiased, would find both painters equally
distant from the truth. One thing, however, must be allowed for the
honour of Barton, he never breaks out into illiberal abuse, far less
endeavours, by infamous calumnies, to blast the moral character of any
individual on the other side.

Ever since we came hither, he has been remarkably assiduous in his
attention to our family; an attention, which, in a man of his indolence
and avocations, I should have thought altogether odd, and even
unnatural, had not I perceived that my sister Liddy had made some
impression upon his heart. I cannot say that I have any objection to
his trying his fortune in this pursuit: if an opulent estate and a great
flock of good-nature are sufficient qualifications in a husband, to
render the marriage-state happy for life, she may be happy with Barton;
but, I imagine, there is something else required to engage and secure
the affection of a woman of sense and delicacy: something which nature
has denied our friend--Liddy seems to be of the same opinion. When
he addresses himself to her in discourse, she seems to listen with
reluctance, and industriously avoids all particular communication; but
in proportion to her coyness, our aunt is coming. Mrs Tabitha goes more
than half way to meet his advances; she mistakes, or affects to mistake,
the meaning of his courtesy, which is rather formal and fulsome; she
returns his compliments with hyperbolical interest, she persecutes
him with her civilities at table, she appeals to him for ever in
conversation, she sighs, and flirts, and ogles, and by her hideous
affectation and impertinence, drives the poor courtier to the very
extremity of his complaisance; in short, she seems to have undertaken
the siege of Barton's heart, and carries on her approaches in such a
desperate manner, that I don't know whether he will not be obliged to
capitulate. In the mean time, his aversion to this inamorata struggling
with his acquired affability, and his natural fear of giving offence,
throws him into a kind of distress which is extremely ridiculous.

Two days ago, he persuaded my uncle and me to accompany him to St
James's, where he undertook to make us acquainted with the persons
of all the great men in the kingdom; and, indeed, there was a great
assemblage of distinguished characters, for it was a high festival at
court. Our conductor performed his promise with great punctuality.
He pointed out almost every individual of both sexes, and generally
introduced them to our notice, with a flourish of panegyrick--Seeing the
king approach, 'There comes (said he) the most amiable sovereign
that ever swayed the sceptre of England: the delicioe humani generis;
Augustus, in patronizing merit; Titus Vespasian in generosity; Trajan
in beneficence; and Marcus Aurelius in philosophy.' 'A very honest kind
hearted gentleman (added my uncle) he's too good for the times. A king
of England should have a spice of the devil in his composition.' Barton,
then turning to the duke of C[umberland], proceeded,--'You know the
duke, that illustrious hero, who trode rebellion under his feet, and
secured us in possession of every thing we ought to hold dear, as
English men and Christians. Mark what an eye, how penetrating, yet
pacific! what dignity in his mien! what humanity in his aspect--Even
malice must own, that he is one of the greatest officers in
Christendom.' 'I think he is (said Mr Bramble) but who are these young
gentlemen that stand beside him?' 'Those! (cried our friend) those are
his royal nephews; the princes of the blood. Sweet young princes! the
sacred pledges of the Protestant line; so spirited, so sensible,
so princely'--'Yes; very sensible! very spirited! (said my uncle,
interrupting him) but see the queen! ha, there's the queen!--There's the
queen! let me see--Let me see--Where are my glasses? ha! there's meaning
in that eye--There's sentiment--There's expression--Well, Mr Barton,
what figure do you call next?' The next person he pointed out, was the
favourite yearl; who stood solitary by one of the windows--'Behold
yon northern star (said he) shorn of his beams'--'What! the Caledonian
luminary, that lately blazed so bright in our hemisphere! methinks, at
present, it glimmers through a fog; like Saturn without his ring, bleak,
and dim, and distant--Ha, there's the other great phenomenon, the grand
pensionary, that weathercock of patriotism that veers about in every
point of the political compass, and still feels the wind of popularity
in his tail. He too, like a portentous comet, has risen again above the
court-horizon; but how long he will continue to ascend, it is not easy
to foretell, considering his great eccentricity--Who are those two
satellites that attend his motions?' When Barton told him their names,
'To their characters (said Mr Bramble) I am no stranger. One of them,
without a drop of red blood in his veins, has a cold intoxicating vapour
in his head; and rancour enough in his heart to inoculate and affect
a whole nation. The other is (I hear) intended for a share in the
ad[ministratio]n, and the pensionary vouches for his being duly
qualified--The only instance I ever heard of his sagacity, was his
deserting his former patron, when he found him declining in power, and
in disgrace with the people. Without principle, talent, or intelligence,
he is ungracious as a hog, greedy as a vulture, and thievish as a
jackdaw; but, it must be owned, he is no hypocrite. He pretends to no
virtue, and takes no pains to disguise his character--His ministry
will be attended with one advantage, no man will be disappointed by his
breach of promise, as no mortal ever trusted to his word. I wonder how
lord--first discovered this happy genius, and for what purpose lord--has
now adopted him: but one would think, that as amber has a power to
attract dirt, and straws, and chaff, a minister is endued with the same
kind of faculty, to lick up every knave and blockhead in his way'--His
eulogium was interrupted by the arrival of the old duke of N--; who,
squeezing into the circle with a busy face of importance, thrust his
head into every countenance, as if he had been in search of somebody, to
whom he wanted to impart something of great consequence--My uncle, who
had been formerly known to him, bowed as he passed; and the duke seeing
himself saluted so respectfully by a well-dressed person, was not slow
in returning the courtesy--He even came up, and, taking him cordially by
the hand, 'My dear friend, Mr A-- (said he) I am rejoiced to see you--
How long have you been come from abroad?--How did you leave our good
friends the Dutch? The king of Prussia don't think of another war,
ah?--He's a great king! a great conqueror! a very great conqueror! Your
Alexanders and Hannibals were nothing, at all to him, sir--Corporals!
drummers! dross! mere trash--Damned trash, heh?'--His grace being by
this time out of breath, my uncle took the opportunity to tell him he
had not been out of England, that his name was Bramble, and that he had
the honour to sit in the last parliament but one of the late king, as
representative for the borough of Dymkymraig. 'Odso! (cried the duke) I
remember you perfectly well, my dear Mr Bramble--You was always a
good and loyal subject--a stanch friend to administration--I made your
brother an Irish bishop'--'Pardon me, my lord (said the squire) I once
had a brother, but he was a captain in the army'--'Ha! (said his
grace) he was so--He was, indeed! But who was the Bishop then! Bishop
Blackberry--Sure it was bishop Blackberry. Perhaps some relation of
yours'--'Very likely, my lord (replied my uncle); the Blackberry is the
fruit of the Bramble--But, I believe, the bishop is not a berry of our
bush'--'No more he is--No more he is, ha, ha, ha! (exclaimed the duke)
there you gave me a scratch, good Mr Bramble, ha, ha, ha!--Well,
I shall be glad to see you at Lincoln's inn-fields--You know the
way--Times are altered. Though I have lost the power, I retain the
inclination--Your very humble servant, good Mr Blackberry'--So saying,
he shoved to another corner of the room. 'What a fine old gentleman!
(cried Mr Barton) what spirits! what a memory! He never forgets an old
friend.' 'He does me too much honour (observed our squire) to rank me
among the number--Whilst I sat in parliament, I never voted with the
ministry but three times, when my conscience told me they were in the
right: however, if he still keeps levee, I will carry my nephew thither,
that he may see, and learn to avoid the scene; for, I think, an English
gentleman never appears to such disadvantage, as at the levee of a
minister--Of his grace I shall say nothing at present, but that for
thirty years he was the constant and common butt of ridicule and
execration. He was generally laughed at as an ape in politics, whose
office and influence served only to render his folly the more notorious;
and the opposition cursed him, as the indefatigable drudge of a
first-mover, who was justly stiled and stigmatized as the father of
corruption: but this ridiculous ape, this venal drudge, no sooner lost
the places he was so ill qualified to fill, and unfurled the banners of
faction, than he was metamorphosed into a pattern of public virtue; the
very people who reviled him before, now extolled him to the skies, as a
wise, experienced statesman, chief pillar of the Protestant succession,
and corner stone of English liberty. I should be glad to know how Mr
Barton reconciles these contradictions, without obliging us to resign
all title to the privilege of common sense.' 'My dear sir (answered
Barton) I don't pretend to justify the extravagations of the multitude;
who, I suppose, were as wild in their former censure, as in the present
praise: but I shall be very glad to attend you on Thursday next to his
grace's levee; where, I'm afraid, we shall not be crowded with company;
for, you know, there's a wide difference between his present office of
president of the council, and his former post of first lord commissioner
of the treasury.'

This communicative friend having announced all the remarkable characters
of both sexes, that appeared at court, we resolved to adjourn, and
retired. At the foot of the stair-case, there was a crowd of lacqueys
and chairmen, and in the midst of them stood Humphry Clinker, exalted
upon a stool, with his hat in one hand, and a paper in the other, in
the act of holding forth to the people--Before we could inquire into the
meaning of this exhibition, he perceived his master, thrust the paper
into his pocket, descended from his elevation, bolted through the crowd,
and brought up the carriage to the gate.

My uncle said nothing till we were seated, when, after having looked at
me earnestly for some time, he burst out a-laughing, and asked if I knew
upon what subject Clinker was holding forth to the mob--'If (said he)
the fellow is turned mountebank, I must turn him out of my service,
otherwise he'll make Merry Andrews of us all'--I observed, that, in
all probability, he had studied medicine under his master, who was a
farrier.

At dinner, the squire asked him, if he had ever practised physic? 'Yes,
and please your honour (said he) among brute beasts; but I never meddle
with rational creatures.' 'I know not whether you rank in that class the
audience you was haranguing in the court at St. James's, but I should be
glad to know what kind of powders you was distributing; and whether you
had a good sale'--'Sale, sir! (cried Clinker) I hope I shall never be
base enough to sell for gold and silver, what freely comes of God's
grace. I distributed nothing, an like your honour, but a word of
advice to my fellows in servitude and sin.' 'Advice! concerning what?'
'Concerning profane swearing, an please your honour; so horrid and
shocking, that it made my hair stand on end.' 'Nay, if thou can'st cure
them Of that disease, I shall think thee a wonderful doctor indeed' 'Why
not cure them, my good master? the hearts of those poor people are not
so stubborn as your honour seems to think--Make them first sensible
that you have nothing in view but their good, then they will listen with
patience, and easily be convinced of the sin and folly of a practice
that affords neither profit nor pleasure--At this remark, our uncle
changed colour, and looked round the company, conscious that his own
withers were not altogether unwrung. 'But, Clinker (said he) if you
should have eloquence enough to persuade the vulgar to resign those
tropes and figures of rhetoric, there will be little or nothing left to
distinguish their conversation from that of their betters.' 'But then
your honour knows, their conversation will be void of offence; and, at
the day of judgment, there will be no distinction of persons.'

Humphry going down stairs to fetch up a bottle of wine, my uncle
congratulated his sister upon having such a reformer in the family; when
Mrs Tabitha declared, he was a sober civilized fellow; very respectful,
and very industrious; and, she believed, a good Christian into
the bargain. One would think, Clinker must really have some very
extraordinary talent, to ingratiate himself in this manner with a
virago of her character, so fortified against him with prejudice and
resentment; but the truth is, since the adventure of Salt-hill, Mrs
Tabby seems to be entirely changed. She has left off scolding the
servants, an exercise which was grown habitual, and even seemed
necessary to her constitution; and is become so indifferent to Chowder,
as to part with him in a present to lady Griskin, who proposes to bring
the breed of him into fashion. Her ladyship is the widow of Sir Timothy
Griskin, a distant relation of our family. She enjoys a jointure of five
hundred pounds a-year, and makes shift to spend three times that sum.
Her character before marriage was a little equivocal; but at present she
lives in the bon ton, keeps card-tables, gives private suppers to select
friends, and is visited by persons of the first fashion--She has been
remarkably civil to us all, and cultivates my uncle with the most
particular regard; but the more she strokes him, the more his bristles
seem to rise--To her compliments he makes very laconic and dry
returns--T'other day she sent us a pottle of fine strawberries, which
he did not receive without signs of disgust, muttering from the Aeneid,
timeo Danaos et Dona ferentes. She has twice called for Liddy, of a
forenoon, to take an airing in the coach; but Mrs Tabby was always so
alert (I suppose by his direction) that she never could have the niece
without her aunt's company. I have endeavoured to sound Square-toes on
this subject; but he carefully avoids all explanation.

I have now, dear Phillips, filled a whole sheet, and if you have read it
to an end, I dare say, you are as tired as

Your humble servant, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 2.




To Dr LEWIS.

Yes, Doctor, I have seen the British Museum; which is a noble
collection, and even stupendous, if we consider it was made by a private
man, a physician, who was obliged to make his own for tune at the same
time: but great as the collection is, it would appear more striking if
it was arranged in one spacious saloon, instead of being divided into
different apartments, which it does not entirely fill--I could wish the
series of medals was connected, and the whole of the animal, vegetable,
and mineral kingdoms completed, by adding to each, at the public
expence, those articles that are wanting. It would likewise be a great
improvement, with respect to the library, if the deficiencies were made
up, by purchasing all the books of character that are not to be found
already in the collection--They might be classed in centuries, according
to the dates of their publication, and catalogues printed of them and
the manuscripts, for the information of those that want to consult, or
compile from such authorities. I could also wish, for the honour of the
nation, that there was a complete apparatus for a course of mathematics,
mechanics, and experimental philosophy; and a good salary settled upon
an able professor, who should give regular lectures on these subjects.

But this is all idle speculation, which will never be reduced to
practice--Considering the temper of the times, it is a wonder to see any
institution whatsoever established for the benefit of the Public. The
spirit of party is risen to a kind of phrenzy, unknown to former ages,
or rather degenerated to a total extinction of honesty and candour--You
know I have observed, for some time, that the public papers are become
the infamous vehicles of the most cruel and perfidious defamation: every
rancorous knave every desperate incendiary, that can afford to spend
half a crown or three shillings, may skulk behind the press of a
newsmonger, and have a stab at the first character in the kingdom,
without running the least hazard of detection or punishment.

I have made acquaintance with a Mr Barton, whom Jery knew at Oxford;
a good sort of a man, though most ridiculously warped in his political
principles; but his partiality is the less offensive, as it never
appears in the stile of scurrility and abuse. He is a member of
parliament, and a retainer to the court; and his whole conversation
turns upon the virtues and perfections of the ministers, who are his
patrons. T'other day, when he was bedaubing one of those worthies,
with the most fulsome praise, I told him I had seen the same nobleman
characterised very differently, in one of the daily-papers; indeed, so
stigmatized, that if one half of what was said of him was true, he
must be not only unfit to rule, but even unfit to live: that those
impeachments had been repeated again and again, with the addition
of fresh matter; and that as he had taken no steps towards his own
vindication, I began to think there was some foundation for the charge.
'And pray, Sir (said Mr Barton), what steps would you have him take?
Suppose he should prosecute the publisher, who screens the anonymous
accuser, and bring him to the pillory for a libel; this is so far from
being counted a punishment, in terrorem, that it will probably make his
fortune. The multitude immediately take him into their protection, as a
martyr to the cause of defamation, which they have always espoused. They
pay his fine, they contribute to the increase of his stock, his shop is
crowded with customers, and the sale of his paper rises in proportion
to the scandal it contains. All this time the prosecutor is inveighed
against as a tyrant and oppressor, for having chosen to proceed by
the way of information, which is deemed a grievance; but if he lays an
action for damages, he must prove the damage, and I leave you to judge,
whether a gentleman's character may not be brought into contempt, and
all his views in life blasted by calumny, without his being able to
specify the particulars of the damage he has sustained.

'This spirit of defamation is a kind of heresy, that thrives under
persecution. The liberty of the press is a term of great efficacy; and
like that of the Protestant religion, has often served the purposes of
sedition--A minister, therefore, must arm himself with patience, and
bear those attacks without repining--Whatever mischief they may do in
other respects, they certainly contribute, in one particular, to the
advantages of government; for those defamatory articles have multiplied
papers in such a manner, and augmented their sale to such a degree, that
the duty upon stamps and advertisements has made a very considerable
addition to the revenue.' Certain it is, a gentleman's honour is a very
delicate subject to be handled by a jury, composed of men, who cannot
be supposed remarkable either for sentiment or impartiality--In such a
case, indeed, the defendant is tried, not only by his peers, but also
by his party; and I really think, that of all patriots, he is the most
resolute who exposes himself to such detraction, for the sake of his
country--If, from the ignorance or partiality of juries, a gentleman can
have no redress from law, for being defamed in a pamphlet or newspaper,
I know but one other method of proceeding against the publisher, which
is attended with some risque, but has been practised successfully, more
than once, in my remembrance--A regiment of horse was represented, in
one of the newspapers, as having misbehaved at Dettingen; a captain
of that regiment broke the publisher's bones, telling him, at the same
time, if he went to law, he should certainly have the like salutation
from every officer of the corps. Governor--took the same satisfaction on
the ribs of an author, who traduced him by name in a periodical paper--I
know a low fellow of the same class, who, being turned out of Venice for
his impudence and scurrility, retired to Lugano, a town of the Grisons
(a free people, God wot) where he found a printing press, from whence he
squirted his filth at some respectable characters in the republic, which
he had been obliged to abandon. Some of these, finding him out of the
reach of legal chastisement, employed certain useful instruments, such
as may be found in all countries, to give him the bastinado; which,
being repeated more than once, effectually stopt the current of his
abuse.

As for the liberty of the press, like every other privilege, it must be
restrained within certain bounds; for if it is carried to a branch of
law, religion, and charity, it becomes one of the greatest evils that
ever annoyed the community. If the lowest ruffian may stab your good
name with impunity in England, will you be so uncandid as to exclaim
against Italy for the practice of common assassination? To what purpose
is our property secured, if our moral character is left defenceless?
People thus baited, grow desperate; and the despair of being able to
preserve one's character, untainted by such vermin, produces a total
neglect of fame; so that one of the chief incitements to the practice of
virtue is effectually destroyed.

Mr Barton's last consideration, respecting the stamp-duty, is equally
wise and laudable with another maxim which has been long adopted by our
financiers, namely, to connive at drunkenness, riot, and dissipation,
because they inhance the receipt of the excise; not reflecting, that in
providing this temporary convenience, they are destroying the morals,
health, and industry of the people--Notwithstanding my contempt for
those who flatter a minister, I think there is something still more
despicable in flattering a mob. When I see a man of birth, education,
and fortune, put himself on a level with the dregs of the people, mingle
with low mechanics, feed with them at the same board, and drink with
them in the same cup, flatter their prejudices, harangue in praise of
their virtues, expose themselves to the belchings of their beer, the
fumes of their tobacco, the grossness of their familiarity, and the
impertinence of their conversation, I cannot help despising him, as
a man guilty of the vilest prostitution, in order to effect a purpose
equally selfish and illiberal.

I should renounce politics the more willingly, if I could find other
topics of conversation discussed with more modesty and candour; but the
daemon of party seems to have usurped every department of life. Even
the world of literature and taste is divided into the most virulent
factions, which revile, decry, and traduce the works of one another.
Yesterday, I went to return an afternoon's visit to a gentleman of my
acquaintance, at whose house I found one of the authors of the present
age, who has written with some success--As I had read one or two of his
performances, which gave me pleasure, I was glad of this opportunity
to know his person; but his discourse and deportment destroyed all the
impressions which his writings had made in his favour. He took upon him
to decide dogmatically upon every subject, without deigning to shew the
least cause for his differing from the general opinions of mankind,
as if it had been our duty to acquiesce in the ipse dixit of this new
Pythagoras. He rejudged the characters of all the principal authors, who
had died within a century of the present time; and, in this revision,
paid no sort of regard to the reputation they had acquired--Milton was
harsh and prosaic; Dryden, languid and verbose; Butler and Swift
without humour; Congreve, without wit; and Pope destitute of any sort of
poetical merit--As for his contemporaries, he could not bear to hear
one of them mentioned with any degree of applause--They were all dunces,
pedants, plagiaries, quacks, and impostors; and you could not name a
single performance, but what was tame, stupid, and insipid. It must be
owned, that this writer had nothing to charge his conscience with, on
the side of flattery; for I understand, he was never known to praise one
line that was written, even by those with whom he lived on terms of good
fellowship. This arrogance and presumption, in depreciating authors, for
whose reputation the company may be interested, is such an insult upon
the understanding, as I could not bear without wincing.

I desired to know his reasons for decrying some works, which had
afforded me uncommon pleasure; and, as demonstration did not seem to be
his talent, I dissented from his opinion with great freedom. Having been
spoiled by the deference and humility of his hearers, he did not bear
contradiction with much temper; and the dispute might have grown warm,
had it not been interrupted by the entrance of a rival bard, at whose
appearance he always quits the place--They are of different cabals, and
have been at open war these twenty years--If the other was dogmatical,
this genius was declamatory: he did not discourse, but harangue; and his
orations were equally tedious and turgid. He too pronounces ex cathedra
upon the characters of his contemporaries; and though he scruples not to
deal out praise, even lavishly, to the lowest reptile in Grubstreet who
will either flatter him in private, or mount the public rostrum as his
panegyrist, he damns all the other writers of the age, with the utmost
insolence and rancour--One is a blunderbuss, as being a native of
Ireland; another, a half-starved louse of literature, from the banks
of the Tweed; a third, an ass, because he enjoys a pension from the
government; a fourth, the very angel of dulness, because he succeeded in
a species of writing in which this Aristarchus had failed; a fifth, who
presumed to make strictures upon one of his performances, he holds as
a bug in criticism, whose stench is more offensive than his sting--In
short, except himself and his myrmidons, there is not a man of genius
or learning in the three kingdoms. As for the success of those, who have
written without the pale of this confederacy, he imputes it entirely to
want of taste in the public; not considering, that to the approbation of
that very tasteless public, he himself owes all the consequence he has
in life.

Those originals are not fit for conversation. If they would maintain the
advantage they have gained by their writing, they should never appear
but upon paper--For my part, I am shocked to find a man have sublime
ideas in his head, and nothing but illiberal sentiments in his
heart--The human soul will be generally found most defective in the
article of candour--I am inclined to think, no mind was ever wholly
exempt from envy; which, perhaps, may have been implanted, as an
instinct essential to our nature. I am afraid we sometimes palliate
this vice, under the spacious name of emulation. I have known a person
remarkably generous, humane, moderate, and apparently self-denying,
who could not hear even a friend commended, without betraying marks of
uneasiness; as if that commendation had implied an odious comparison
to his prejudice, and every wreath of praise added to the other's
character, was a garland plucked from his own temples. This is a
malignant species of jealousy, of which I stand acquitted in my own
conscience.

Whether it is a vice, or an infirmity, I leave you to inquire.

There is another point, which I would much rather see determined;
whether the world was always as contemptible, as it appears to me at
present?--If the morals of mankind have not contracted an extraordinary
degree of depravity, within these thirty years, then must I be infected
with the common vice of old men, difficilis, querulus, laudator temporis
acti; or, which is more probable, the impetuous pursuits and avocations
of youth have formerly hindered me from observing those rotten parts of
human nature, which now appear so offensively to my observation.

We have been at court, and 'change, and every where; and every where we
find food for spleen, and subject for ridicule--My new servant,
Humphry Clinker, turns out a great original: and Tabby is a changed
creature--She has parted with Chowder; and does nothing but smile, like
Malvolio in the play--I'll be hanged if she is not acting a part which
is not natural to her disposition, for some purpose which I have not yet
discovered.

With respect to the characters of mankind, my curiosity is quite
satisfied: I have done with the science of men, and must now endeavour
to amuse myself with the novelty of things. I am, at present, by a
violent effort of the mind, forced from my natural bias; but this power
ceasing to act, I shall return to my solitude with redoubled velocity.
Every thing I see, and hear, and feel, in this great reservoir of folly,
knavery, and sophistication, contributes to inhance the value of a
country life, in the sentiments of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 2.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Lady Griskin's botler, Mr Crumb, having got 'squire Barton to frank me
a kiver, I would not neglect to let you know how it is with me, and the
rest of the family.

I could not rite by John Thomas, for because he went away in a huff,
at a minutes' warning. He and Chowder could not agree, and so they fitt
upon the road, and Chowder bitt his thumb, and he swore he would do him
a mischief, and he spoke saucy to mistress, whereby the squire turned
him off in gudgeon; and by God's providence we picked up another
footman, called Umphry Klinker; a good sole as ever broke bread;
which shews that a scalded cat may prove a good mouser, and a hound be
staunch, thof he has got narro hare on his buttocks; but the proudest
nose may be bro't to the grinestone, by sickness and misfortunes.

0 Molly! what shall I say of London? All the towns that ever I beheld
in my born-days, are no more than Welsh barrows and crumlecks to this
wonderful sitty! Even Bath itself is but a fillitch, in the naam of
God--One would think there's no end of the streets, but the land's end.
Then there's such a power of people, going hurry skurry! Such a racket
of coxes! Such a noise, and haliballoo! So many strange sites to be
seen! O gracious! my poor Welsh brain has been spinning like a top ever
since I came hither! And I have seen the Park, and the paleass of Saint
Gimses, and the king's and the queen's magisterial pursing, and the
sweet young princes, and the hillyfents, and pye bald ass, and all the
rest of the royal family.

Last week I went with mistress to the Tower, to see the crowns and wild
beastis; and there was a monstracious lion, with teeth half a quarter
long; and a gentleman bid me not go near him, if I wasn't a maid; being
as how he would roar, and tear, and play the dickens--Now I had no mind
to go near him; for I cannot abide such dangerous honeymils, not I--but,
mistress would go; and the beast kept such a roaring and bouncing,
that I tho't he would have broke his cage and devoured us all; and the
gentleman tittered forsooth; but I'll go to death upon it, I will,
that my lady is as good a firchin, as the child unborn; and, therefore,
either the gentleman told a fib, or the lion oft to be set in the
stocks for bearing false witness agin his neighbour; for the commandment
sayeth, Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

I was afterwards of a party at Sadler's-wells, where I saw such tumbling
and dancing upon ropes and wires, that I was frightened and ready to
go into a fit--I tho't it was all inchantment; and, believing myself
bewitched, began for to cry--You knows as how the witches in Wales fly
upon broom-sticks: but here was flying without any broom-stick, or thing
in the varsal world, and firing of pistols in the air, and blowing of
trumpets, and swinging, and rolling of wheel-barrows upon a wire (God
bless us!) no thicker than a sewing-thread; that, to be sure, they must
deal with the devil!--A fine gentleman, with a pig's-tail, and a golden
sord by his side, come to comfit me, and offered for to treat me with
a pint of wind; but I would not stay; and so, in going through the dark
passage, he began to shew his cloven futt, and went for to be rude: my
fellow-sarvant, Umphry Klinker, bid him be sivil, and he gave the young
man a dowse in the chops; but, I fackins, Mr Klinker wa'n't long in
his debt--with a good oaken sapling he dusted his doublet, for all his
golden cheese toaster; and, fipping me under his arm, carried me huom, I
nose not how, being I was in such a flustration--But, thank God! I'm
now vaned from all such vanities; for what are all those rarities and
vagaries to the glory that shall be revealed hereafter? O Molly! let not
your poor heart be puffed up with vanity.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that I have had my hair cut and
pippered, and singed, and bolstered, and buckled, in the newest fashion,
by a French freezer--Parley vow Francey--Vee madmansell--I now carries
my head higher than arrow private gentlewoman of Vales. Last night,
coming huom from the meeting, I was taken by lamp-light for an iminent
poulterer's daughter, a great beauty--But as I was saying, this is all
vanity and vexation of spirit--The pleasures of London are no better
than sower whey and stale cyder, when compared to the joys of the new
Gerusalem.

Dear Mary Jones! An please God when I return, I'll bring you a new cap,
with a turkey-shell coom, and a pyehouse sermon, that was preached in
the Tabernacle; and I pray of all love, you will mind your vriting
and your spilling; for, craving your pardon, Molly, it made me suet
to disseyffer your last scrabble, which was delivered by the hind at
Bath--0, voman! voman! if thou had'st but the least consumption of what
pleasure we scullers have, when we can cunster the crabbidst buck off
hand, and spell the ethnitch vords without lucking at the primmer. As
for Mr Klinker, he is qualified to be a clerk to a parish--But I'll say
no more--Remember me to Saul--poor sole! it goes to my hart to think
she don't yet know her letters--But all in God's good time--It shall go
hard, but I will bring her the A B C in gingerbread; and that, you nose,
will be learning to her taste.

Mistress says, we are going a long gurney to the North; but go where we
will, I shall ever be,

Dear Mary Jones, Yours with true infection WIN. JENKINS LONDON, June 3.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

I mentioned in my last, my uncle's design of going to the duke of N--'s
levee; which design has been executed accordingly. His grace has been
so long accustomed to this kind of homage, that though the place he now
fills does not imply the tenth part of the influence, which he exerted
in his former office, he has given his friends to understand, that they
cannot oblige him in any thing more, than in contributing to support
the shadow of that power, which he no longer retains in substance; and
therefore he has still public days, on which they appear at his levee.

My uncle and I went thither with Mr Barton, who, being one of the duke's
adherents, undertook to be our introducer--The room was pretty well
filled with people, in a great variety of dress; but there was no more
than one gown and cassock, though I was told his grace had, while he was
minister, preferred almost every individual that now filled the bench of
bishops in the house of lords; but in all probability, the gratitude of
the clergy is like their charity, which shuns the light--Mr Barton
was immediately accosted by a person well stricken in years, tall, and
raw-boned, with a hook-nose, and an arch leer, that indicated, at least,
as much cunning as sagacity. Our conductor saluted him, by the name of
captain C--, and afterwards informed us he was a man of shrewd parts,
whom the government occasionally employed in secret services. But I have
had the history of him more at large, from another quarter. He had been,
many years ago, concerned in fraudulent practices, as a merchant, in
France; and being convicted of some of them, was sent to the gallies,
from whence he was delivered by the interest of the late duke of Ormond,
to whom he had recommended himself in letter, as his name-sake and
relation--He was in the sequel, employed by our ministry as a spy;
and in the war of 1740, traversed all Spain, as well as France, in the
disguise of a capuchin, at the extreme hazard of his life, in as much as
the court of Madrid had actually got scent of him, and given orders to
apprehend him at St Sebastian's, from whence he had fortunately retired
but a few hours before the order arrived. This and other hair-breadth
'scapes he pleaded so effectually as a merit with the English ministry,
that they allowed him a comfortable pension, which he now enjoys in his
old age--He has still access to all the ministers, and is said to be
consulted by them on many subjects, as a man of uncommon understanding
and great experience--He is, in fact, a fellow of some parts, and
invincible assurance; and, in his discourse, he assumes such an air
of self-sufficiency, as may very well impose upon some of the shallow
politicians, who now labour at the helm of administration. But, if he is
not belied, this is not the only imposture of which he is guilty--They
say, he is at bottom not only a Roman-catholic, but really a priest; and
while he pretends to disclose to our state-pilots all the springs that
move the cabinet of Versailles, he is actually picking up intelligence
for the service of the French minister. Be that as it may, captain
C-- entered into conversation with us in the most familiar manner, and
treated the duke's character without any ceremony--'This wiseacre (said
he) is still a-bed; and, I think, the best thing he can do, is to sleep
on till Christmas; for, when he gets up, he does nothing but expose his
own folly.--Since Grenville was turned out, there has been no minister
in this nation worth the meal that whitened his peri-wig--They are so
ignorant, they scarce know a crab from a cauliflower; and then they
are such dunces, that there's no making them comprehend the plainest
proposition--In the beginning of the war, this poor half-witted creature
told me, in a great fright, that thirty thousand French had marched
from Acadie to Cape Breton--"Where did they find transports? (said I)"
"Transports (cried he) I tell you they marched by land"--"By land to the
island of Cape Breton?" "What! is Cape Breton an island?" "Certainly."
"Ha! are you sure of that?" When I pointed it out in the map, he
examined it earnestly with his spectacles; then, taking me in his arms,
"My dear C--! (cried he) you always bring us good news--Egad! I'll go
directly, and tell the king that Cape Breton is an island."'

He seemed disposed to entertain us with more anecdotes of this nature,
at the expense of his grace, when he was interrupted by the arrival
of the Algerine ambassador; a venerable Turk, with a long white beard,
attended by his dragoman, or interpreter, and another officer of his
household, who had got no stockings to his legs--Captain C-- immediately
spoke with an air of authority to a servant in waiting, bidding him go
and tell the duke to rise, as there was a great deal of company come,
and, among others, the ambassador from Algiers. Then, turning to
us, 'This poor Turk (said he) notwithstanding his grey beard, is a
green-horn--He has been several years resident in London, and still is
ignorant of our political revolutions. This visit is intended for
the prime minister of England; but you'll see how this wise duke will
receive it as a mark of attachment to his own person'--Certain it is,
the duke seemed eager to acknowledge the compliment--A door opened,
he suddenly bolted out; with a shaving-cloth under his chin, his
face frothed up to the eyes with soap lather; and running up to the
ambassador, grinned hideous in his face--'My dear Mahomet! (said he) God
love your long beard, I hope the dey will make you a horsetail at the
next promotion, ha, ha, ha! Have but a moment's patience, and I'll send
to you in a twinkling,'--So saying, he retired into his den, leaving
the Turk in some confusion. After a short pause, however, he said
something to his interpreter, the meaning of which I had great
curiosity to know, as he turned up his eyes while he spoke, expressing
astonishment, mixed with devotion. We were gratified by means of the
communicative captain C--, who conversed with the dragoman, as an old
acquaintance. Ibrahim, the ambassador, who had mistaken his grace for
the minister's fool, was no sooner undeceived by the interpreter, than
he exclaimed to this effect 'Holy prophet! I don't wonder that this
nation prospers, seeing it is governed by the counsel of ideots; a
series of men, whom all good mussulmen revere as the organs of immediate
inspiration!' Ibrahim was favoured with a particular audience of short
duration; after which the duke conducted him to the door, and
then returned to diffuse his gracious looks among the crowd of his
worshippers.

As Mr Barton advanced to present me to his grace, it was my fortune to
attract his notice, before I was announced--He forthwith met me more
than half way, and, seizing me by the hand, 'My dear Sir Francis! (cried
he) this is so kind--I vow to God! I am so obliged--Such attention to
a poor broken minister. Well--Pray when does your excellency set
sail?--For God's sake have a care of your health, and cat stewed
prunes in the passage. Next to your own precious health, pray, my dear
excellency, take care of the Five Nations--Our good friends the Five
Nations. The Toryrories, the Maccolmacks, the Out-o'the-ways, the
Crickets, and the Kickshaws--Let 'em have plenty of blankets, and
stinkubus, and wampum; and your excellency won't fail to scour
the kettle, and boil the chain, and bury the tree, and plant the
hatchet--Ha, ha, ha!' When he had uttered this rhapsody, with his usual
precipitation, Mr Barton gave him to understand, that I was neither Sir
Francis, nor St Francis, but simply Mr Melford, nephew to Mr Bramble;
who, stepping forward, made his bow at the same time. 'Odso! no more it
is Sir Francis--(said this wise statesman) Mr Melford, I'm glad to
see you--I sent you an engineer to fortify your dock--Mr Bramble--your
servant, Mr Bramble--How d'ye, good Mr Bramble? Your nephew is a pretty
young fellow--Faith and troth, a very pretty fellow!--His father is
my old friend--How does he hold it? Still troubled with that damned
disorder, ha?' 'No, my lord (replied my uncle), all his troubles are
over--He has been dead these fifteen years.' 'Dead! how--Yes faith!
now I remember: he is dead sure enough--Well, and how--does the
young gentleman stand for Haverford West? or--a what d'ye. My dear Mr
Milfordhaven, I'll do you all the service in my power I hope I have some
credit left'--My uncle then gave him to understand, that I was still a
minor; and that we had no intention to trouble him at present, for any
favour whatsoever--'I came hither with my nephew (added he) to pay our
respects to your grace; and I may venture to say, that his views and
mine are at least as disinterested as those of any individual in this
assembly.' 'My dear Mr Brambleberry! you do me infinite honour--I shall
always rejoice to see you and your hopeful nephew, Mr Milfordhaven--My
credit, such as it is, you may command--I wish we had more friends of
your kidney.'

Then, turning to captain C--, 'Ha, C--! (said he) what news, C--? How
does the world wag? ha!' 'The world wags much after the old fashion, my
lord (answered the captain): the politicians of London and Westminster
have begun again to wag their tongues against your grace; and your
short-lived popularity wags like a feather, which the next puff of
antiministerial calumny will blow away'--'A pack of rascals (cried the
duke)--Tories, Jacobites, rebels; one half of them would wag their heels
at Tyburn, if they had their deserts'--So saying, he wheeled about;
and going round the levee, spoke to every individual, with the most
courteous familiarity; but he scarce ever opened his mouth without
making some blunder, in relation to the person or business of the party
with whom he conversed; so that he really looked like a comedian, hired
to burlesque the character of a minister--At length, a person of a very
prepossessing appearance coming in, his grace ran up, and, hugging him
in his arms, with the appellation of 'My dear Ch--s!' led him forthwith
into the inner apartment, or Sanctum Sanctorum of this political temple.
'That (said captain C--) is my friend C-- T--, almost the only man of
parts who has any concern in the present administration--Indeed, he
would have no concern at all in the matter, if the ministry did not find
it absolutely necessary to make use of his talents upon some particular
occasions--As for the common business of the nation, it is carried on in
a constant routine by the clerks of the different offices, otherwise the
wheels of government would be wholly stopt amidst the abrupt succession
of ministers, every one more ignorant than his predecessor--I am
thinking what a fine hovel we should be in, if all the clerks of the
treasury, the secretaries, of the war-office, and the admiralty, should
take it in their heads to throw up their places in imitation of the
great pensioner--But, to return to C-- T--; he certainly knows more
than all the ministry and all the opposition, if their heads were laid
together, and talks like an angel on a vast variety of subjects. He
would really be a great man, if he had any consistency or stability of
character--Then, it must be owned, he wants courage, otherwise he would
never allow himself to be cowed by the great political bully, for whose
understanding he has justly a very great contempt. I have seen him as
much afraid of that overbearing Hector, as ever schoolboy was of his
pedagogue; and yet this Hector, I shrewdly suspect, is no more than a
craven at bottom--Besides this defect, C-- has another, which he is
at too little pains to hide--There's no faith to be given to his
assertions, and no trust to be put in his promises--However, to give
the devil his due, he's very good-natured; and even friendly, when close
urged in the way of solicitation--As for principle, that's out of the
question--In a word, he is a wit and an orator, extremely entertaining,
and he shines very often at the expence even of those ministers to whom
he is a retainer. This is a mark of great imprudence, by which he has
made them all his enemies, whatever face they may put upon the matter;
and sooner or later he'll have cause to wish he had been able to keep
his own counsel. I have several times cautioned him on this subject;
but 'tis all preaching to the desert--His vanity runs away with his
discretion'--I could not help thinking the captain himself might have
been the better for some hints of the same nature--His panegyric,
excluding principle and veracity, puts me in mind of a contest I
once overheard, in the way of altercation, betwixt two apple-women
in Spring-garden--One of those viragos having hinted something to the
prejudice of the other's moral character, her antagonist, setting her
hands in her sides, replied--'Speak out, hussy--I scorn your malice--I
own I'm both a whore and a thief; and what more have you to say?--Damn
you, what more have you to say? baiting that, which all the world knows,
I challenge you to say black is the white of my eye'--We did not wait
for Mr T--'s coming forth; but after captain C-- had characterised all
the originals in waiting, we adjourned to a coffeehouse, where we had
buttered muffins and tea to breakfast, the said captain still favouring
us with his company--Nay, my uncle was so diverted with his anecdotes,
that he asked him to dinner, and treated him with a fine turbot, to
which he did ample justice--That same evening I spent at the tavern with
some friends, one of whom let me into C--'s character, which Mr Bramble
no sooner understood, than he expressed some concern for the connexion
he had made, and resolved to disengage himself from it without ceremony.

We are become members of the Society for the Encouragement of the Arts,
and have assisted at some of their deliberations, which were conducted
with equal spirit and sagacity--My uncle is extremely fond of the
institution, which will certainly be productive of great advantages to
the public, if, from its democratical form, it does not degenerate into
cabal and corruption--You are already acquainted with his aversion to
the influence of the multitude, which, he affirms, is incompatible with
excellence, and subversive of order--Indeed his detestation of the mob
has been heightened by fear, ever since he fainted in the room at Bath;
and this apprehension has prevented him from going to the Little Theatre
in the Hay-market, and other places of entertainment, to which, however,
I have had the honour to attend the ladies.

It grates old Square-toes to reflect, that it is not in his power to
enjoy even the most elegant diversions of the capital, without the
participation of the vulgar; for they now thrust themselves into all
assemblies, from a ridotto at St James's, to a hop at Rotherhithe. I
have lately seen our old acquaintance Dick Ivy, who we imagined had died
of dram-drinking; but he is lately emerged from the Fleet, by means of
a pamphlet which he wrote and published against the government with some
success. The sale of this performance enabled him to appear in clean
linen, and he is now going about soliciting subscriptions for his Poems;
but his breeches are not yet in the most decent order.

Dick certainly deserves some countenance for his intrepidity and
perseverance--It is not in the power of disappointment, nor even of
damnation, to drive him to despair--After some unsuccessful essays in
the way of poetry, he commenced brandy-merchant, and I believe his
whole stock ran out through his own bowels; then he consorted with a
milk-woman, who kept a cellar in Petty France: but he could not make his
quarters good; he was dislodged and driven up stairs into the kennel by
a corporal in the second regiment of foot-guards--He was afterwards the
laureat of Blackfriars, from whence there was a natural transition to
the Fleet--As he had formerly miscarried in panegyric, he now turned his
thoughts to satire, and really seems to have some talent for abuse. If
he can hold out till the meeting of the parliament, and be prepared
for another charge, in all probability Dick will mount the pillory,
or obtain a pension, in either of which events his fortune will be
made--Mean while he has acquired some degree of consideration with the
respectable writers of the age; and as I have subscribed for his works,
he did me the favour t'other night to introduce me to a society of those
geniuses; but I found them exceedingly formal and reserved--They
seemed afraid and jealous of one another, and sat in a state of mutual
repulsion, like so many particles of vapour, each surrounded by its own
electrified atmosphere. Dick, who has more vivacity than judgment, tried
more than once to enliven the conversation; sometimes making an effort
at wit, sometimes letting off a pun, and sometimes discharging a
conundrum; nay, at length he started a dispute upon the hackneyed
comparison betwixt blank verse and rhyme, and the professors opened with
great clamour; but, instead of keeping to the subject, they launched
out into tedious dissertations on the poetry of the ancients; and one
of them, who had been a school-master, displayed his whole knowledge of
prosody, gleaned from Disputer and Ruddiman. At last, I ventured to say,
I did not see how the subject in question could be at all elucidated by
the practice of the ancients, who certainly had neither blank verse
nor rhyme in their poems, which were measured by feet, whereas ours are
reckoned by the number of syllables--This remark seemed to give umbrage
to the pedant, who forthwith involved himself in a cloud of Greek and
Latin quotations, which nobody attempted to dispel--A confused hum of
insipid observations and comments ensued; and, upon the whole, I never
passed a duller evening in my life--Yet, without all doubt, some of them
were men of learning, wit, and ingenuity. As they are afraid of making
free with one another, they should bring each his butt, or whet-stone,
along with him, for the entertainment of the company--My uncle says, he
never desires to meet with more than one wit at a time--One wit, like a
knuckle of ham in soup, gives a zest and flavour to the dish; but more
than one serves only to spoil the pottage--And now I'm afraid I have
given you an unconscionable mess, without any flavour at all; for which,
I suppose, you will bestow your benedictions upon

Your friend, and servant J. MELFORD LONDON, June 5




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS

Your fable of the monkey and the pig, is what the Italians call ben
trovata: but I shall not repeat it to my apothecary, who is a proud
Scotchman, very thin skinned, and, for aught I know, may have his degree
in his pocket--A right Scotchman has always two strings to his bow, and
is in utrumque paratus--Certain it is, I have not 'scaped a scouring;
but, I believe, by means of that scouring, I have 'scaped something
worse, perhaps a tedious fit of the gout or rheumatism; for my appetite
began to flag, and I had certain croakings in the bowels, which boded me
no good--Nay, I am not yet quite free of these remembrances, which warn
me to be gone from this centre of infection--

What temptation can a man of my turn and temperament have, to live in
a place where every corner teems with fresh objects of detestation
and disgust? What kind of taste and organs must those people have,
who really prefer the adulterate enjoyments of the town to the genuine
pleasures of a country retreat? Most people, I know, are originally
seduced by vanity, ambition, and childish curiosity; which cannot be
gratified, but in the busy haunts of men: but, in the course of this
gratification, their very organs of sense are perverted, and they become
habitually lost to every relish of what is genuine and excellent in its
own nature.

Shall I state the difference between my town grievances, and my country
comforts? At Brambleton-hall, I have elbow-room within doors, and
breathe a clear, elastic, salutary air--I enjoy refreshing sleep, which
is never disturbed by horrid noise, nor interrupted, but in a-morning,
by the sweet twitter of the martlet at my window--I drink the virgin
lymph, pure and chrystalline as it gushes from the rock, or the
sparkling beveridge, home-brewed from malt of my own making; or I
indulge with cyder, which my own orchard affords; or with claret of
the best growth, imported for my own use, by a correspondent on whose
integrity I can depend; my bread is sweet and nourishing, made from my
own wheat, ground in my own mill, and baked in my own oven; my table
is, in a great measure, furnished from my own ground; my five-year old
mutton, fed on the fragrant herbage of the mountains, that might vie
with venison in juice and flavour; my delicious veal, fattened with
nothing but the mother's milk, that fills the dish with gravy; my
poultry from the barn-door, that never knew confinement, but when they
were at roost; my rabbits panting from the warren; my game fresh from
the moors; my trout and salmon struggling from the stream; oysters from
their native banks; and herrings, with other sea fish, I can eat in
four hours after they are taken--My sallads, roots, and potherbs, my own
garden yields in plenty and perfection; the produce of the natural
soil, prepared by moderate cultivation. The same soil affords all the
different fruits which England may call her own, so that my dessert is
every day fresh-gathered from the tree; my dairy flows with nectarious
tildes of milk and cream, from whence we derive abundance of excellent
butter, curds, and cheese; and the refuse fattens my pigs, that are
destined for hams and bacon--I go to bed betimes, and rise with the
sun--I make shift to pass the hours without weariness or regret, and
am not destitute of amusements within doors, when the weather will not
permit me to go abroad--I read, and chat, and play at billiards, cards
or back-gammon--Without doors, I superintend my farm, and execute
plans of improvements, the effects of which I enjoy with unspeakable
delight--Nor do I take less pleasure in seeing my tenants thrive under
my auspices, and the poor live comfortably by the employment which I
provide--You know I have one or two sensible friends, to whom I can open
all my heart; a blessing which, perhaps, I might have sought in vain
among the crowded scenes of life: there are a few others of more humble
parts, whom I esteem for their integrity; and their conversation I find
inoffensive, though not very entertaining. Finally, I live in the midst
of honest men, and trusty dependents, who, I flatter myself, have a
disinterested attachment to my person. You, yourself, my dear Doctor,
can vouch for the truth of these assertions.

Now, mark the contrast at London--I am pent up in frowzy lodgings, where
there is not room enough to swing a cat; and I breathe the steams
of endless putrefaction; and these would, undoubtedly, produce a
pestilence, if they were not qualified by the gross acid of sea-coal,
which is itself a pernicious nuisance to lungs of any delicacy of
texture: but even this boasted corrector cannot prevent those languid,
sallow looks, that distinguish the inhabitants of London from those
ruddy swains that lead a country-life--I go to bed after midnight, jaded
and restless from the dissipations of the day--I start every hour from
my sleep, at the horrid noise of the watchmen bawling the hour through
every street, and thundering at every door; a set of useless fellows,
who serve no other purpose but that of disturbing the repose of the
inhabitants; and by five o'clock I start out of bed, in consequence
of the still more dreadful alarm made by the country carts, and noisy
rustics bellowing green pease under my window. If I would drink water,
I must quaff the maukish contents of an open aqueduct, exposed to all
manner of defilement; or swallow that which comes from the river
Thames, impregnated with all the filth of London and Westminster--Human
excrement is the least offensive part of the concrete, which is
composed of all the drugs, minerals, and poisons, used in mechanics and
manufacture, enriched with the putrefying carcasses of beasts and men;
and mixed with the scourings of all the wash-tubs, kennels, and common
sewers, within the bills of mortality.

This is the agreeable potation, extolled by the Londoners, as the finest
water in the universe--As to the intoxicating potion, sold for wine, it
is a vile, unpalatable, and pernicious sophistication, balderdashed with
cyder, corn-spirit, and the juice of sloes. In an action at law, laid
against a carman for having staved a cask of port, it appeared from the
evidence of the cooper, that there were not above five gallons of real
wine in the whole pipe, which held above a hundred, and even that had
been brewed and adulterated by the merchant at Oporto. The bread I
cat in London, is a deleterious paste, mixed up with chalk, alum, and
bone-ashes; insipid to the taste, and destructive to the constitution.
The good people are not ignorant of this adulteration--but they prefer
it to wholesome bread, because it is whiter than the meal of corn: thus
they sacrifice their taste and their health, and the lives of their
tender infants, to a most absurd gratification of a mis-judging eye; and
the miller, or the baker, is obliged to poison them and their families,
in order to live by his profession. The same monstrous depravity appears
in their veal, which is bleached by repeated bleedings, and other
villainous arts, till there is not a drop of juice left in the body,
and the poor animal is paralytic before it dies; so void of all taste,
nourishment, and savour, that a man might dine as comfortably on a white
fricassee of kid-skin gloves; or chip hats from Leghorn.

As they have discharged the natural colour from their bread, their
butchers-meat, and poultry, their cutlets, ragouts, fricassees and
sauces of all kinds; so they insist upon having the complexion of their
potherbs mended, even at the hazard of their lives. Perhaps, you will
hardly believe they can be so mad as to boil their greens with brass
halfpence, in order to improve their colour; and yet nothing is more
true--Indeed, without this improvement in the colour, they have no
personal merit. They are produced in an artificial soil, and taste
of nothing but the dunghills, from whence they spring. My cabbage,
cauliflower, and 'sparagus in the country, are as much superior in
flavour to those that are sold in Covent-garden, as my heath-mutton is
to that of St James's-market; which in fact, is neither lamb nor mutton,
but something betwixt the two, gorged in the rank fens of Lincoln and
Essex, pale, coarse, and frowzy--As for the pork, it is an abominable
carnivorous animal, fed with horse-flesh and distillers' grains; and
the poultry is all rotten, in consequence of a fever, occasioned by
the infamous practice of sewing up the gut, that they may be the sooner
fattened in coops, in consequence of this cruel retention.

Of the fish, I need say nothing in this hot weather, but that it comes
sixty, seventy, fourscore, and a hundred miles by land-carriage; a
circumstance sufficient without any comment, to turn a Dutchman's
stomach, even if his nose was not saluted in every alley with the sweet
flavour of fresh mackarel, selling by retail. This is not the season for
oysters; nevertheless, it may not be amiss to mention, that the right
Colchester are kept in slime-pits, occasionally overflowed by the sea;
and that the green colour, so much admired by the voluptuaries of this
metropolis, is occasioned by the vitriolic scum, which rises on the
surface of the stagnant and stinking water--Our rabbits are bred and
fed in the poulterer's cellar, where they have neither air nor exercise,
consequently they must be firm in flesh, and delicious in flavour; and
there is no game to be had for love or money.

It must be owned, the Covent-garden affords some good fruit; which,
however, is always engrossed by a few individuals of overgrown fortune,
at an exorbitant price; so that little else than the refuse of the
market falls to the share of the community; and that is distributed
by such filthy hands, as I cannot look at without loathing. It was but
yesterday that I saw a dirty barrow-bunter in the street, cleaning her
dusty fruit with her own spittle; and, who knows but some fine lady
of St James's parish might admit into her delicate mouth those very
cherries, which had been rolled and moistened between the filthy, and,
perhaps, ulcerated chops of a St Giles's huckster--I need not dwell upon
the pallid, contaminated mash, which they call strawberries; soiled and
tossed by greasy paws through twenty baskets crusted with dirt; and then
presented with the worst milk, thickened with the worst flour, into a
bad likeness of cream: but the milk itself should not pass unanalysed,
the produce of faded cabbage-leaves and sour draff, lowered with hot
water, frothed with bruised snails, carried through the streets in open
pails, exposed to foul rinsings, discharged from doors and windows,
spittle, snot, and tobacco-quids from foot passengers, overflowings from
mud carts, spatterings from coach wheels, dirt and trash chucked into it
by roguish boys for the joke's sake, the spewings of infants, who have
slabbered in the tin-measure, which is thrown back in that condition
among the milk, for the benefit of the next customer; and, finally,
the vermin that drops from the rags of the nasty drab that vends this
precious mixture, under the respectable denomination of milk-maid.

I shall conclude this catalogue of London dainties, with that
table-beer, guiltless of hops and malt, vapid and nauseous; much fitter
to facilitate the operation of a vomit, than to quench thirst and
promote digestion; the tallowy rancid mass, called butter, manufactured
with candle grease and kitchen stuff; and their fresh eggs, imported
from France and Scotland.--Now, all these enormities might be remedied
with a very little attention to the article of police, or civil
regulation; but the wise patriots of London have taken it into their
heads, that all regulation is inconsistent with liberty; and that every
man ought to live in his own way, without restraint--Nay, as there is
not sense enough left among them, to be discomposed by the nuisance I
have mentioned, they may, for aught I care, wallow in the mire of their
own pollution.

A companionable man will, undoubtedly put up with many inconveniences
for the sake of enjoying agreeable society. A facetious friend of mine
used to say, the wine could not be bad, where the company was agreeable;
a maxim which, however, ought to be taken cum grano salis: but what
is the society of London, that I should be tempted, for its sake, to
mortify my senses, and compound with such uncleanness as my soul abhors?
All the people I see, are too much engrossed by schemes of interest or
ambition, to have any room left for sentiment or friendship. Even in
some of my old acquaintance, those schemes and pursuits have obliterated
all traces of our former connexion--Conversation is reduced to party
disputes, and illiberal altercation--Social commerce, to formal visits
and card-playing--If you pick up a diverting original by accident, it
may be dangerous to amuse yourself with his oddities--He is generally a
tartar at bottom; a sharper, a spy, or a lunatic. Every person you deal
with endeavours to overreach you in the way of business; you are preyed
upon by idle mendicants, who beg in the phrase of borrowing, and live
upon the spoils of the stranger--Your tradesmen are without conscience,
your friends without affection, and your dependents without fidelity.--

My letter would swell into a treatise, were I to particularize every
cause of offence that fills up the measure of my aversion to this, and
every other crowded city--Thank Heaven! I am not so far sucked into
the vortex, but that I can disengage myself without any great effort of
philosophy--From this wild uproar of knavery, folly, and impertinence, I
shall fly with double relish to the serenity of retirement, the cordial
effusions of unreserved friendship, the hospitality and protection
of the rural gods; in a word, the jucunda oblivia Vitae, which Horace
himself had not taste enough to enjoy.--

I have agreed for a good travelling-coach and four, at a guinea a day,
for three months certain; and next week we intend to begin our
journey to the North, hoping still to be with you by the latter end of
October--I shall continue to write from every stage where we make any
considerable halt, as often as anything occurs, which I think can
afford you the least amusement. In the mean time, I must beg you will
superintend the oeconomy of Barns, with respect to my hay and corn
harvests; assured that my ground produces nothing but what you may
freely call your own--On any other terms I should be ashamed to
subscribe myself

Your unvariable friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last, I mentioned my having spent an evening with a society of
authors, who seemed to be jealous and afraid of one another. My uncle
was not at all surprised to hear me say I was disappointed in their
conversation. 'A man may be very entertaining and instructive upon paper
(said he), and exceedingly dull in common discourse. I have observed,
that those who shine most in private company, are but secondary stars
in the constellation of genius--A small stock of ideas is more easily
managed, and sooner displayed, than a great quantity crowded together.
There is very seldom any thing extraordinary in the appearance and
address of a good writer; whereas a dull author generally distinguishes
himself by some oddity or extravagance. For this reason, I fancy, that
an assembly of Grubs must be very diverting.'

My curiosity being excited by this hint, I consulted my friend Dick Ivy,
who undertook to gratify it the very next day, which was Sunday last.
He carried me to dine with S--, whom you and I have long known by his
writings.--He lives in the skirts of the town, and every Sunday his
house is opened to all unfortunate brothers of the quill, whom he treats
with beef, pudding, and potatoes, port, punch, and Calvert's entire butt
beer. He has fixed upon the first day of the week for the exercise of
his hospitality, because some of his guests could not enjoy it on any
other, for reasons that I need not explain. I was civilly received in
a plain, yet decent habitation, which opened backwards into a very
pleasant garden, kept in excellent order; and, indeed, I saw none of the
outward signs of authorship, either in the house or the landlord, who
is one of those few writers of the age that stand upon their own
foundation, without patronage, and above dependence. If there was
nothing characteristic in the entertainer, the company made ample amends
for his want of singularity.

At two in the afternoon, I found myself one of ten messmates seated at
table; and, I question, if the whole kingdom could produce such another
assemblage of originals. Among their peculiarities, I do not mention
those of dress, which may be purely accidental. What struck me were
oddities originally produced by affectation, and afterwards confirmed
by habit. One of them wore spectacles at dinner, and another his hat
flapped; though (as Ivy told me) the first was noted for having a
seaman's eye, when a bailiff was in the wind; and the other was never
known to labour under any weakness or defect of vision, except about
five years ago, when he was complimented with a couple of black eyes by
a player, with whom he had quarrelled in his drink. A third wore a laced
stocking, and made use of crutches, because, once in his life, he had
been laid up with a broken leg, though no man could leap over a stick
with more agility. A fourth had contracted such an antipathy to the
country, that he insisted upon sitting with his back towards the window
that looked into the garden, and when a dish of cauliflower was set upon
the table, he snuffed up volatile salts to keep him from fainting; yet
this delicate person was the son of a cottager, born under a hedge,
and had many years run wild among asses on a common. A fifth affected
distraction. When spoke to, he always answered from the purpose
sometimes he suddenly started up, and rapped out a dreadful oath
sometimes he burst out a-laughing--then he folded his arms, and sighed
and then, he hissed like fifty serpents.

At first I really thought he was mad, and, as he sat near me, began
to be under some apprehensions for my own safety, when our landlord,
perceiving me alarmed, assured me aloud that I had nothing to fear. 'The
gentleman (said he) is trying to act a part for which he is by no means
qualified--if he had all the inclination in the world, it is not in his
power to be mad. His spirits are too flat to be kindled into frenzy.'
''Tis no bad p-p-puff, however (observed a person in a tarnished
laced coat): aff-ffected in-madness w-will p-pass for w-wit w-with
nine-ninet-teen out of t-twenty.'--'And affected stuttering for humour:
replied our landlord, tho', God knows, there is an affinity betwixt
them.' It seems, this wag, after having made some abortive attempts
in plain speaking, had recourse to this defect, by means of which he
frequently extorted the laugh of the company, without the least expence
of genius; and that imperfection, which he had at first counterfeited,
was now become so habitual, that he could not lay it aside.

A certain winking genius, who wore yellow gloves at dinner, had, on his
first introduction, taken such offence at S--, because he looked
and talked, and ate and drank like any other man, that he spoke
contemptuously of his understanding ever after, and never would repeat
his visit, until he had exhibited the following proof of his caprice.
Wat Wyvil, the poet, having made some unsuccessful advances towards an
intimacy with S--, at last gave him to understand, by a third person,
that he had written a poem in his praise, and a satire against his
person; that if he would admit him to his house, the first should be
immediately sent to press; but that if he persisted in declining his
friendship, he would publish his satire without delay. S-- replied, that
he looked upon Wyvil's panegyrick, as in effect, a species of infamy,
and would resent it accordingly with a good cudgel; but if he published
the satire, he might deserve his compassion, and had nothing to fear
from his revenge. Wyvil having considered the alternative, resolved to
mortify S-- by printing the panegyrick, for which he received a sound
drubbing. Then he swore the peace against the aggressor, who, in order
to avoid a prosecution at law, admitted him to his good graces. It was
the singularity in S--'s conduct, on this occasion, that reconciled him
to the yellow-gloved philosopher, who owned he had some genius, and from
that period cultivated his acquaintance.

Curious to know upon what subjects the several talents of my
fellow-guests were employed, I applied to my communicative friend Dick
Ivy, who gave me to understand, that most of them were, or had been,
understrappers, or journeymen, to more creditable authors, for whom they
translated, collated, and compiled, in the business of bookmaking; and
that all of them had, at different times, laboured in the service of
our landlord, though they had now set up for themselves in various
departments of literature. Not only their talents, but also their
nations and dialects were so various, that our conversation resembled
the confusion of tongues at Babel. We had the Irish brogue, the
Scotch accent, and foreign idiom, twanged off by the most discordant
vociferation; for, as they all spoke together, no man had any chance
to be heard, unless he could bawl louder than his fellows. It must be
owned, however, there was nothing pedantic in their discourse; they
carefully avoided all learned disquisitions, and endeavoured to be
facetious; nor did their endeavours always miscarry--some droll repartee
passed, and much laughter was excited; and if any individual lost his
temper so far as to transgress the bounds of decorum, he was effectually
checked by the master of the feast, who exerted a sort of paternal
authority over this irritable tribe.

The most learned philosopher of the whole collection, who had been
expelled the university for atheism, has made great progress in a
refutation of lord Bolingbroke's metaphysical works, which is said to
be equally ingenious, and orthodox; but, in the mean time, he has been
presented to the grand jury as a public nuisance, for having blasphemed
in an ale-house on the Lord's day. The Scotchman gives lectures on the
pronunciation of the English language, which he is now publishing by
subscription.

The Irishman is a political writer, and goes by the name of my Lord
Potatoe. He wrote a pamphlet in vindication of a minister, hoping his
zeal would be rewarded with some place or pension; but, finding himself
neglected in that quarter, he whispered about, that the pamphlet was
written by the minister himself, and he published an answer to his own
production. In this, he addressed the author under the title of your
lordship with such solemnity, that the public swallowed the deceit, and
bought up the whole impression. The wise politicians of the metropolis
declared they were both masterly performances, and chuckled over the
flimsy reveries of an ignorant garretteer, as the profound speculations
of a veteran statesman, acquainted with all the secrets of the cabinet.
The imposture was detected in the sequel, and our Hibernian pamphleteer
retains no part of his assumed importance, but the bare title of
my lord. and the upper part of the table at the potatoe-ordinary in
Shoelane.

Opposite to me sat a Piedmontese, who had obliged the public with
a humorous satire, intituled, The Ballance of the English Poets, a
performance which evinced the great modesty and taste of the author,
and, in particular, his intimacy with the elegancies of the English
language. The sage, who laboured under the agrophobia, or horror of
green fields, had just finished a treatise on practical agriculture,
though, in fact, he had never seen corn growing in his life, and was
so ignorant of grain, that our entertainer, in the face of the whole
company, made him own, that a plate of hominy was the best rice pudding
he had ever eat.

The stutterer had almost finished his travels through Europe and part
of Asia, without ever budging beyond the liberties of the King's Bench,
except in term-time, with a tipstaff for his companion; and as for
little Tim Cropdale, the most facetious member of the whole society,
he had happily wound up the catastrophe of a virgin tragedy, from the
exhibition of which he promised himself a large fund of profit and
reputation. Tim had made shift to live many years by writing novels,
at the rate of five pounds a volume; but that branch of business is now
engrossed by female authors, who publish merely for the propagation of
virtue, with so much ease and spirit, and delicacy, and knowledge of the
human heart, and all in the serene tranquillity of high life, that the
reader is not only inchanted by their genius, but reformed by their
morality.

After dinner, we adjourned into the garden, where, I observed, Mr S--
gave a short separate audience to every individual in a small remote
filbert walk, from whence most of them dropt off one after another,
without further ceremony; but they were replaced by fresh recruits of
the same clan, who came to make an afternoon's visit; and, among others,
a spruce bookseller, called Birkin, who rode his own gelding, and made
his appearance in a pair of new jemmy boots, with massy spurs of plate.
It was not without reason, that this midwife of the Muses used exercise
a-horseback, for he was too fat to walk a-foot, and he underwent some
sarcasms from Tim Cropdale, on his unwieldy size and inaptitude for
motion. Birkin, who took umbrage at this poor author's petulance in
presuming to joke upon a man so much richer than himself, told him, he
was not so unwieldy but that he could move the Marshalsea court for a
writ, and even overtake him with it, if he did not very speedily come
and settle accounts with him, respecting the expence of publishing his
last ode to the king of Prussia, of which he had sold but three, and
one of them was to Whitfield the methodist. Tim affected to receive this
intimation with good humour, saying, he expected in a post or two, from
Potsdam, a poem of thanks from his Prussian majesty, who knew very well
how to pay poets in their own coin; but, in the mean time, he proposed,
that Mr Birkin and he should run three times round the garden for a bowl
of punch, to be drank at Ashley's in the evening, and he would run boots
against stockings. The bookseller, who valued himself upon his mettle,
was persuaded to accept the challenge, and he forthwith resigned
his boots to Cropdale, who, when he had put them on, was no bad
representation of captain Pistol in the play.

Every thing being adjusted, they started together with great
impetuosity, and, in the second round, Birkin had clearly the advantage,
larding the lean earth as he puff'd along. Cropdale had no mind to
contest the victory further; but, in a twinkling, disappeared through
the back-door of the garden, which opened into a private lane, that had
communication with the high road.--The spectators immediately began to
hollow, 'Stole away!' and Birkin set off in pursuit of him with great
eagerness; but he had not advanced twenty yards in the lane, when a
thorn running into his foot, sent him hopping back into the garden,
roaring with pain, and swearing with vexation. When he was delivered
from this annoyance by the Scotchman, who had been bred to surgery, he
looked about him wildly, exclaiming, 'Sure, the fellow won't be such
a rogue as to run clear away with my boots!' Our landlord, having
reconnoitered the shoes he had left, which, indeed, hardly deserved that
name, 'Pray (said he), Mr Birkin, wa'n't your boots made of calf-skin?'
'Calf-skin or cow-skin (replied the other) I'll find a slip of
sheep-skin that will do his business--I lost twenty pounds by his farce
which you persuaded me to buy--I am out of pocket five pounds by
his damn'd ode; and now this pair of boots, bran new, cost me
thirty shillings, as per receipt--But this affair of the boots is
felony--transportation.--I'll have the dog indicted at the Old Bailey--I
will, Mr S-- I will be reveng'd, even though I should lose my debt in
consequence of his conviction.'

Mr S-- said nothing at present, but accommodated him with a pair of
shoes; then ordered his servant to rub him down, and comfort him with a
glass of rum-punch, which seemed, in a great measure, to cool the rage
of his indignation. 'After all (said our landlord) this is no more
than a humbug in the way of wit, though it deserves a more respectable
epithet, when considered as an effort of invention. Tim, being (I
suppose) out of credit with the cordwainer, fell upon this ingenious
expedient to supply the want of shoes, knowing that Mr Birkin, who
loves humour, would himself relish the joke upon a little recollection.
Cropdale literally lives by his wit, which he has exercised upon all his
friends in their turns. He once borrowed my poney for five or six days
to go to Salisbury, and sold him in Smithfield at his return. This was
a joke of such a serious nature, that, in the first transports of my
passion, I had some thoughts of prosecuting him for horse-stealing;
and even when my resentment had in some measure subsided, as he
industriously avoided me, I vowed, I would take satisfaction on his ribs
with the first opportunity. One day, seeing him at some distance in the
street, coming towards me, I began to prepare my cane for action, and
walked in the shadow of a porter, that he might not perceive me soon
enough to make his escape; but, in the very instant I had lifted up
the instrument of correction, I found Tim Cropdale metamorphosed into a
miserable blind wretch, feeling his way with a long stick from post to
post, and rolling about two bald unlighted orbs instead of eyes. I
was exceedingly shocked at having so narrowly escaped the concern and
disgrace that would have attended such a misapplication of vengeance:
but, next day, Tim prevailed upon a friend of mine to come and solicit
my forgiveness, and offer his note, payable in six weeks, for the price
of the poney. This gentleman gave me to understand, that the blind man
was no other than Cropdale, who having seen me advancing, and
guessing my intent, had immediately converted himself into the object
aforesaid--I was so diverted at the ingenuity of the evasion, that I
agreed to pardon his offence, refusing his note, however, that I might
keep a prosecution for felony hanging over his head, as a security for
his future good behaviour--But Timothy would by no means trust himself
in my hands till the note was accepted--then he made his appearance at
my door as a blind beggar, and imposed in such a manner upon my man, who
had been his old acquaintance and pot-companion, that the fellow threw
the door in his face, and even threatened to give him the bastinado.
Hearing a noise in the hall, I went thither, and immediately
recollecting the figure I had passed in the street, accosted him by his
own name, to the unspeakable astonishment of the footman.'

Birkin declared he loved a joke as well as another; but asked if any of
the company could tell where Mr Cropdale lodged, that he might send him
a proposal about restitution, before the boots should be made away with.
'I would willingly give him a pair of new shoes (said he), and half a
guinea into the bargain' for the boots, which fitted me like a glove;
and I shan't be able to get the fellows of them 'till the good weather
for riding is over. The stuttering wit declared, that the only secret
which Cropdale ever kept, was the place of his lodgings; but he
believed, that, during the heats of summer, he commonly took his
repose upon a bulk, or indulged himself, in fresco, with one of the
kennel-nymphs, under the portico of St Martin's church. 'Pox on him!
(cried the bookseller) he might as well have taken my whip and spurs. In
that case, he might have been tempted to steal another horse, and then
he would have rid to the devil of course.'

After coffee, I took my leave of Mr S--, with proper acknowledgments of
his civility, and was extremely well pleased with the entertainment of
the day, though not yet satisfied, with respect to the nature of this
connexion, betwixt a man of character in the literary world, and a
parcel of authorlings, who, in all probability, would never be able
to acquire any degree of reputation by their labours. On this head
I interrogated my conductor, Dick Ivy, who answered me to this
effect--'One would imagine S-- had some view to his own interest, in
giving countenance and assistance to those people, whom he knows to be
bad men, as well as bad writers; but, if he has any such view, he will
find himself disappointed; for if he is so vain as to imagine he can
make them, subservient to his schemes of profit or ambition, they are
cunning enough to make him their property in the mean time. There is not
one of the company you have seen to-day (myself excepted) who does
not owe him particular obligations--One of them he bailed out of a
spunging-house, and afterwards paid the debt--another he translated into
his family, and clothed, when he was turned out half naked from jail in
consequence of an act for the relief of insolvent debtors--a third, who
was reduced to a woollen night cap, and lived upon sheeps trotters, up
three pair of stairs backward in Butcher-row, he took into present pay
and free quarters, and enabled him to appear as a gentleman, without
having the fear of sheriff's officers before his eyes. Those who are in
distress he supplies with money when he has it, and with his credit when
he is out of cash. When they want business, he either finds employment
for them in his own service, or recommends them to booksellers to
execute some project he has formed for their subsistence. They are
always welcome to his table (which though plain, is plentiful) and to
his good offices as far as they will go, and when they see Occasion,
they make use of his name with the most petulant familiarity; nay, they
do not even scruple to arrogate to themselves the merit of some of his
performances, and have been known to sell their own lucubrations as the
produce of his brain. The Scotchman you saw at dinner once personated
him at an alehouse in West-Smithfield and, in the character of S--, had
his head broke by a cow-keeper, for having spoke disrespectfully of the
Christian religion; but he took the law of him in his own person, and
the assailant was fain to give him ten pounds to withdraw his action.'

I observed, that all this appearance of liberality on the side of Mr S--
was easily accounted for, on the supposition that they flattered him
in private, and engaged his adversaries in public; and yet I was
astonished, when I recollected that I often had seen this writer
virulently abused in papers, poems, and pamphlets, and not a pen was
drawn in his defence 'But you will be more astonished (said he) when I
assure you, those very guests whom you saw at his table to-day, were
the authors of great part of that abuse; and he himself is well aware
of their particular favours, for they are all eager to detect and betray
one another.' 'But this is doing the devil's work for nothing (cried I).
What should induce them to revile their benefactor without provocation?'
'Envy (answered Dick) is the general incitement; but they are galled by
an additional scourge of provocation. S-- directs a literary journal,
in which their productions are necessarily brought to trial; and though
many of them have been treated with such lenity and favour as they
little deserved, yet the slightest censure, such as, perhaps, could not
be avoided with any pretensions to candour and impartiality, has rankled
in the hearts of those authors to such a degree, that they have taken
immediate vengeance on the critic in anonymous libels, letters,
and lampoons. Indeed, all the writers of the age, good, bad, and
indifferent, from the moment he assumed this office, became his enemies,
either professed or in petto, except those of his friends who knew they
had nothing to fear from his strictures; and he must be a wiser man than
me who can tell what advantage or satisfaction he derives from having
brought such a nest of hornets about his ears.'

I owned, that was a point which might deserve consideration; but still
I expressed a desire to know his real motives for continuing his
friendship to a set of rascals equally ungrateful and insignificant.--He
said, he did not pretend to assign any reasonable motive; that, if
the truth must be told, the man was, in point of conduct, a most
incorrigible fool; that, though he pretended to have a knack at hitting
off characters, he blundered strangely in the distribution of his
favours, which were generally bestowed on the most undeserving of those
who had recourse to his assistance; that, indeed, this preference was
not so much owing to want of discernment as to want of resolution, for
he had not fortitude enough to resist the importunity even of the most
worthless; and, as he did not know the value of money, there was very
little merit in parting with it so easily; that his pride was gratified
in seeing himself courted by such a number of literary dependents; that,
probably, he delighted in hearing them expose and traduce one another;
and, finally, from their information, he became acquainted with all the
transactions of Grubstreet, which he had some thoughts of compiling for
the entertainment of the public.

I could not help suspecting, from Dick's discourse, that he had some
particular grudge against S--, upon whose conduct he had put the worst
construction it would bear; and, by dint of cross-examination, I found
he was not at all satisfied with the character which had been given in
the Review of his last performance, though it had been treated civilly
in consequence of the author's application to the critic. By all
accounts, S-- is not without weakness and caprice; but he is certainly
good-humoured and civilized; nor do I find that there is any thing
overbearing, cruel, or implacable in his disposition.

I have dwelt so long upon authors, that you will perhaps suspect I
intend to enroll myself among the fraternity; but, if I were actually
qualified for the profession, it is at best but a desperate resource
against starving, as it affords no provision for old age and infirmity.
Salmon, at the age of fourscore, is now in a garret, compiling matter,
at a guinea a sheet, for a modern historian, who, in point of age, might
be his grandchild; and Psalmonazar, after having drudged half a century
in the literary mill, in all the simplicity and abstinence of an
Asiatic, subsists upon the charity of a few booksellers, just sufficient
to keep him from the parish, I think Guy, who was himself a bookseller,
ought to have appropriated one wing or ward of his hospital to the use
of decayed authors; though indeed, there is neither hospital, college,
nor workhouse, within the bills of mortality, large enough to contain
the poor of this society, composed, as it is, from the refuse of every
other profession.

I know not whether you will find any amusement in this account of an odd
race of mortals, whose constitution had, I own, greatly interested the
curiosity of

Yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 10.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

There is something on my spirits, which I should not venture to
communicate by the post, but having the opportunity of Mrs Brentwood's
return, I seize it eagerly, to disburthen my poor heart, which is
oppressed with fear and vexation.--O Letty! what a miserable situation
it is, to be without a friend to whom one can apply for counsel and
consolation in distress! I hinted in my last, that one Mr Barton had
been very particular in his civilities: I can no longer mistake his
meaning--he has formally professed himself my admirer; and, after
a thousand assiduities, perceiving I made but a cold return to his
addresses, he had recourse to the mediation of lady Griskin, who has
acted the part of a very warm advocate in his behalf:--but, my dear
Willis, her ladyship over acts her part--she not only expatiates on the
ample fortune, the great connexions, and the unblemished character of
Mr Barton, but she takes the trouble to catechise me; and, two days ago,
peremptorily told me, that a girl of my age could not possibly resist so
many considerations, if her heart was not pre-engaged.

This insinuation threw me into such a flutter, that she could not but
observe my disorder; and, presuming upon the discovery, insisted upon
my making her the confidante of my passion. But, although I had not such
command of myself as to conceal the emotion of my heart, I am not such a
child as to disclose its secret to a person who would certainly use
them to its prejudice. I told her, it was no wonder if I was out of
countenance at her introducing a subject of conversation so unsuitable
to my years and inexperience; that I believed Mr Barton was a very
worthy gentleman, and I was much obliged to him for his good opinion;
but the affections were involuntary, and mine, in particular, had as
yet made no concessions in his favour. She shook her head with an air of
distrust that made me tremble; and observed, that if my affections were
free, they would submit to the decision of prudence, especially when
enforced by the authority of those who had a right to direct my conduct.
This remark implied a design to interest my uncle or my aunt, perhaps my
brother, in behalf of Mr Barton's passion; and I am sadly afraid that
my aunt is already gained over. Yesterday in the forenoon, he had been
walking with us in the Park, and stopping in our return at a toy-shop,
he presented her with a very fine snuff-box, and me with a gold etuis,
which I resolutely refused, till she commanded me to accept it on pain
of her displeasure: nevertheless, being still unsatisfied with respect
to the propriety of receiving this toy, I signified my doubts to my
brother, who said he would consult my uncle on the subject, and seemed
to think Mr Barton had been rather premature in his presents.

What will be the result of this consultation, Heaven knows; but I am
afraid it will produce an explanation with Mr Barton, who will, no
doubt, avow his passion, and solicit their consent to a connexion which
my soul abhors; for, my dearest Letty, it is not in my power to love Mr
Barton, even if my heart was untouched by any other tenderness. Not that
there is any thing disagreeable about his person, but there is a total
want of that nameless charm which captivates and controuls the inchanted
spirit at least, he appears to me to have this defect; but if he had
all the engaging qualifications which a man can possess, they would be
excited in vain against that constancy, which, I flatter myself, is the
characteristic of my nature. No, my dear Willis, I may be involved in
fresh troubles, and I believe I shall, from the importunities of this
gentleman and the violence of my relations; but my heart is incapable of
change.

You know I put no faith in dreams; and yet I have been much disturbed
by one that visited me last night.--I thought I was in a church, where
a certain person, whom you know, was on the point of being married to my
aunt; that the clergyman was Mr Barton, and that poor forlorn I, stood
weeping in a corner, half naked, and without shoes or stockings.--Now,
I know there is nothing so childish as to be moved by those vain
illusions; but, nevertheless, in spite of all my reason, this hath
made a strong impression upon my mind, which begins to be very gloomy.
Indeed, I have another more substantial cause of affliction--I have some
religious scruples, my dear friend, which lie heavy on my conscience.--I
was persuaded to go to the Tabernacle, where I heard a discourse that
affected me deeply.--I have prayed fervently to be enlightened, but
as yet I am not sensible of these inward motions, those operations of
grace, which are the signs of a regenerated spirit; and therefore I
begin to be in terrible apprehensions about the state of my poor soul.
Some of our family have had very uncommon accessions, particularly
my aunt and Mrs Jenkins, who sometimes speak as if they were really
inspired; so that I am not like to want for either exhortation or
example, to purify my thoughts, and recall them from the vanities of
this world, which, indeed, I would willingly resign, if it was in my
power; but to make this sacrifice, I must be enabled by such assistance
from above as hath not yet been indulged to

Your unfortunate friend, LYDIA MELFORD June 10.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The moment I received your letter, I began to execute your
commission--With the assistance of mine host at the Bull and Gate, I
discovered the place to which your fugitive valet had retreated, and
taxed him with his dishonesty--The fellow was in manifest confusion at
sight of me, but he denied the charge with great confidence, till I told
him, that if he would give up the watch, which was a family piece, he
might keep the money and the clothes, and go to the devil his own way,
at his leisure; but if he rejected this proposal, I would deliver him
forthwith to the constable, whom I had provided for that purpose, and
he would carry him before the justice without further delay. After
some hesitation, he desired to speak with me in the next room, where he
produced the watch, with all its appendages, and I have delivered it to
our landlord, to be sent you by the first safe conveyance.

So much for business.

I shall grow vain, upon your saying you find entertainment in my
letters; barren, as they certainly are, of incident and importance,
because your amusement must arise, not from the matter, but from the
manner, which you know is all my own--Animated, therefore, by the
approbation of a person, whose nice taste and consummate judgment I can
no longer doubt, I will chearfully proceed with our memoirs--As it is
determined we shall set out next week for Yorkshire, I went to-day in
the forenoon with my uncle to see a carriage, belonging to a coachmaker
in our neighbourhood--Turning down a narrow lane, behind Longacre, we
perceived a crowd of people standing at a door; which, it seems, opened
into a kind of a methodist meeting, and were informed, that a footman
was then holding forth to the congregation within. Curious to see this
phoenomenon, we squeezed into the place with much difficulty; and who
should this preacher be, but the identical Humphry Clinker. He had
finished his sermon, and given out a psalm, the first stave of which he
sung with peculiar graces--But if we were astonished to see Clinker in
the pulpit, we were altogether confounded at finding all the females
of our family among the audience--There was lady Griskin, Mrs Tabitha
Bramble, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, my sister Liddy, and Mr Barton, and all
of them joined in the psalmody, with strong marks of devotion.

I could hardly keep my gravity on this ludicrous occasion; but old
Square-toes was differently affected--The first thing that struck him,
was the presumption of his lacquey, whom he commanded to come down, with
such an air of authority as Humphry did not think proper to disregard.
He descended immediately, and all the people were in commotion. Barton
looked exceedingly sheepish, lady Griskin flirted her fan, Mrs Tabby
groaned in spirit, Liddy changed countenance, and Mrs Jenkins sobbed as
if her heart was breaking--My uncle, with a sneer, asked pardon of the
ladies, for having interrupted their devotion, saying, he had particular
business with the preacher, whom he ordered to call a hackney-coach.
This being immediately brought up to the end of the lane, he handed
Liddy into it, and my aunt and I following him, we drove home, without
taking any further notice of the rest of the company, who still remained
in silent astonishment.

Mr Bramble, perceiving Liddy in great trepidation, assumed a milder
aspect, bidding her be under no concern, for he was not at all
displeased at any thing she had done--'I have no objection (said he)
to your being religiously inclined; but I don't think my servant is a
proper ghostly director for a devotee of your sex and character--if,
in fact (as I rather believe) your aunt is not the sole conductress of,
this machine'--Mrs Tabitha made no answer, but threw up the whites of
her eyes, as if in the act of ejaculation--Poor Liddy, said, she had no
right to the title of a devotee; that she thought there was no harm in
hearing a pious discourse, even if it came from a footman, especially
as her aunt was present; but that if she had erred from ignorance, she
hoped he would excuse it, as she could not bear the thoughts of living
under his displeasure. The old gentleman, pressing her hand with a
tender smile, said she was a good girl, and that he did not believe
her capable of doing any thing that could give him the least umbrage or
disgust.

When we arrived at our lodgings, he commanded Mr Clinker to attend him
up stairs, and spoke to him in these words--'Since you are called upon
by the spirit to preach and to teach, it is high time to lay aside the
livery of an earthly master; and for my part, I am unworthy to have an
apostle in my service'--'I hope (said Humphry) I have not failed in my
duty to your honour--I should be a vile wretch if I did, considering the
misery from which your charity and compassion relieved me--but having
an inward admonition of the spirit--' 'An admonition of the devil (cried
the squire, in a passion) What admonition, you blockhead? What right has
such a fellow as you to set up for a reformer?' 'Begging your honour's
pardon (replied Clinker) may not the new light of God's grace shine
upon the poor and the ignorant in their humility, as well as upon the
wealthy, and the philosopher in all his pride of human learning?' 'What
you imagine to be the new light of grace (said his master) I take to be
a deceitful vapour, glimmering through a crack in your upper story--In
a word, Mr Clinker, I will have no light in my family but what pays the
king's taxes, unless it be the light of reason, which you don't pretend
to follow.'

'Ah, sir! (cried Humphry) the light of reason, is no more in comparison
to the light I mean, than a farthing candle to the sun at noon'--'Very
true (said uncle), the one will serve to shew you your way, and the
other to dazzle and confound your weak brain. Heark ye, Clinker, you
are either an hypocritical knave, or a wrong-headed enthusiast; and in
either case, unfit for my service. If you are a quack in sanctity and
devotion, you will find it an easy matter to impose upon silly women,
and others of crazed understanding, who will contribute lavishly for
your support. If you are really seduced by the reveries of a disturbed
imagination, the sooner you lose your senses entirely, the better for
yourself and the community. In that case, some charitable person might
provide you with a dark room and clean straw in Bedlam, where it would
not be in your power to infect others with your fanaticism; whereas,
if you have just reflection enough left to maintain the character of a
chosen vessel in the meetings of the godly, you and your hearers will be
misled by a Will-i'the-wisp, from one error into another, till you are
plunged into religious frenzy; and then, perhaps, you will hang yourself
in despair' 'Which the Lord of his infinite mercy forbid! (exclaimed the
affrighted Clinker) It is very possible I may be under the temptation of
the devil, who wants to wreck me on the rocks of spiritual pride--Your
honour says, I am either a knave or a madman; now, as I'll assure your
honour, I am no knave, it follows that I must be mad; therefore, I
beseech your honour, upon my knees, to take my case into consideration,
that means may be used for my recovery'

The 'squire could not help smiling at the poor fellow's simplicity, and
promised to take care of him, provided he would mind the business of his
place, without running after the new light of methodism: but Mrs Tabitha
took offence at his humility, which she interpreted into poorness
of spirit and worldly mindedness. She upbraided him with the want of
courage to suffer for conscience sake--She observed, that if he should
lose his place for bearing testimony to the truth, Providence would not
fail to find him another, perhaps more advantageous; and, declaring that
it could not be very agreeable to live in a family where an inquisition
was established, retired to another room in great agitation.

My uncle followed her with a significant look, then, turning to the
preacher, 'You hear what my sister says--If you cannot live with me upon
such terms as I have prescribed, the vineyard of methodism lies before
you, and she seems very well disposed to reward your labour'--'I would
not willingly give offence to any soul upon earth (answered Humphry);
her ladyship has been very good to me, ever since we came to London; and
surely she has a heart turned for religious exercises; and both she and
lady Griskin sing psalms and hymns like two cherubims--But, at the same
time, I'm bound to love and obey your honour--It becometh not such a
poor ignorant fellow as me, to hold dispute with gentlemen of rank and
learning--As for the matter of knowledge, I am no more than a beast in
comparison of your honour; therefore I submit; and, with God's grace, I
will follow you to the world's end, if you don't think me too far gone
to be out of confinement'.

His master promised to keep him for some time longer on trial; then
desired to know in what manner lady Griskin and Mr Barton came to join
their religious society, he told him, that her ladyship was the person
who first carried my aunt and sister to the Tabernacle, whither he
attended them, and had his devotion kindled by Mr W--'s preaching: that
he was confirmed in this new way, by the preacher's sermons, which he
had bought and studied with great attention: that his discourse and
prayers had brought over Mrs Jenkins and the house-maid to the same
way of thinking; but as for Mr Barton, he had never seen him at service
before this day, when he came in company with lady Griskin. Humphry,
moreover, owned that he had been encouraged to mount the rostrum, by
the example and success of a weaver, who was much followed as a powerful
minister: that on his first trial he found himself under such strong
impulsions, as made him believe he was certainly moved by the spirit;
and that he had assisted in lady Griskin's, and several private houses,
at exercises of devotion.

Mr Bramble was no sooner informed, that her ladyship had acted as the
primum mobile of this confederacy, than he concluded she had only made
use of Clinker as a tool, subservient to the execution of some design,
to the true secret of which he was an utter stranger--He observed, that
her ladyship's brain was a perfect mill for projects; and that she and
Tabby had certainly engaged in some secret treaty, the nature of which
he could not comprehend. I told him I thought it was no difficult matter
to perceive the drift of Mrs Tabitha, which was to ensnare the heart
of Barton, and that in all likelihood my lady Griskin acted as her
auxiliary: that this supposition would account for their endeavours to
convert him to methodism; an event which would occasion a connexion of
souls that might be easily improved into a matrimonial union.

My uncle seemed to be much diverted by the thoughts of this Scheme's
succeeding; but I gave him to understand, that Barton was pre-engaged:
that he had the day before made a present of an etuis to Liddy,
which her aunt had obliged her to receive, with a view, no doubt, to
countenance her own accepting of a snuff-box at the same time; that my
sister having made me acquainted with this incident, I had desired an
explanation of Mr Barton, who declared his intentions were honourable,
and expressed his hope that I would have no objections to his alliance;
that I had thanked him for the honour he intended our family; but told
him, it would be necessary to consult her uncle and aunt, who were
her guardians; and their approbation being obtained, I could have no
objection to his proposal; though I was persuaded that no violence would
be offered to my sister's inclinations, in a transaction that so nearly
interested the happiness of her future life: that he had assured me, he
should never think of availing himself of a guardian's authority, unless
he could render his addresses agreeable to the young lady herself; and
that he would immediately demand permission of Mr and Mrs Bramble, to
make Liddy a tender of his hand and fortune.

The squire was not insensible to the advantages of such a match, and
declared he would promote it with all his influence; but when I took
notice that there seemed to be an aversion on the side of Liddy, he said
he would sound her on the subject; and if her reluctance was such as
would not be easily overcome, he would civilly decline the proposal of
Mr Barton; for he thought that, in the choice of a husband a young woman
ought not to sacrifice the feelings of her heart for any consideration
upon earth--'Liddy is not so desperate (said he) as to worship fortune
at such an expence.'

I take it for granted, this whole affair will end in smoke; though there
seems to be a storm brewing in the quarter of Mrs Tabby, who sat with
all the sullen dignity of silence at dinner, seemingly pregnant with
complaint and expostulation. As she had certainly marked Barton for her
own prey, she cannot possibly favour his suit to Liddy; and therefore
I expect something extraordinary will attend his declaring himself my
sister's admirer. This declaration will certainly be made in form, as
soon as the lover can pick up resolution enough to stand the brunt
of Mrs Tabby's disappointment; for he is, without doubt, aware of her
designs upon his person--The particulars of the denouement you shall
know in due season: mean while I am

Always yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 10.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

The deceitful calm was of short duration. I am plunged again in a sea of
vexation, and the complaints in my stomach and bowels are returned; so
that I suppose I shall be disabled from prosecuting the excursion I had
planned--What the devil had I to do, to come a plague hunting with a
leash of females in my train? Yesterday my precious sister (who, by
the bye, has been for some time a professed methodist) came into my
apartment, attended by Mr Barton, and desired an audience with a very
stately air--'Brother (said she), this gentleman has something to
propose, which I flatter myself will be the more acceptable, as it will
rid you of a troublesome companion.' Then Mr Barton proceeded to this
effect--'I am, indeed, extremely ambitious of being allied to your
family, Mr Bramble, and I hope you will see no cause to interpose your
authority.' 'As for authority (said Tabby, interrupting him with some
warmth), I know of none that he has a right to use on this occasion--If
I pay him the compliment of making him acquainted with the step I intend
to take, it is all he can expect in reason--This is as much as I
believe he would do by me, if he intended to change his own situation in
life--In a word, brother, I am so sensible of Mr Barton's extra ordinary
merit, that I have been prevailed upon to alter my resolution of living
a single life, and to put my happiness in his hands, by vesting him with
a legal title to my person and fortune, such as they are. The business
at present, is to have the writings drawn; and I shall be obliged to
you, if you will recommend a lawyer to me for that purpose'

You may guess what an effect this overture had upon me; who, from the
information of my nephew, expected that Barton was to make a formal
declaration of his passion for Liddy; I could not help gazing in silent
astonishment, alternately at Tabby, and her supposed admirer, who last
hung his head in the most aukward confusion for a few minutes, and then
retired on pretence of being suddenly seized with a vertigo--Mrs Tabitha
affected much concern, and would have had him make use of a bed in the
house; but he insisted upon going home, that he might have recourse
of some drops, which he kept for such emergencies, and his innamorata
acquiesced--In the mean time I was exceedingly puzzled at this adventure
(though I suspected the truth) and did not know in what manner to demean
myself towards Mrs Tabitha, when Jery came in and told me, he had just
seen Mr Barton alight from his chariot at lady Griskin's door--This
incident seemed to threaten a visit from her ladyship, with which we
were honoured accordingly, in less than half an hour--'I find (said she)
there has been a match of cross purposes among you good folks; and
I'm come to set you to rights'--So saying, she presented me with the
following billet

'DEAR SIR,

I no sooner recollected myself from the extreme confusion I was thrown
into, by that unlucky mistake of your sister, than I thought it my duty
to assure you, that my devoirs to Mrs Bramble never exceeded the bounds
of ordinary civility; and that my heart is unalterably fixed upon Miss
Liddy Melford, as I had the honour to declare to her brother, when he
questioned me upon that subject--Lady Griskin has been so good as to
charge herself, not only with the delivery of this note, but also with
the task of undeceiving Mrs Bramble, for whom I have the most profound
respect and veneration, though my affection being otherwise engaged is
no longer in the power of

Sir, Your very humble servant, RALPH BARTON.'

Having cast my eyes over this billet, I told her ladyship, that I would
no longer retard the friendly office she had undertaken: and I and
Jery forthwith retired into another room. There we soon perceived the
conversation grow very warm betwixt the two ladies; and, at length,
could distinctly hear certain terms of altercation, which we could no
longer delay interrupting, with any regard to decorum. When we entered
the scene of contention, we found Liddy had joined the disputants, and
stood trembling betwixt them, as if she had been afraid they would have
proceeded to something more practical than words. Lady Griskin's
face was like the full moon in a storm of wind, glaring, fiery,
and portentous; while Tabby looked grim and ghastly, with an aspect
breathing discord and dismay.--Our appearance put a stop to their mutual
revilings; but her ladyship turning to me, 'Cousin (said she) I can't
help saying I have met with a very ungrateful return from this lady, for
the pains I have taken to serve her family'--'My family is much obliged
to your ladyship (cried Tabby, with a kind of hysterical giggle); but
we have no right to the good offices of such an honourable go-between.'
'But, for all that, good Mrs Tabitha Bramble (resumed the other), I
shall be content with the reflection, That virtue is its own reward;
and it shall not be my fault, if you continue to make yourself
ridiculous--Mr Bramble, who has no little interest of his own to serve,
will, no doubt, contribute all in his power to promote a match
betwixt Mr Barton and his niece, which will be equally honourable and
advantageous; and, I dare say, Miss Liddy herself will have no objection
to a measure so well calculated to make her happy in life'--'I beg your
ladyship's pardon (exclaimed Liddy, with great vivacity) I have nothing
but misery to expect from such a measure; and I hope my guardians
will have too much compassion, to barter my peace of mind for any
consideration of interest or fortune'--'Upon my word, Miss Liddy! (said
she) you have profited by the example of your good aunt--I comprehend
your meaning, and will explain it when I have a proper opportunity--In
the mean time, I shall take my leave--Madam, your most obedient, and
devoted humble servant,' said she, advancing close up to my sister, and
curtsying so low, that I thought she intended to squat herself down on
the floor--This salutation Tabby returned with equal solemnity; and
the expression of the two faces, while they continued in this attitude,
would be no bad subject for a pencil like that of the incomparable
Hogarth, if any such should ever appear again, in these times of
dullness and degeneracy.

Jery accompanied her ladyship to her house, that he might have an
opportunity to restore the etuis to Barton, and advise him to give
up his suit, which was so disagreeable to his sister, against whom,
however, he returned much irritated--Lady Griskin had assured him that
Liddy's heart was pre-occupied; and immediately the idea of Wilson
recurring to his imagination, his family-pride took the alarm. He
denounced vengeance against the adventurer, and was disposed to be
very peremptory with his sister; but I desired he would suppress his
resentment, until I should have talked with her in private.

The poor girl, when I earnestly pressed her on this head, owned with
a flood of tears, that Wilson had actually come to the Hot Well at
Bristol, and even introduced himself into our lodgings as a Jew pedlar;
but that nothing had passed betwixt them, further than her begging him
to withdraw immediately, if he had any regard for her peace of mind:
that he had disappeared accordingly, after having attempted to prevail
upon my sister's maid, to deliver a letter; which, however, she refused
to receive, though she had consented to carry a message, importing that
he was a gentleman of a good family; and that, in a very little time, he
would avow his passion in that character--She confessed, that although
he had not kept his word in this particular, he was not yet altogether
indifferent to her affection; but solemnly promised, she would never
carry on any correspondence with him, or any other admirer, for the
future, without the privity and approbation of her brother and me.

By this declaration, she made her own peace with Jery; but the
hot-headed boy is more than ever incensed against Wilson, whom he now
considers as an impostor, that harbours some infamous design upon the
honour of his family--As for Barton he was not a little mortified to
find his present returned, and his addresses so unfavourably received;
but he is not a man to be deeply affected by such disappointments; and
I know not whether he is not as well pleased with being discarded
by Liddy, as he would have been with a permission to prosecute his
pretensions, at the risque of being every day exposed to the revenge or
machinations of Tabby, who is not to be slighted with impunity.--I
had not much time to moralize on these occurrences; for the house
was visited by a constable and his gang, with a warrant from Justice
Buzzard, to search the box of Humphry Clinker, my footman,--who was just
apprehended as a highwayman. This incident threw the whole family into
confusion. My sister scolded the constable for presuming to enter the
lodgings of a gentleman on such an errand, without having first asked,
and obtained permission; her maid was frightened into fits, and Liddy
shed tears of compassion for the unfortunate Clinker, in whose box,
however, nothing was found to confirm the suspicion of robbery.

For my own part, I made no doubt of the fellow's being mistaken for some
other person, and I went directly to the justice, in order to procure
his discharge; but there I found the matter much more serious than
I expected--Poor Clinker stood trembling at the bar, surrounded by
thief-takers; and at a little distance, a thick, squat fellow, a
postilion, his accuser, who had seized him on the street, and swore
positively to his person, that the said Clinker had, on the 15th day of
March last, on Blackheath, robbed a gentleman in a post-chaise, which
he (the postilion) drove--This deposition was sufficient to justify his
commitment; and he was sent accordingly to Clerkenwell prison, whither
Jery accompanied him in the coach, in order to recommend him properly to
the keeper, that he may want for no convenience which the place affords.

The spectators, who assembled to see this highwayman, were sagacious
enough to discern something very villainous in his aspect; which
(begging their pardon) is the very picture of simplicity; and the
justice himself put a very unfavourable construction upon some of his
answers, which, he said, savoured of the ambiguity and equivocation of
an old offender; but, in my opinion, it would have been more just and
humane to impute them to the confusion into which we may suppose a poor
country lad to be thrown on such an occasion. I am still persuaded he is
innocent; and, in this persuasion, I can do no less than use my utmost
endeavours that he may not be oppressed--I shall, to-morrow, send my
nephew to wait on the gentleman who was robbed, and beg; he will have
the humanity to go and see the prisoner; that, in case he should find
him quite different from the person of the highwayman, he may bear
testimony in his behalf--Howsoever it may fare with Clinker, this cursed
affair will be to me productive of intolerable chagrin--I have already
caught a dreadful cold, by rushing into the open air from the justice's
parlour, where I had been stewing in the crowd; and though I should not
be laid up with the gout, as I believe I shall, I must stay at London
for some weeks, till this poor devil comes to his trial at Rochester; so
that, in all probability, my northern expedition is blown up.

If you can find any thing in your philosophical budget, to console me
in the midst of these distresses and apprehensions, pray let it be
communicated to

Your unfortunate friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 12.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

The farce is finished, and another piece of a graver cast brought upon
the stage.--Our aunt made a desperate attack upon Barton, who had no
other way of saving himself, but by leaving her in possession of
the field, and avowing his pretensions to Liddy, by whom he has been
rejected in his turn.--Lady Griskin acted as his advocate and agent on
this occasion, with such zeal as embroiled her with Mrs Tabitha, and a
high scene of altercation passed betwixt these two religionists, which
might have come to action, had not my uncle interposed. They are however
reconciled, in consequence of an event which hath involved us all in
trouble and disquiet. You must know, the poor preacher, Humphry Clinker,
is now exercising his ministry among the felons in Clerkenwell prison--A
postilion having sworn a robbery against him, no bail could be taken,
and he was committed to jail, notwithstanding all the remonstrances and
interest my uncle could make in his behalf.

All things considered, the poor fellow cannot possibly be guilty,
and yet, I believe, he runs some risque of being hanged. Upon his
examination, he answered with such hesitation and reserve as persuaded
most of the people, who crowded the place, that he was really a knave,
and the justice's remarks confirmed their opinion. Exclusive of my uncle
and myself, there was only one person who seemed inclined to favour
the culprit.--He was a young man, well dressed, and, from the manner in
which he cross-examined the evidence, we took it for granted, that
he was a student in one of the inns of court.--He freely checked the
justice for some uncharitable inferences he made to the prejudice of
the prisoner, and even ventured to dispute with his worship on certain
points of law.

My uncle, provoked at the unconnected and dubious answers of Clinker,
who seemed in danger of falling a sacrifice to his own simplicity,
exclaimed, 'In the name of God, if you are innocent, say so.' 'No (cried
he) God forbid that I should call myself innocent, while my conscience
is burthened with sin.' 'What then, you did commit this robbery?'
resumed his master. 'No, sure (said he) blessed be the Lord, I'm free of
that guilt.'

Here the justice interposed, observing, that the man seemed inclined to
make a discovery by turning king's evidence, and desired the clerk to
take his confession; upon which Humphry declared, that he looked upon
confession to be a popish fraud, invented by the whore of Babylon. The
Templar affirmed, that the poor fellow was non compos; and exhorted the
justice to discharge him as a lunatic.--'You know very well (added he)
that the robbery in question was not committed by the prisoner.'

The thief-takers grinned at one another; and Mr Justice Buzzard
replied with great emotion, 'Mr Martin, I desire you will mind your
own business; I shall convince you one of these days that I understand
mine.' In short, there was no remedy; the mittimus was made out,
and poor Clinker sent to prison in a hackney-coach, guarded by the
constable, and accompanied by your humble servant. By the way, I was not
a little surprised to hear this retainer to justice bid the prisoner to
keep up his spirits, for that he did not at all doubt but that he would
get off for a few weeks confinement--He said, his worship knew very well
that Clinker was innocent of the fact, and that the real highwayman who
robbed the chaise, was no other than that very individual Mr Martin, who
had pleaded so strenuously for honest Humphry.

Confounded at this information, I asked, 'Why then is he suffered to
go about at his liberty, and this poor innocent fellow treated as a
malefactor?' 'We have exact intelligence of all Mr Martin's transactions
(said he); but as yet there is not evidence sufficient for his
conviction; and as for this young man, the justice could do no less than
commit him, as the postilion swore point-blank to his identity.' 'So
if this rascally postilion should persist in the falsity to which he is
sworn (said I), this innocent lad may be brought to the gallows.'

The constable observed, that he would have time enough to prepare
for his trial, and might prove an alibi; or, perhaps, Martin might be
apprehended and convicted for another fact; in which case, he might be
prevailed upon to take this affair upon himself; or, finally, if these
chances should fail, and the evidence stand good against Clinker,
the jury might recommend him to mercy, in consideration of his youth,
especially if this should appear to be the first fact of which he had
been guilty.

Humphry owned he could not pretend to recollect where he had been on the
day when the robbery was committed, much less prove a circumstance of
that kind so far back as six months, though he knew he had been sick
of the fever and ague, which, however, did not prevent him from going
about--then, turning up his eyes, he ejaculated, 'The Lord's will be
done! if it be my fate to suffer, I hope I shall not disgrace the faith
of which, though unworthy, I make profession.'

When I expressed my surprize that the accuser should persist in charging
Clinker, without taking the least notice of the real robber who
stood before him, and to whom, indeed, Humphry bore not the smallest
resemblance; the constable (who was himself a thief-taker) gave me to
understand, that Mr Martin was the best qualified for business of all
the gentlemen on the road he had ever known; that he had always acted on
his own bottom, without partner or correspondent, and never went to work
but when he was cool and sober; that his courage and presence of mind
never failed him; that his address was genteel, and his behaviour void
of all cruelty and insolence; that he never encumbered himself with
watches or trinkets, nor even with bank-notes, but always dealt for
ready money, and that in the current coin of the kingdom; and that he
could disguise himself and his horse in such a manner, that, after
the action, it was impossible to recognize either the one or the
other--'This great man (said he) has reigned paramount in all the roads
within fifty miles of London above fifteen months, and has done more
business in that time, than all the rest of the profession put together;
for those who pass through his hands are so delicately dealt with, that
they have no desire to give him the least disturbance; but for all that,
his race is almost run--he is now fluttering about justice, like a moth
about a candle--there are so many lime-twigs laid in his way, that I'll
bet a cool hundred, he swings before Christmas.'

Shall I own to you, that this portrait, drawn by a ruffian, heightened
by what I myself had observed in his deportment, has interested me
warmly in the fate of poor Martin, whom nature seems to have intended
for a useful and honourable member of that community upon which he now
preys for subsistence? It seems, he lived some time as a clerk to a
timber-merchant, whose daughter Martin having privately married, was
discarded, and his wife turned out of doors. She did not long survive
her marriage; and Martin, turning fortune-hunter, could not supply his
occasions any other way, than by taking to the road, in which he
has travelled hitherto with uncommon success.--He pays his respects
regularly to Mr Justice Buzzard, the thief-catcher-general of this
metropolis, and sometimes they smoke a pipe together very lovingly,
when the conversation generally turns upon the nature of evidence.--The
justice has given him fair warning to take care of himself, and he has
received his caution in good part.--Hitherto he has baffled all the
vigilance, art, and activity of Buzzard and his emissaries, with
such conduct as would have done honour to the genius of a Caesar or
a Turenne; but he has one weakness, which has proved fatal to all the
heroes of his tribe, namely, an indiscreet devotion to the fair sex, and
in all probability, he will be attacked on this defenceless quarter.

Be that as it may, I saw the body of poor Clinker consigned to the
gaoler of Clerkenwell, to whose indulgence I recommended him so
effectually, that he received him in the most hospitable manner, though
there was a necessity for equipping him with a suit of irons, in which
he made a very rueful appearance. The poor creature seemed as much
affected by my uncle's kindness, as by his own misfortune. When I
assured him, that nothing should be left undone for procuring his
enlargement, and making his confinement easy in the mean time, he fell
down on his knees, and kissing my hand, which he bathed with his tears,
'0 'squire! (cried he, sobbing) what shall I say?--I can't--no, I can't
speak--my poor heart is bursting with gratitude to you and my dear--dear
generous--noble benefactor.'

I protest, the scene became so pathetic, that I was fain to force myself
away, and returned to my uncle, who sent me in the afternoon with
a compliment to one Mr Mead, the person who had been robbed on
Black-heath. As I did not find him at home, I left a message, in
consequence of which he called at our lodgings this morning, and very
humanely agreed to visit the prisoner. By this time, lady Griskin had
come to make her formal compliments of condolance to Mrs Tabitha, on
this domestic calamity; and that prudent maiden, whose passion was
now cooled, thought proper to receive her ladyship so civilly, that a
reconciliation immediately ensued. These two ladies resolved to comfort
the poor prisoner in their own persons, and Mr Mead and I 'squired
them to Clerkenwell, my uncle being detained at home by some slight
complaints in his stomach and bowels.

The turnkey, who received us at Clerkenwell, looked remarkably sullen;
and when we enquired for Clinker, 'I don't care, if the devil had him
(said he); here has been nothing but canting and praying since the
fellow entered the place.--Rabbit him! the tap will be ruined--we han't
sold a cask of beer, nor a dozen of wine, since he paid his garnish--the
gentlemen get drunk with nothing but your damned religion.--For my part,
I believe as how your man deals with the devil.--Two or three as bold
hearts as ever took the air upon Hounslow have been blubbering all
night; and if the fellow an't speedily removed by Habeas Corpus, or
otherwise, I'll be damn'd if there's a grain of true spirit left within
these walls we shan't have a soul to do credit to the place, or make his
exit like a true born Englishman--damn my eyes! there will be nothing
but snivelling in the cart--we shall all die like so many psalm-singing
weavers.'

In short, we found that Humphry was, at that very instant, haranguing
the felons in the chapel; and that the gaoler's wife and daughter,
together with my aunt's woman, Win Jenkins, and our house-maid, were
among the audience, which we immediately joined. I never saw any thing
so strongly picturesque as this congregation of felons clanking their
chains, in the midst of whom stood orator Clinker, expatiating in a
transport of fervor, on the torments of hell, denounced in scripture
against evil-doers, comprehending murderers, robbers, thieves, and
whore mongers. The variety of attention exhibited in the faces of those
ragamuffins, formed a groupe that would not have disgraced the pencil of
a Raphael. In one, it denoted admiration; in another, doubt; in a
third, disdain; in a fourth, contempt; in a fifth, terror; in a sixth,
derision; and in a seventh, indignation.--As for Mrs Winifred Jenkins,
she was in tears, overwhelmed with sorrow; but whether for her own sins,
or the misfortune of Clinker, I cannot pretend to say. The other females
seemed to listen with a mixture of wonder and devotion. The gaoler's
wife declared he was a saint in trouble, saying, she wished from her
heart there was such another good soul, like him, in every gaol in
England.

Mr Mead, having earnestly surveyed the preacher, declared his appearance
was so different from that of the person who robbed him on Black-heath,
that he could freely make oath he was not the man: but Humphry himself
was by this time pretty well rid of all apprehensions of being hanged;
for he had been the night before solemnly tried and acquitted by his
fellow prisoners, some of whom he had already converted to methodism.
He now made proper acknowledgments for the honour of our visit, and was
permitted to kiss the hands of the ladies, who assured him, he might
depend upon their friendship and protection. Lady Griskin, in her
great zeal, exhorted his fellow-prisoners to profit by the precious
opportunity of having such a saint in bonds among them, and turn over a
new leaf for the benefit of their poor souls; and, that her admonition
might have the greater effect, she reinforced it with her bounty.

While she and Mrs Tabby returned in the coach with the two maidservants,
I waited on Mr Mead to the house of justice Buzzard, who, having heard
his declaration, said his oath could be of no use at present, but that
he would be a material evidence for the prisoner at his trial; so that
there seems to be no remedy but patience for poor Clinker; and, indeed,
the same virtue, or medicine, will be necessary for us all, the
squire in particular, who had set his heart upon his excursion to the
northward.

While we were visiting honest Humphry in Clerkenwell prison, my uncle
received a much more extraordinary visit at his own lodgings. Mr Martin,
of whom I have made such honourable mention, desired permission to pay
him his respects, and was admitted accordingly. He told him, that
having observed him, at Mr Buzzard's, a good deal disturbed by what had
happened to his servant, he had come to assure him he had nothing to
apprehend for Clinker's life; for, if it was possible that any jury
could find him guilty upon such evidence, he, Martin himself, would
produce in court a person, whose deposition would bring him off clear as
the sun at noon.--Sure, the fellow would not be so romantic as to
take the robbery upon himself!--He said, the postilion was an infamous
fellow, who had been a dabbler in the same profession, and saved his
life at the Old Bailey by impeaching his companions; that being now
reduced to great poverty, he had made this desperate push, to swear
away the life of an innocent man, in hopes of having the reward upon his
conviction; but that he would find himself miserably disappointed, for
the justice and his myrmidons were determined to admit of no interloper
in this branch of business; and that he did not at all doubt but that
they would find matter enough to shop the evidence himself before the
next gaol-delivery. He affirmed, that all these circumstances were well
known to the justice; and that his severity to Clinker was no other
than a hint to his master to make him a present in private, as an
acknowledgment of his candour and humanity.

This hint, however, was so unpalatable to Mr Bramble, that he declared,
with great warmth, he would rather confine himself for life to
London, which he detested, than be at liberty to leave it tomorrow, in
consequence of encouraging corruption in a magistrate. Hearing, however,
how favourable Mr Mead's report had been for the prisoner, he is
resolved to take the advice of counsel in what manner to proceed for his
immediate enlargement. I make no doubt, but that in a day or two this
troublesome business may be discussed; and in this hope we are preparing
for our journey. If our endeavours do not miscarry, we shall have taken
the field before you hear again from

Yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 11




To Dr LEWIS.

Thank Heaven! dear Lewis, the clouds are dispersed, and I have now the
clearest prospect of my summer campaign, which, I hope, I shall be able
to begin to-morrow. I took the advice of counsel with respect to the
case of Clinker, in whose favour a lucky incident has intervened.
The fellow who accused him, has had his own battery turned upon
himself.--Two days ago he was apprehended for a robbery on the highway,
and committed, on the evidence of an accomplice. Clinker, having moved
for a writ of habeas corpus, was brought before the lord chief justice,
who, in consequence of an affidavit of the gentleman who had been
robbed, importing that the said Clinker was not the person who stopped
him on the highway, as well as in consideration of the postilion's
character and present circumstances, was pleased to order, that
my servant should be admitted to bail, and he has been discharged
accordingly, to the unspeakable satisfaction of our whole family, to
which he has recommended himself in an extraordinary manner, not only by
his obliging deportment, but by his talents of preaching, praying, and
singing psalms, which he has exercised with such effect, that even Tabby
respects him as a chosen vessel. If there was any thing like affectation
or hypocrisy in this excess of religion, I would not keep him in
my service, but, so far as I can observe, the fellow's character is
downright simplicity, warmed with a kind of enthusiasm, which renders
him very susceptible of gratitude and attachment to his benefactors.

As he is an excellent horseman, and understands farriery, I have bought
a stout gelding for his use, that he may attend us on the road, and have
an eye to our cattle, in case the coachman should not mind his business.
My nephew, who is to ride his own saddle-horse, has taken, upon trial,
a servant just come from abroad with his former master, Sir William
Strollop, who vouches for his honesty. The fellow, whose name is Dutton,
seems to be a petit maitre.--He has got a smattering of French, bows,
and grins, and shrugs, and takes snuff a la mode de France, but values
himself chiefly upon his skill and dexterity in hair-dressing.--If I
am not much deceived by appearance, he is, in all respects, the very
contrast of Humphry Clinker.

My sister has made up matters with lady Griskin; though, I must own, I
should not have been sorry to see that connexion entirely destroyed: but
Tabby is not of a disposition to forgive Barton, who, I understand,
is gone to his seat in Berkshire for the summer season. I cannot help
suspecting, that in the treaty of peace, which has been lately ratified
betwixt those two females, it is stipulated, that her ladyship shall
use her best endeavours to provide an agreeable help-mate for our sister
Tabitha, who seems to be quite desperate in her matrimonial designs.
Perhaps, the match-maker is to have a valuable consideration in the way
of brokerage, which she will most certainly deserve, if she can find
any man in his senses, who will yoke with Mrs Bramble from motives of
affection or interest.

I find my spirits and my health affect each other reciprocally that is
to say, every thing that discomposes my mind, produces a correspondent
disorder in my body; and my bodily complaints are remarkably
mitigated by those considerations that dissipate the clouds of mental
chagrin.--The imprisonment of Clinker brought on those symptoms which
I mentioned in my last, and now they are vanished at his discharge.--It
must be owned, indeed, I took some of the tincture of ginseng, prepared
according to your prescription, and found it exceedingly grateful to
the stomach; but the pain and sickness continued to return, after short
intervals, till the anxiety of my mind was entirely removed, and then I
found myself perfectly at case. We have had fair weather these ten days,
to the astonishment of the Londoners, who think it portentous. If you
enjoy the same indulgence in Wales, I hope Barns has got my hay made,
and safe cocked by this time. As we shall be in motion for some weeks,
I cannot expect to hear from you as usual; but I shall continue to write
from every place at which we make any halt, that you may know our track,
in case it should be necessary to communicate any thing to

Your assured friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 14.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall, &c.

DEAR MARY,

Having the occasion of my cousin Jenkins of Aberga'ny, I send you, as
a token, a turkey-shell comb, a kiple of yards of green ribbon, and a
sarment upon the nothingness of good works, which was preached in the
Tabernacle; and you will also receive a horn-buck for Saul, whereby she
may learn her letters; for Fin much consarned about the state of her
poor sole--and what are all the pursuits of this life to the consarns of
that immortal part?--What is life but a veil of affliction? O Mary! the
whole family have been in such a constipation!--Mr Clinker has been in
trouble, but the gates of hell have not been able to prevail again him.
His virtue is like poor gould, seven times tried in the fire. He was
tuck up for a rubbery, and had before gustass Busshard, who made his
mittamouse; and the pore youth was sent to prison upon the false oaf of
a willian, that wanted to sware his life away for the looker of cain.

The 'squire did all in his power, but could not prevent his being put
in chains, and confined among common manufactors, where he stood like
an innocent sheep in the midst of wolves and tygers.--Lord knows what
mought have happened to this pyehouse young man, if master had not
applied to Apias Korkus, who lives with the ould bailiff, and is, they
say, five hundred years old (God bless us!), and a congeror: but, if he
be, sure I am he don't deal with the devil, otherwise he couldn't have
fought out Mr Clinker, as he did, in spite of stone walls, iron bolts,
and double locks, that flew open at his command; for ould Scratch has
not a greater enemy upon hearth than Mr Clinker, who is, indeed, a very
powerful labourer in the Lord's vineyard. I do no more than yuse the
words of my good lady, who has got the infectual calling; and, I
trust, that even myself, though unworthy, shall find grease to be
excepted.--Miss Liddy has been touch'd to the quick, but is a little
timorsome: howsomever, I make no doubt, but she, and all of us, will be
brought, by the endeavours of Mr Clinker, to produce blessed fruit of
generation and repentance.--As for master and the young 'squire, they
have as yet had narro glimpse of the new light.--I doubt as how their
harts are hardened by worldly wisdom, which, as the pyebill saith, is
foolishness in the sight of God.

O Mary Jones, pray without seizing for grease to prepare you for
the operations of this wonderful instrument, which, I hope, will
be exorcised this winter upon you and others at Brambleton-hall.--
Tomorrow, we are to set out in a cox and four for Yorkshire; and, I
believe, we shall travel that way far, and far, and farther than I can
tell; but I shan't go so far as to forget my friends; and Mary Jones
will always be remembered as one of them by her


Humble sarvant, WIN. JENKINS LONDON, June 14.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall. MRS GWYLLIM,

I can't help thinking it very strange, that I never had an answer to the
letter I wrote you some weeks ago from Bath, concerning the sour bear,
the gander, and the maids eating butter, which I won't allow to be
wasted.--We are now going upon a long journey to the north, whereby I
desire you will redouble your care and circumflexion, that the family
may be well managed in our absence; for, you know, you must render
account, not only to your earthly master, but also to him that is above;
and if you are found a good and faithful sarvant, great will be your
reward in haven. I hope there will be twenty stun of cheese ready for
market--by the time I get huom, and as much owl spun, as will make half
a dozen pair of blankets; and that the savings of the butter-milk will
fetch me a good penny before Martinmass, as the two pigs are to be fed
for baking with bitchmast and acrons.

I wrote to doctor Lews for the same porpuss, but he never had the good
manners to take the least notice of my letter; for which reason, I shall
never favour him with another, though he beshits me on his bended knees.
You will do well to keep a watchful eye over the hind Villiams, who is
one of his amissories, and, I believe, no better than he should be at
bottom. God forbid that I should lack christian charity; but charity
begins at huom, and sure nothing can be a more charitable work than to
rid the family of such vermine. I do suppose, that the bindled cow has
been had to the parson's bull, that old Moll has had another litter of
pigs, and that Dick is become a mighty mouser. Pray order every thing
for the best, and be frugal, and keep the maids to their labour--If I
had a private opportunity, I would send them some hymns to sing instead
of profane ballads; but, as I can't, they and you must be contented with
the prayers of


Your assured friend, T. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 14.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The very day after I wrote my last, Clinker was set at liberty. As
Martin had foretold, the accuser was himself committed for a robbery,
upon unquestionable evidence. He had been for some time in the snares of
the thief-taking society; who, resenting his presumption in attempting
to incroach upon their monopoly of impeachment, had him taken up and
committed to Newgate, on the deposition of an accomplice, who has been
admitted as evidence for the king. The postilion being upon record as an
old offender, the chief justice made no scruple of admitting Clinker to
bail, when he perused the affidavit of Mr Mead, importing that the said
Clinker was not the person that robbed him on Blackheath; and honest
Humphry was discharged. When he came home, he expressed great eagerness
to pay his respects to his master, and here his elocution failed him,
but his silence was pathetic; he fell down at his feet and embraced his
knees, shedding a flood of tears, which my uncle did not see without
emotion. He took snuff in some confusion; and, putting his hand in
his pocket, gave him his blessing in something more substantial than
words--'Clinker (said he), I am so well convinced, both of your honesty
and courage, that I am resolved to make you my life-guardman on the
highway.'

He was accordingly provided with a case of pistols, and a carbine to be
flung a-cross his shoulders; and every other preparation being made, we
set out last Thursday, at seven in the morning; my uncle, with the three
women in the coach; Humphry, well mounted on a black gelding bought for
his use; myself a-horseback, attended by my new valet, Mr Dutton,
an exceeding coxcomb, fresh from his travels, whom I have taken upon
trial--The fellow wears a solitaire, uses paint, and takes rappee with
all the grimace of a French marquis. At present, however, he is in a
ridingdress, jack-boots, leather breeches, a scarlet waistcoat, with
gold binding, a laced hat, a hanger, a French posting-whip in his hand,
and his hair en queue.

Before we had gone nine miles, my horse lost one of his shoes; so that I
was obliged to stop at Barnet to have another, while the coach proceeded
at an easy pace over the common. About a mile short of Hatfield, the
postilions, stopping the carriage, gave notice to Clinker that there
were two suspicious fellows a-horseback, at the end of a lane, who
semed waiting to attack the coach. Humphry forthwith apprised my uncle,
declaring he would stand by him to the last drop of his blood; and
unflinging his carbine, prepared for action. The 'squire had pistols in
the pockets of the coach, and resolved to make use of them directly;
but he was effectually prevented by his female companions, who flung
themselves about his neck, and screamed in concert--At that instant,
who should come up at a hand-gallop, but Martin, the highway-man, who,
advancing to the coach, begged the ladies would compose themselves for
a moment then, desiring Clinker to follow him to the charge, he pulled a
pistol out of his bosom, and they rode up together to give battle to the
rogues, who, having fired at a great distance, fled across the common.
They were in pursuit of the fugitives when I came up, not a little
alarmed at the shrieks in the coach, where I found my uncle in a violent
rage, without his periwig, struggling to disentangle himself from Tabby
and the other two, and swearing with great vociferation. Before I had
time to interpose, Martin and Clinker returned from the pursuit, and
the former payed his compliments with great politeness, giving us to
understand, that the fellows had scampered off, and that he believed
they were a couple of raw 'prentices from London. He commended Clinker
for his courage, and said, if we would give him leave, he would have the
honour to accompany us as far as Stevenage, where he had some business.

The 'squire, having recollected and adjusted himself, was the first
to laugh at his own situation: but it was not without difficulty, that
Tabby's arms could be untwisted from his neck; Liddy's teeth chattered,
and Jenkins was threatened with a fit as usual. I had communicated to my
uncle the character of Martin, as it was described by the constable, and
he was much struck with its singularity--He could not suppose the fellow
had any design on our company, which was so numerous and well armed; he
therefore thanked him, for the service he had just done them, said he
would be glad of his company, and asked him to dine with us at Hatfield.
This invitation might not have been agreeable to the ladies, had they
known the real profession of our guest, but this was a secret to all,
except my uncle and myself. Mrs Tabitha, however, would by no means
consent to proceed with a case of loaded pistols in the coach, and they
were forthwith discharged in complaisance to her and the rest of the
women.

Being gratified in this particular, she became remarkably goodhumoured,
and at dinner behaved in the most affable manner to Mr Martin, with
whose polite address and agreeable conversation she seemed to be much
taken. After dinner, the landlord accosting me in the yard, asked with a
significant look, if the gentleman that rode the sorrel belonged to our
company?--I understand his meaning, but answered no; that he had come
up with us on the common, and helped us to drive away two fellows, that
looked like highwaymen--He nodded three times distinctly, as much as to
say, he knows his cue. Then he inquired, if one of those men was mounted
on a bay mare, and the other on a chestnut gelding with a white streak
down his forehead? and being answered in the affirmative, he assured me
they had robbed three post-chaises this very morning--I inquired, in my
turn, if Mr Martin was of his acquaintance; and, nodding thrice again,
he answered, that he had seen the gentleman.

Before we left Hatfield, my uncle, fixing his eyes on Martin with such
expression as is more easily conceived than described, asked, if he
often travelled that road? and he replied with a look which denoted his
understanding the question, that he very seldom did business in that
part of the country. In a word, this adventurer favoured us with his
company to the neighbourhood of Stevenage, where he took his leave of
the coach and me, in very polite terms, and turned off upon a crossroad,
that led to a village on the left--At supper, Mrs Tabby was very full
in the praise of Mr Martin's good-sense and good-breeding, and seemed
to regret that she had not a further opportunity to make some experiment
upon his affection. In the morning, my uncle was not a little surprised
to receive, from the waiter a billet couched in these words--


'SIR,

I could easily perceive from your looks, when I had the honour to
converse with you at Hatfield, that my character is not unknown to you;
and, I dare say you won't think it strange, that I should be glad to
change my present way of life, for any other honest occupation, let it
be ever so humble, that will afford me bread in moderation, and sleep
in safety--Perhaps you may think I flatter, when I say, that from the
moment I was witness to your generous concern in the cause of your
servant, I conceived a particular esteem and veneration for your person;
and yet what I say is true. I should think myself happy, if I could
be admitted into your protection and service, as house-steward, clerk,
butler, or bailiff, for either of which places I think myself tolerably
well qualified; and, sure I am, I should not be found deficient in
gratitude and fidelity--At the same time, I am very sensible how much
you must deviate from the common maxims of discretion, even in putting
my professions to the trial; but I don't look upon you as a person that
thinks in the ordinary stile; and the delicacy of my situation, will,
I know, justify this address to a heart warmed with beneficence and
compassion--Understanding you are going pretty far north, I shall take
an opportunity to throw myself in your way again, before you reach the
borders of Scotland; and, I hope, by that time, you will have taken into
consideration, the truly distressful case of,

honoured sir, your very humble, and devoted servant, EDWARD MARTIN'

The 'squire, having perused this letter, put it into my hand, without
saying a syllable; and when I had read it we looked at each other in
silence. From a certain sparkling in his eyes, I discovered there was
more in his heart, than he cared to express with his tongue, in favour
of poor Martin; and this was precisely my own feeling, which he did not
fail to discern, by the same means of communication--'What shall we
do (said he) to save this poor sinner from the gallows, and make him
a useful member of the commonwealth; and yet the proverb says, Save a
thief from the gallows, and he'll cut your throat.' I told him I really
believed Martin was capable of giving the proverb the lie; and that
I should heartily concur in any step he might take in favour of his
solicitation. We mutually resolved to deliberate upon the subject,
and, in the mean time, proceeded on our journey. The roads, having been
broken up by the heavy rains in the spring, were so rough, that although
we travelled very slowly, the jolting occasioned such pain, to my uncle,
that he was become exceedingly peevish when we arrived at this place,
which lies about eight miles from the postroad, between Wetherby and
Boroughbridge.

Harrigate-water, so celebrated for its efficacy in the scurvy and other
distempers, is supplied from a copious spring, in the hollow of a
wild common, round which, a good many houses have been built for the
convenience of the drinkers, though few of them are inhabited. Most of
the company lodge at some distance, in five separate inns, situated in
different parts of the commons, from whence they go every morning to the
well, in their own carriages. The lodgers of each inn form a distinct
society, that eat together; and there is a commodious public room, where
they breakfast in disabille, at separate tables, from eight o'clock till
eleven, as they chance or chuse to come in--Here also they drink tea in
the afternoon, and play at cards or dance in the evening. One custom,
however, prevails, which I looked upon as a solecism in politeness. The
ladies treat with tea in their turns; and even girls of sixteen are
not exempted from this shameful imposition--There is a public ball by
subscription every night at one of the houses, to which all the company
from the others are admitted by tickets; and, indeed, Harrigate treads
upon the heels of Bath, in the articles of gaiety and dissipation--with
this difference, however, that here we are more sociable and familiar.
One of the inns is already full up to the very garrets, having no less
than fifty lodgers, and as many servants. Our family does not exceed
thirty-six; and I should be sorry to see the number augmented, as our
accommodations won't admit of much increase.

At present, the company is more agreeable than one could expect from
an accidental assemblage of persons, who are utter strangers to one
another--There seems to be a general disposition among us to maintain
good-fellowship, and promote the purposes of humanity, in favour of
those who come hither on the score of health. I see several faces which
we left at Bath, although the majority are of the Northern counties,
and many come from Scotland for the benefit of these waters--In such a
variety, there must be some originals, among whom Mrs Tabitha Bramble is
not the most inconsiderable--No place where there is such an intercourse
between the sexes, can be disagreeable to a lady of her views and
temperament--She has had some warm disputes at table, with a lame parson
from Northumberland, on the new birth, and the insignificance of moral
virtue; and her arguments have been reinforced by an old Scotch lawyer,
in a rye periwig, who, though he has lost his teeth, and the use of his
limbs, can still wag his tongue with great volubility. He has paid her
such fulsome compliments, upon her piety and learning, as seem to have
won her heart; and she, in her turn, treats him with such attention as
indicates a design upon his person; but, by all accounts, he is too
much of a fox to be inveigled into any snare that she can lay for his
affection.

We do not propose to stay long at Harrigate, though, at present, it is
our headquarters, from whence we shall make some excursions, to
visit two or three of our rich relations, who are settled in this
country.--Pray, remember me to all our friends of Jesus, and allow me to
be still

Yours affectionately, J. MELFORD HARRIGATE, June 23.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

Considering the tax we pay for turnpikes, the roads of this county
constitute a most intolerable grievance. Between Newark and Weatherby,
I have suffered more from jolting and swinging than ever I felt in the
whole course of my life, although the carriage is remarkably commodious
and well hung, and the postilions were very careful in driving. I am now
safely housed at the New Inn, at Harrigate, whither I came to satisfy
my curiosity, rather than with any view of advantage to my health; and,
truly, after having considered all the parts and particulars of the
place, I cannot account for the concourse of people one finds here, upon
any other principle but that of caprice, which seems to be the character
of our nation.

Harrigate is a wild common, bare and bleak, without tree or shrub, or
the least signs of cultivation; and the people who come to drink the
water, are crowded together in paltry inns, where the few tolerable
rooms are monopolized by the friends and favourites of the house, and
all the rest of the lodgers are obliged to put up with dirty holes,
where there is neither space, air, nor convenience. My apartment is
about ten feet square; and when the folding bed is down, there is just
room sufficient to pass between it and the fire. One might expect,
indeed, that there would be no occasion for a fire at Midsummer; but
here the climate is so backward, that an ash tree, which our landlord
has planted before my window, is just beginning to put forth its leaves;
and I am fain to have my bed warmed every night.

As for the water, which is said to have effected so many surprising
cures, I have drank it once, and the first draught has cured me of all
desire to repeat the medicine.--Some people say it smells of rotten
eggs, and others compare it to the scourings of a foul gun.--It is
generally supposed to be strongly impregnated with sulphur; and Dr Shaw,
in his book upon mineral water, says, he has seen flakes of sulphur
floating in the well--Pace tanti viri; I, for my part, have never
observed any thing like sulphur, either in or about the well, neither do
I find that any brimstone has ever been extracted from the water. As
for the smell, if I may be allowed to judge from my own organs, it is
exactly that of bilge-water; and the saline taste of it seems to declare
that it is nothing else than salt water putrified in the bowels of the
earth. I was obliged to hold my nose with one hand, while I advanced the
glass to my mouth with the other; and after I had made shift to swallow
it, my stomach could hardly retain what it had received.--The only
effects it produced were sickness, griping, and insurmountable
disgust.--I can hardly mention it without puking.--The world is
strangely misled by the affectation of singularity. I cannot help
suspecting, that this water owes its reputation in a great measure
to its being so strikingly offensive.--On the same kind of analogy, a
German doctor has introduced hemlock and other poisons, as specifics,
into the materia medica.--I am persuaded, that all the cures ascribed
to the Harrigate water, would have been as efficaciously, and infinitely
more agreeably performed, by the internal and external use of seawater.
Sure I am, this last is much less nauseous to the taste and smell, and
much more gentle in its operation as a purge, as well as more extensive
in its medical qualities.

Two days ago we went across the country to visit 'squire Burdock, who
married a first cousin of my father, an heiress, who brought him an
estate of a thousand a-year. This gentleman is a declared opponent
of the ministry in parliament; and having an opulent fortune, piques
himself upon living in the country, and maintaining old English
hospitality--By the bye, this is a phrase very much used by the English
themselves both in words and writing; but I never heard of it out of the
island, except by way of irony and sarcasm. What the hospitality of our
forefathers has been I should be glad to see recorded, rather in the
memoirs of strangers who have visited our country, and were the proper
objects and judges of such hospitality, than in the discourse and
lucubrations of the modern English, who seem to describe it from
theory and conjecture. Certain it is, we are generally looked upon by
foreigners, as a people totally destitute of this virtue; and I
never was in any country abroad, where I did not meet with persons of
distinction, who complained of having been inhospitably used in Great
Britain. A gentleman of France, Italy, or Germany, who has entertained
and lodged an Englishman at his house, when he afterwards meets with
his guest at London, is asked to dinner at the Saracen's-head, the
Turk's-head, the Boar's-head, or the Bear, eats raw beef and butter,
drinks execrable port, and is allowed to pay his share of the reckoning.

But to return from this digression, which my feeling for the honour of
my country obliged me to make--our Yorkshire cousin has been a mighty
fox-hunter before the Lord; but now he is too fat and unwieldy to leap
ditches and five-bar gates; nevertheless, he still keeps a pack
of hounds, which are well exercised; and his huntsman every night
entertains him with the adventures of the day's chace, which he recites
in a tone and terms that are extremely curious and significant. In the
mean time, his broad brawn is scratched by one of his grooms.--This
fellow, it seems, having no inclination to curry any beast out of the
stable, was at great pains to scollop his nails in such a manner that
the blood followed at every stroke.--He was in hopes that he would
be dismissed from this disagreeable office, but the event turned out
contrary to his expectation.--His master declared he was the best
scratcher in the family; and now he will not suffer any other servant to
draw a nail upon his carcase.

The 'squire's lady is very proud, without being stiff or inaccessible.
She receives even her inferiors in point of fortune with a kind of
arrogant civility; but then she thinks she has a right to treat them
with the most ungracious freedoms of speech, and never fails to let
them know she is sensible of her own superior affluence. In a word,
she speaks well of no living soul, and has not one single friend in
the world. Her husband hates her mortally; but, although the brute is
sometimes so very powerful in him that he will have his own way, he
generally truckles to her dominion, and dreads, like a school-boy, the
lash of her tongue. On the other hand, she is afraid of provoking him
too far, lest he should make some desperate effort to shake off her
yoke.--She, therefore, acquiesces in the proofs he daily gives of his
attachment to the liberty of an English freeholder, by saying and doing,
at his own table, whatever gratifies the brutality of his disposition,
or contributes to the case of his person. The house, though large, is
neither elegant nor comfortable.--It looks like a great inn, crowded
with travellers, who dine at the landlord's ordinary, where there is
a great profusion of victuals and drink, but mine host seems to be
misplaced; and I would rather dine upon filberts with a hermit, than
feed upon venison with a hog. The footmen might be aptly compared to the
waiters of a tavern, if they were more serviceable and less rapacious;
but they are generally insolent and inattentive, and so greedy, that, I
think, I can dine better, and for less expence, at the Star and Garter
in Pall mall, than at our cousin's castle in Yorkshire. The 'squire is
not only accommodated with a wife, but he is also blessed with an only
son, about two and twenty, just returned from Italy, a complete fidler
and dillettante; and he slips no opportunity of manifesting the most
perfect contempt for his own father.

When we arrived, there was a family of foreigners at the house, on a
visit to this virtuoso, with whom they had been acquainted at the Spa;
it was the count de Melville, with his lady, on their way to Scotland.
Mr Burdock had met with an accident, in consequence of which both the
count and I would have retired but the young gentleman and his mother
insisted upon our staying dinner; and their serenity seemed to be
so little ruffled by what had happened, that we complied with their
invitation. The 'squire had been brought home over night in his
post-chaise, so terribly belaboured about the pate, that he seemed to
be in a state of stupefaction, and had ever since remained speechless. A
country apothecary, called Grieve, who lived in a neighbouring village,
having been called to his assistance, had let him blood, and applied a
poultice to his head, declaring, that he had no fever, nor any other bad
symptom but the loss of speech, if he really had lost that faculty.
But the young 'squire said this practitioner was an ignorantaccio, that
there was a fracture in the cranium, and that there was a necessity for
having him trepanned without loss of time. His mother, espousing this
opinion, had sent an express to York for a surgeon to perform the
operation, and he was already come with his 'prentice and instruments.
Having examined the patient's head, he began to prepare his dressings;
though Grieve still retained his first opinion that there was no
fracture, and was the more confirmed in it as the 'squire had passed the
night in profound sleep, uninterrupted by any catching or convulsion.
The York surgeon said he could not tell whether there was a fracture,
until he should take off the scalp; but, at any rate, the operation
might be of service in giving vent to any blood that might be
extravasated, either above or below the dura mater. The lady and her son
were clear for trying the experiment; and Grieve was dismissed with
some marks of contempt, which, perhaps, he owed to the plainness of his
appearance. He seemed to be about the middle age, wore his own black
hair without any sort of dressing; by his garb, one would have taken
him for a quaker, but he had none of the stiffness of that sect, on the
contrary he was very submissive, respectful, and remarkably taciturn.

Leaving the ladies in an apartment by themselves, we adjourned to the
patient's chamber, where the dressings and instruments were displayed
in order upon a pewter dish. The operator, laying aside his coat and
periwig, equipped himself with a night-cap, apron, and sleeves, while
his 'prentice and footman, seizing the 'squire's head, began to place
it in a proper posture.--But mark what followed.--The patient, bolting
upright in the bed, collared each of these assistants with the grasp of
Hercules, exclaiming, in a bellowing tone, 'I ha'n't lived so long in
Yorkshire to be trepanned by such vermin as you;' and leaping on the
floor, put on his breeches quietly, to the astonishment of us all. The
Surgeon still insisted upon the operation, alleging it was now plain
that the brain was injured, and desiring the servants put him into
bed again; but nobody would venture to execute his orders, or even to
interpose: when the 'squire turned him and his assistants out of doors,
and threw his apparatus out at the window. Having thus asserted his
prerogative, and put on his cloaths with the help of a valet, the count,
with my nephew and me, were introduced by his son, and received with his
usual stile of rustic civility; then turning to signor Macaroni, with a
sarcastic grin, 'I tell thee what, Dick (said he), a man's scull is not
to be bored every time his head is broken; and I'll convince thee and
thy mother, that I know as many tricks as e'er an old fox in the West
Riding.'

We afterwards understood he had quarrelled at a public house with an
exciseman, whom he challenged to a bout at single stick, in which he had
been worsted; and that the shame of this defeat had tied up his tongue.
As for madam, she had shewn no concern for his disaster, and now heard
of his recovery without emotion--She had taken some little notice of
my sister and niece, though rather with a view to indulge her own
petulance, than out of any sentiment of regard to our family.--She said
Liddy was a fright, and ordered her woman to adjust her head before
dinner; but she would not meddle with Tabby, whose spirit, she soon
perceived, was not to be irritated with impunity. At table, she
acknowledged me so far as to say she had heard of my father; though
she hinted, that he had disobliged her family by making a poor match
in Wales. She was disagreeably familiar in her enquiries about our
circumstances; and asked, if I intended to bring up my nephew to the
law. I told her, that, as he had an independent fortune, he should
follow no profession but that of a country gentleman; and that I was not
without hopes of procuring for him a seat in parliament--'Pray cousin
(said she), what may his fortune be?' When I answered, that, with what
I should be able to give him, he would have better than two thousand a
year, she replied, with a disdainful toss of her head, that it would
be impossible for him to preserve his independence on such a paultry
provision.

Not a little nettled at this arrogant remark, I told her, I had the
honour to sit in parliament with her father, when he had little more
than half that income; and I believed there was not a more independent
and incorruptible member in the house. 'Ay; but times are changed (cried
the 'squire)--Country gentlemen now-a-days live after another fashion.
My table alone stands me in a cool thousand a quarter, though I raise
my own stock, import my own liquors, and have every thing at the first
hand.--True it is, I keep open house, and receive all corners, for the
honour of Old England.' 'If that be the case (said I), 'tis a wonder you
can maintain it at so small an expence; but every private gentleman is
not expected to keep a caravanserai for the accommodation of travellers:
indeed, if every individual lived in the same stile, you would not have
such a number of guests at your table, of consequence your hospitality
would not shine so bright for the glory of the West Riding.' The
young 'squire, tickled by this ironical observation, exclaimed, 'O che
burla!'--his mother eyed me in silence with a supercilious air; and
the father of the feast, taking a bumper of October, 'My service to you,
cousin Bramble (said he), I have always heard there was something keen
and biting in the air of the Welch mountains.'

I was much pleased with the count de Melville, who is sensible, easy,
and polite; and the countess is the most amiable woman I ever beheld.
In the afternoon they took leave of their entertainers, and the young
gentleman, mounting his horse, undertook to conduct their coach through
the park, while one of their servants rode round to give notice to the
rest, whom they had left at a public house on the road. The moment
their backs were turned, the censorious daemon took possession of our
Yorkshire landlady and our sister Tabitha--The former observed, that
the countess was a good sort of a body, but totally ignorant of good
breeding, consequently aukward in her address. The squire said, he did
not pretend to the breeding of any thing but colts; but that the jade
would be very handsome, if she was a little more in flesh. 'Handsome!
(cried Tabby) she has indeed a pair of black eyes without any meaning;
but then there is not a good feature in her face.' 'I know not what you
call good features in Wales (replied our landlord); but they'll pass in
Yorkshire.' Then turning to Liddy, he added, 'What say you, my pretty
Redstreak?--what is your opinion of the countess?' 'I think (cried
Liddy, with great emotion), she's an angel.' Tabby chid her for talking
with such freedom in company; and the lady of the house said, in a
contemptuous tone, she supposed miss had been brought up at some country
boarding-school.

Our conversation was suddenly interrupted by the young gentleman,
who galloped into the yard all aghast, exclaiming, that the coach was
attacked by a great number of highwaymen. My nephew and I rushed out,
found his own and his servant's horse ready saddled in the stable, with
pistols in the caps--We mounted instantly, ordering Clinker and Dutton
to follow with all possible expedition; but notwithstanding all the
speed we could make, the action was over before we arrived, and the
count with his lady, safe lodged at the house of Grieve, who had
signalized himself in a very remarkable manner on this occasion. At the
turning of a lane, that led to the village where the count's servants
remained, a couple of robbers a-horseback suddenly appeared, with their
pistols advanced: one kept the coachman in awe, and the other demanded
the count's money, while the young 'squire went off at full speed,
without ever casting a look behind. The count desiring the thief to
withdraw his pistol, as the lady was in great terror, delivered his
purse without making the least resistance; but not satisfied with this
booty, which was pretty considerable, the rascal insisted upon rifling
her of her car-rings and necklace, and the countess screamed with
affright. Her husband, exasperated at the violence with which she was
threatened, wrested the pistol out of the fellow's hand, and turning it
upon him, snapped it in his face; but the robber knowing there was no
charge in it, drew another from his bosom, and in all probability would
have killed him on the spot, had not his life been saved by a wonderful
interposition. Grieve, the apothecary, chancing to pass that very
instant, ran up to the coach, and with a crab-stick, which was all the
weapon he had, brought the fellow to the ground with the first blow;
then seizing his pistol, presented it at his colleague, who fired his
piece at random, and fled without further opposition. The other was
secured by the assistance of the count and the coachman; and his legs
being tied under the belly of his own horse, Grieve conducted him to
the village, whither also the carriage proceeded. It was with great
difficulty the countess could be kept from swooning; but at last she was
happily conveyed to the house of the apothecary, who went into the shop
to prepare some drops for her, while his wife and daughter administered
to her in another apartment.

I found the count standing in the kitchen with the parson of the parish,
and expressing much impatience to see his protector, whom as yet he had
scarce found time to thank for the essential service he had done him
and the countess.--The daughter passing at the same time with a glass of
water, monsieur de Melville could not help taking notice of her figure,
which was strikingly engaging.--'Ay (said the parson), she is the
prettiest girl, and the best girl in all my parish: and if I could give
my son an estate of ten thousand a year, he should have my consent to
lay it at her feet. If Mr Grieve had been as solicitious about getting
money, as he has been in performing all the duties of a primitive
Christian, he would not have hung so long upon his hands.' 'What is her
name?' said I. 'Sixteen years ago (answered the vicar) I christened her
by the names of Seraphina Melvilia.' 'Ha! what! how! (cried the count
eagerly) sure, you said Seraphina Melvilia.' 'I did (said he); Mr Grieve
told me those were the names of two noble persons abroad, to whom he had
been obliged for more than life.'

The count, without speaking another syllable, rushed into the parlour,
crying, 'This is your god-daughter, my dear.' Mrs Grieve, then seizing
the countess by the hand, exclaimed with great agitation, 'O madam! O
sir!--I am--I am your poor Elinor.--This is my Seraphina Melvilia O
child! these are the count and countess of Melville, the generous the
glorious benefactors of thy once unhappy parents.'

The countess rising from her scat threw her arms about the neck of the
amiable Seraphina, and clasped her to her breast with great tenderness,
while she herself was embraced by the weeping mother. This moving scene
was completed by the entrance of Grieve himself, who falling on his
knees before the count, 'Behold (said he) a penitent, who at length
can look upon his patron without shrinking.' 'Ah, Ferdinand! (cried he,
raising and folding him in his arms) the playfellow of my infancy--the
companion of my youth!--Is it to you then I am indebted for my
life?' 'Heaven has heard my prayer (said the other), and given me an
opportunity to prove myself not altogether unworthy of your clemency and
protection.' He then kissed the hand of the countess, while monsieur
de Melville saluted his wife and lovely daughter, and all of us were
greatly affected by this pathetic recognition.

In a word, Grieve was no other than Ferdinand count Fathom, whose
adventures were printed many years ago. Being a sincere convert to
virtue, he had changed his name, that he might elude the enquiries of
the count, whose generous allowance he determined to forego, that he
might have no dependence but upon his own industry and moderation. He
had accordingly settled in this village as a practitioner in surgery and
physic, and for some years wrestled with all the miseries of indigence,
which, however, he and his wife had borne with the most exemplary
resignation. At length, by dint of unwearied attention to the duties of
his profession, which he exercised with equal humanity and success, he
had acquired tolerable share of business among the farmers and common
people, which enabled him to live in a decent manner. He had been scarce
ever seen to smile; was unaffectedly pious; and all the time he could
spare from the avocations of his employment, he spent in educating
his daughter, and in studying for his own improvement. In short, the
adventurer Fathom was, under the name of Grieve, universally respected
among the commonalty of this district, as a prodigy of learning and
virtue. These particulars I learned from the vicar, when we quitted the
room, that they might be under no restraint in their mutual effusions.
I make no doubt that Grieve will be pressed to leave off business,
and re-unite himself to the count's family; and as the countess seemed
extremely fond of his daughter, she will, in all probability, insist
upon Seraphina's accompanying her to Scotland.

Having paid our compliments to these noble persons, we returned to the
'squire's, where we expected an invitation to pass the night, which was
wet and raw; but it seems, 'squire Burdock's hospitality reached not so
far for the honour of Yorkshire; we therefore departed in the evening,
and lay at an inn, where I caught cold.

In hope of riding it down before it could take fast hold on my
constitution, I resolved to visit another relation, one Mr Pimpernel,
who lived about a dozen miles from the place where we lodged. Pimpernel
being the youngest of four sons, was bred an attorney at Furnival's inn;
but all his elder brothers dying, he got himself called to the bar for
the honour of his family, and soon after this preferment, succeeded to
his father's estate which was very considerable. He carried home with
him all the knavish chicanery of the lowest pettifogger, together with
a wife whom he had purchased of a drayman for twenty pounds; and he soon
found means to obtain a dedimus as an acting justice of peace. He is not
only a sordid miser in his disposition, but his avarice is mingled
with a spirit of despotism, which is truly diabolical.--He is a brutal
husband, an unnatural parent, a harsh master, an oppressive landlord, a
litigious neighbour, and a partial magistrate. Friends he has none;
and in point of hospitality and good breeding, our cousin Burdock is a
prince in comparison of this ungracious miscreant, whose house is the
lively representation of a gaol. Our reception was suitable to the
character I have sketched. Had it depended upon the wife, we should have
been kindly treated.--She is really a good sort of a woman, in spite
of her low original, and well respected in the country; but she has not
interest enough in her own house to command a draught of table beer,
far less to bestow any kind of education on her children, who run about,
like tagged colts, in a state of nature.--Pox on him! he is such a dirty
fellow, that I have not patience to prosecute the subject.

By that time we reached Harrigate, I began to be visited by certain
rheumatic symptoms. The Scotch lawyer, Mr Micklewhimmen, recommended a
hot bath of these waters so earnestly, that I was over-persuaded to try
the experiment.--He had used it often with success and always stayed an
hour in the bath, which was a tub filled with Harrigate water, heated
for the purpose. If I could hardly bear the smell of a single tumbler
when cold, you may guess how my nose was regaled by the streams arising
from a hot bath of the same fluid. At night, I was conducted into a dark
hole on the ground floor, where the tub smoaked and stunk like the pot
of Acheron, in one corner, and in another stood a dirty bed provided
with thick blankets, in which I was to sweat after coming out of the
bath. My heart seemed to die within me when I entered this dismal
bagnio, and found my brain assaulted by such insufferable effluvia. I
cursed Micklewhimmen for not considering that my organs were formed on
this side of the Tweed; but being ashamed to recoil upon the threshold,
I submitted to the process.

After having endured all but real suffocation for above a quarter of an
hour in the tub, I was moved to the bed and wrapped in blankets.--There
I lay a full hour panting with intolerable heat; but not the least
moisture appearing on my skin, I was carried to my own chamber, and
passed the night without closing an eye, in such a flutter of spirits as
rendered me the most miserable wretch in being. I should certainly
have run distracted, if the rarefaction of my blood, occasioned by
that Stygian bath, had not burst the vessels, and produced a violent
haemorrhage, which, though dreadful and alarming, removed the horrible
disquiet--I lost two pounds of blood, and more, on this occasion; and
find myself still weak and languid; but, I believe, a little exercise
will forward my recovery, and therefore I am resolved to set out
to-morrow for York, in my way to Scarborough, where I propose to brace
up my fibres by sea-bathing, which, I know, is one of your favourite
specificks. There is, however, one disease, for which you have found as
yet no specific, and that is old age, of which this tedious unconnected
epistle is an infallible symptom: what, therefore, cannot be cured, must
be endured, by you, as well as by

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE HARRIGATE, June 26.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

The manner of living at Harrigate was so agreeable to my disposition,
that I left the place with some regret--Our aunt Tabby would have
probably made some objection to our departing so soon, had not an
accident embroiled her with Mr Micklewhimmen, the Scotch advocate,
on whose heart she had been practising, from the second day after our
arrival--That original, though seemingly precluded from the use of
his limbs, had turned his genius to good account--In short, by dint of
groaning, and whining, he had excited the compassion of the company so
effectually, that an old lady, who occupied the very best apartment in
the house, gave it up for his case and convenience. When his man led him
into the Long Room, all the females were immediately in commotion--One
set an elbow-chair; another shook up the cushion; a third brought a
stool; and a fourth a pillow, for the accommodation of his feet--
Two ladies (of whom Tabby was always one) supported him into the
dining-room, and placed him properly at the table; and his taste was
indulged with a succession of delicacies, culled by their fair hands.
All this attention he repaid with a profusion of compliments and
benedictions, which were not the less agreeable for being delivered in
the Scottish dialect. As for Mrs Tabitha, his respects were particularly
addressed to her, and he did not fail to mingle them with religious
reflections, touching free grace, knowing her bias to methodism, which
he also professed upon a calvinistical model.

For my part, I could not help thinking this lawyer was not such an
invalid as he pretended to be. I observed he ate very heartily three
times a day; and though his bottle was marked stomachic tincture, he
had recourse to it so often, and seemed to swallow it with such peculiar
relish, that I suspected it was not compounded in the apothecary's shop,
or the chemist's laboratory. One day, while he was earnest in discourse
with Mrs Tabitha, and his servant had gone out on some occasion or
other, I dexterously exchanged the labels, and situation of his bottle
and mine; and having tasted his tincture, found it was excellent claret.
I forthwith handed it about me to some of my neighbours, and it was
quite emptied before Mr Micklewhimmen had occasion to repeat his
draught. At length, turning about, he took hold of my bottle, instead of
his own, and, filling a large glass, drank to the health of Mrs Tabitha.
It had scarce touched his lips, when he perceived the change which had
been put upon him, and was at first a little out of countenance. He
seemed to retire within himself, in order to deliberate, and in half a
minute his resolution was taken; addressing himself to our quarter, 'I
give the gentleman credit for his wit (said he); it was a gude practical
joke; but sometimes hi joci in seria ducunt mala--I hope for his own
sake he has na drank all the liccor; for it was a vara poorful infusion
of jallap in Bourdeaux wine; at its possable he may ha ta'en sic a dose
as will produce a terrible catastrophe in his ain booels--'

By far the greater part of the contents had fallen to the share of a
young clothier from Leeds, who had come to make a figure at Harrigate,
and was, in effect a great coxcomb in his way. It was with a view to
laugh at his fellow-guests, as well as to mortify the lawyer, that he
had emptied the bottle, when it came to his turn, and he had laughed
accordingly: but now his mirth gave way to his apprehension--He began
to spit, to make wry faces, and writhe himself into various
contorsions--'Damn the stuff! (cried he) I thought it had a villainous
twang--pah! He that would cozen a Scot, mun get oope betimes, and take
Old Scratch for his counsellor--' 'In troth mester what d'ye ca'um
(replied the lawyer), your wit has run you into a filthy puddle--I'm
truly consarned for your waeful case--The best advice I can give you, in
sic a delemma, is to send an express to Rippon for doctor Waugh, without
delay, and, in the mean time, swallow all the oil and butter you can
find in the hoose, to defend your poor stomach and intastines from the
villication of the particles of the jallap, which is vara violent, even
when taken in moderation.'

The poor clothier's torments had already begun: he retired, roaring with
pain, to his own chamber; the oil was swallowed, and the doctor
sent for; but before he arrived, the miserable patient had made such
discharges upwards and downwards, that nothing remained to give him
further offence; and this double evacuation, was produced by imagination
alone; for what he had drank was genuine wine of Bourdeaux, which the
lawyer had brought from Scotland for his own private use. The clothier,
finding the joke turn out so expensive and disagreeable, quitted the
house next morning, leaving the triumph to Micklewhimmen, who enjoyed it
internally without any outward signs of exultation--on the contrary, he
affected to pity the young man for what he had suffered; and acquired
fresh credit from this shew of moderation.

It was about the middle of the night, which succeeded this adventure,
that the vent of the kitchen chimney being foul, the soot took fire, and
the alarm was given in a dreadful manner. Every body leaped naked out
of bed, and in a minute the whole house was filled with cries and
confusion--There was two stairs in the house, and to these we naturally
ran; but they were both so blocked up, by the people pressing one upon
another, that it seemed impossible to pass, without throwing down
and trampling upon the women. In the midst of this anarchy, Mr
Micklewhimmen, with a leathern portmanteau on his back, came running
as nimble as a buck along the passage; and Tabby in her underpetticoat,
endeavouring to hook him under the arm, that she might escape through
his protection, he very fairly pushed her down, crying, 'Na, na, gude
faith, charity begins at hame!' Without paying the least respect to the
shrieks and intreaties of his female friends, he charged through the
midst of the crowd, overturning every thing that opposed him; and
actually fought his way to the bottom of the Stair-case--By this time
Clinker had found a ladder by which he entered the window of my uncle's
chamber, where our family was assembled, and proposed that we should
make our exit successively by that conveyance. The 'squire exhorted his
sister to begin the descent; but, before she could resolve, her woman,
Mrs Winifred Jenkins, in a transport of terror, threw herself out at the
window upon the ladder, while Humphry dropped upon the ground, that
he might receive her in her descent--This maiden was just as she had
started out of bed, the moon shone very bright, and a fresh breeze of
wind blowing, none of Mrs Winifred's beauties could possibly escape the
view of the fortunate Clinker, whose heart was not able to withstand the
united force of so many charms; at least I am much mistaken, if he has
not been her humble slave from that moment--He received her in his arms,
and, giving her his coat to protect her from the weather, ascended again
with admirable dexterity.

At that instant, the landlord of the house called out with an audible
voice, that the fire was extinguished, and the ladies had nothing
further to fear: this was a welcome note to the audience, and produced
an immediate effect; the shrieking ceased, and a confused sound of
expostulation ensued. I conducted Mrs Tabitha and my sister to their own
chamber, where Liddy fainted away; but was soon brought to herself.
Then I went to offer my services to the other ladies, who might want
assistance--They were all scudding through the passage to their several
apartments; and as the thoroughfair was lighted by two lamps, I had a
pretty good observation of them in their transit; but as most of them
were naked to the smock, and all their heads shrowded in huge nightcaps,
I could not distinguish one face from another, though I recognized
some of their voices--These were generally plaintive; some wept, some
scolded, and some prayed--I lifted up one poor old gentlewoman, who had
been overturned and sore bruised by a multitude of feet; and this
was also the case with the lame person from Northumberland, whom
Micklewhimmen had in his passage overthrown, though not with impunity,
for the cripple, in falling, gave him such a good pelt on the head with
his crutch, that the blood followed.

As for this lawyer, he waited below till the hurly burly was over, and
then stole softly to his own chamber, from whence he did not venture to
make a second sally till eleven in the forenoon, when he was led into
the Public Room, by his own servant and another assistant, groaning most
woefully, with a bloody napkin round his head. But things were greatly
altered--The selfish brutality of his behaviour on the stairs had
steeled their hearts against all his arts and address--Not a soul
offered to accommodate him with a chair, cushion, or footstool; so that
he was obliged to sit down on a hard bench--In that position, he looked
around with a rueful aspect, and, bowing very low, said in a
whining tone, 'Your most humble servant, ladies--Fire is a dreadful
calamity'--'Fire purifies gold, and it ties friendship,' cried Mrs
Tabitha, bridling. 'Yea, madam (replied Micklewhimmen); and it trieth
discretion also'--'If discretion consists in forsaking a friend in
adversity, you are eminently possessed of that virtue' (resumed our
aunt).--'Na, madam (rejoined the advocate), well I wot, I cannot claim
any merit from the mode of my retreat--Ye'll please to observe, ladies,
there are twa independent principles that actuate our nature--One is
instinct, which we have in common with the brute creation, and the other
is reason--Noo, in certain great emergencies, when the faculty of reason
is suspended, instinct taks the lead, and when this predominates, having
no affinity with reason, it pays no sort of regard to its connections;
it only operates for the preservation of the individual, and that by the
most expeditious and effectual means; therefore, begging your pardon,
ladies, I'm no accountable in foro conscientioe for what I did, while
under the influence of this irresistible pooer.'

Here my uncle interposing, 'I should be glad to know (said he), whether
it was instinct that prompted you to retreat with bag and baggage; for,
I think, you had a portmanteau on your shoulder' The lawyer answered,
without hesitation, 'Gif I might tell my mind freely, withoot incuring
the suspicion of presumption, I should think it was something superior
to either reason or instinct which suggested that measure, and this on
a twafold accoont: in the first place, the portmanteau contained the
writings of a worthy nobleman's estate; and their being burnt would have
occasioned a loss that could not be repaired; secondly, my good angel
seems to have laid the portmanteau on my shoulders, by way of defence,
to sustain the violence of a most inhuman blow, from the crutch of a
reverend clergyman, which, even in spite of that medium, hath wounded
me sorely, even unto the pericranium.' 'By your own doctrine (cried the
parson, who chanced to be present), I am not accountable for the blow,
which was the effect of instinct.' 'I crave your pardon, reverend sir
(said the other), instinct never acts but for the preservation of the
individual; but your preservation was out of the case--you had already
received the damage, and therefore the blow must be imputed to revenge,
which is a sinful passion, that ill becomes any Christian, especially a
protestant divine; and let me tell you, most reverend doctor, gin I had
a mind to plea, the law would hauld my libel relevant.' 'Why, the damage
is pretty equal on both sides (cried the parson); your head is broke,
and my crutch is snapt in the middle. Now, if you will repair the one, I
will be at the expence of curing the other.'

This sally raised the laugh against Micklewhimmen, who began to look
grave; when my uncle, in order to change the discourse, observed,
that instinct had been very kind to him in another respect; for it had
restored to him the use of his limbs, which, in his exit, he had moved
with surprising agility.--He replied, that it was the nature of fear to
brace up the nerves; and mentioned some surprising feats of strength
and activity performed by persons under the impulse of terror; but he
complained that in his own particular, the effects had ceased when the
cause was taken away--The 'squire said, he would lay a tea-drinking on
his head, that he should dance a Scotch measure, without making a false
step; and the advocate grinning, called for the piper--A fidler being
at hand, this original started up, with his bloody napkin over his black
tye-periwig, and acquitted himself in such a manner as excited the mirth
of the whole company; but he could not regain the good graces of Mrs
Tabby, who did not understand the principle of instinct; and the lawyer
did not think it worth his while to proceed to further demonstration.

From Harrigate, we came hither, by the way of York, and here we shall
tarry some days, as my uncle and Tabitha are both resolved to make use
of the waters. Scarborough, though a paltry town, is romantic from its
situation along a cliff that over-hangs the sea. The harbour is formed
by a small elbow of land that runs out as a natural mole, directly
opposite to the town; and on that side is the castle, which stands very
high, of considerable extent, and, before the invention of gun-powder,
was counted impregnable. At the other end of Scarborough are two public
rooms for the use of the company, who resort to this place in the summer
to drink the waters and bathe in the sea; and the diversions are pretty
much on the same footing here as at Bath. The Spa is a little way beyond
the town, on this side, under a cliff, within a few paces of the sea,
and thither the drinkers go every morning in dishabille; but the descent
is by a great number of steps, which invalids find very inconvenient.
Betwixt the well and the harbour, the bathing machines are ranged along
the beach, with all their proper utensils and attendants. You have never
seen one of these machines--Image to yourself a small, snug, wooden
chamber, fixed upon a wheel-carriage, having a door at each end, and on
each side a little window above, a bench below--The bather, ascending
into this apartment by wooden steps, shuts himself in, and begins to
undress, while the attendant yokes a horse to the end next the sea, and
draws the carriage forwards, till the surface of the water is on a level
with the floor of the dressing-room, then he moves and fixes the horse
to the other end--The person within being stripped, opens the door to
the sea-ward, where he finds the guide ready, and plunges headlong into
the water--After having bathed, he re-ascends into the apartment, by the
steps which had been shifted for that purpose, and puts on his clothes
at his leisure, while the carriage is drawn back again upon the dry
land; so that he has nothing further to do, but to open the door, and
come down as he went up--Should he be so weak or ill as to require
a servant to put off and on his clothes, there is room enough in the
apartment for half a dozen people. The guides who attend the ladies in
the water, are of their own sex, and they and the female bathers have
a dress of flannel for the sea; nay, they are provided with other
conveniences for the support of decorum. A certain number of the
machines are fitted with tilts, that project from the sea-ward ends
of them, so as to screen the bathers from the view of all persons
whatsoever--The beach is admirably adapted for this practice, the
descent being gently gradual, and the sand soft as velvet; but then the
machines can be used only at a certain time of the tide, which varies
every day; so that sometimes the bathers are obliged to rise very early
in the morning--For my part, I love swimming as an exercise, and
can enjoy it at all times of the tide, without the formality of an
apparatus--You and I have often plunged together into the Isis; but
the sea is a much more noble bath, for health as well as pleasure. You
cannot conceive what a flow of spirits it gives, and how it braces every
sinew of the human frame. Were I to enumerate half the diseases which
are every day cured by sea-bathing, you might justly say you had
received a treatise, instead of a letter, from

Your affectionate friend and servant, J. MELFORD SCARBOROUGH, July 1.




To Dr LEWIS.

I have not found all the benefit I expected at Scarborough, where I have
been these eight days--From Harrigate we came hither by the way of York,
where we stayed only one day to visit the Castle, the Minster and
the Assembly-room. The first, which was heretofore a fortress, is now
converted to a prison, and is the best, in all respects, I ever saw,
at home or abroad--It stands in a high situation, extremely well
ventilated; and has a spacious area within the walls, for the health and
convenience of all the prisoners except those whom it is necessary to
secure in close confinement. Even these last have all the comforts that
the nature of their situation can admit. Here the assizes are held, in a
range of buildings erected for that purpose.

As for the Minster, I know not how to distinguish it, except by its
great size and the height of its spire, from those other ancient
churches in different parts of the kingdom, which used to be called
monuments of Gothic architecture; but it is now agreed, that this stile
is Saracen rather than Gothic; and, I suppose, it was first imported
into England from Spain, great part of which was under the dominion of
the Moors. Those British architects who adopted this stile, don't seem
to have considered the propriety of their adoption. The climate of the
country, possessed by the Moors or Saracens, both in Africa and Spain,
was so exceedingly hot and dry, that those who built places of worship
for the multitude, employed their talents in contriving edifices that
should be cool; and, for this purpose, nothing could be better adopted
than those buildings, vast, narrow, dark, and lofty, impervious to the
sun-beams, and having little communication with the scorched external
atmosphere; but ever affording a refreshing coolness, like subterranean
cellars in the heats of summer, or natural caverns in the bowels of huge
mountains. But nothing could be more preposterous, than to imitate such
a mode of architecture in a country like England, where the climate
is cold, and the air eternally loaded with vapours; and where, of
consequence, the builder's intention should be to keep the people dry
and warm--For my part, I never entered the Abbey church at Bath but
once, and the moment I stept over the threshold, I found myself chilled
to the very marrow of my bones. When we consider, that in our churches,
in general, we breathe a gross stagnated air, surcharged with damps
from vaults, tombs, and charnel-houses, may we not term them so many
magazines of rheums, created for the benefit of the medical faculty? and
safely aver, that more bodies are lost, than souls saved, by going to
church, in the winter especially, which may be said to engross eight
months in the year. I should be glad to know, what offence it would give
to tender consciences, if the house of God was made more comfortable,
or less dangerous to the health of valetudinarians; and whether it
would not be an encouragement to piety, as well as the salvation of many
lives, if the place of worship was well floored, wainscotted, warmed,
and ventilated, and its area kept sacred from the pollution of the
dead. The practice of burying in churches was the effect of ignorant
superstition, influenced by knavish priests, who pretended that the
devil could have no power over the defunct if he was interred in holy
ground; and this indeed, is the only reason that can be given for
consecrating all cemeteries, even at this day.

The external appearance of an old cathedral cannot be but displeasing to
the eye of every man, who has any idea of propriety or proportion, even
though he may be ignorant of architecture as a science; and the long
slender spire puts one in mind of a criminal impaled with a sharp stake
rising up through his shoulder--These towers, or steeples, were likewise
borrowed from the Mahometans; who, having no bells, used such minarets
for the purpose of calling the people to prayers--They may be of further
use, however, for making observations and signals; but I would vote for
their being distinct from the body of the church, because they serve
only to make the pile more barbarous, or Saracenical.

There is nothing of this Arabic architecture in the Assembly Room, which
seems to me to have been built upon a design of Palladio, and might
be converted into an elegant place of worship; but it is indifferently
contrived for that sort of idolatry which is performed in it at present:
the grandeur of the fane gives a diminutive effect to the little painted
divinities that are adorned in it, and the company, on a ball-night,
must look like an assembly of fantastic fairies, revelling by moonlight
among the columns of a Grecian temple.

Scarborough seems to be falling off, in point of reputation. All these
places (Bath excepted) have their vogue, and then the fashion changes.
I am persuaded, there are fifty spaws in England as efficacious and
salutary as that of Scarborough, though they have not yet risen to fame;
and, perhaps, never will, unless some medical encomiast should find an
interest in displaying their virtues to the public view--Be that as it
may, recourse will always be had to this place for the convenience of
sea bathing, while this practice prevails; but it were to be wished,
they would make the beach more accessible to invalids.

I have here met with my old acquaintance, H[ewet]t, whom you have often
heard me mention as one of the most original characters upon earth--I
first knew him at Venice, and afterwards saw him in different parts of
Italy, where he was well known by the nick-name of Cavallo Bianco,
from his appearing always mounted on a pale horse, like Death in the
Revelations. You must remember the account I once gave you of a curious
dispute he had at Constantinople, with a couple of Turks, in defence of
the Christian religion; a dispute from which he acquired the epithet
of Demonstrator--The truth is, H--owns no religion but that of nature;
but, on this occasion, he was stimulated to shew his parts, for the
honour of his country--Some years ago, being in the Campidoglio at Rome,
he made up to the bust of Jupiter, and, bowing very low, exclaimed in
the Italian language, 'I hope, sir, if ever you get your head above
water again, you will remember that I paid my respects to you in your
adversity.' This sally was reported to the cardinal Camerlengo, and by
him laid before pope Benedict XIV, who could not help laughing at the
extravagance of the address, and said to the cardinal, 'Those English
heretics think they have a right to go to the devil in their own way.'

Indeed H-- was the only Englishman I ever knew, who had resolution
enough to live in his own way, in the midst of foreigners; for, neither
in dress, diet, customs, or conversation, did he deviate one tittle from
the manner in which he had been brought up. About twelve years ago, he
began a Giro or circuit, which he thus performed--At Naples, where
he fixed his headquarters, he embarked for Marseilles, from whence he
travelled with a Voiturin to Antibes--There he took his passage to
Genoa and Lerici; from which last place he proceeded, by the way of
Cambratina, to Pisa and Florence--After having halted some time in
this metropolis, he set out with a Vetturino for Rome, where he reposed
himself a few weeks, and then continued his route for Naples, in order
to wait for the next opportunity of embarkation--After having twelve
times described this circle, he lately flew off at a tangent to visit
some trees at his country-house in England, which he had planted above
twenty years ago, after the plan of the double colonnade in the piazza
of St Peter's at Rome--He came hither to Scarborough, to pay his
respects to his noble friend and former pupil, the M-- of G--, and,
forgetting that he is now turned of seventy, sacrificed so liberally to
Bacchus, that next day he was seized with a fit of the apoplexy, which
has a little impaired his memory; but he retains all the oddity of
his character in perfection, and is going back to Italy by the way of
Geneva, that he may have a conference with his friend Voltaire, about
giving the last blow to the Christian superstition--He intends to take
shipping here for Holland or Hamburgh; for it is a matter of great
indifference to him at what part of the continent he first lands.

When he was going abroad the last time, he took his passage in a ship
bound for Leghorn, and his baggage was actually embarked. In going down
the river by water, he was by mistake put on board of another
vessel under sail; and, upon inquiry understood she was bound to
Petersburgh--'Petersburgh,--Petersburgh (said he) I don't care if I go
along with you.' He forthwith struck a bargain with the captain; bought
a couple of shirts of the mate, and was safe conveyed to the court of
Muscovy, from whence he travelled by land to receive his baggage at
Leghorn--He is now more likely than ever to execute a whim of the same
nature; and I will hold any wager, that as he cannot be supposed to live
much longer, according to the course of nature, his exit will be as odd
as his life has been extravagant.

[This gentleman crossed the sea to France, visited and conferred with
Mr de Voltaire at Fernay, resumed his old circuit at Genoa, and died in
1767, at the house of Vanini in Florence. Being taken with a suppression
of urine, he resolved, in imitation of Pomponius Atticus, to take
himself off by abstinence; and this resolution he executed like an
ancient Roman. He saw company to the last, cracked his jokes, conversed
freely, and entertained his guests with music. On the third day of his
fast, he found himself entirely freed of his complaint; but refused
taking sustenance. He said the most disagreeable part of the voyage was
past, and he should be a cursed fool indeed, to put about ship, when he
was just entering the harbour. In these sentiments he persisted, without
any marks of affectation, and thus finished his course with such
case and serenity, as would have done honour to the firmest Stoic of
antiquity.]

But, to return from one humourist to another, you must know I have
received benefit, both from the chalybeate and the sea, and would have
used them longer, had not a most ridiculous adventure, by making me the
town-talk, obliged me to leave the place; for I can't bear the thoughts
of affording a spectacle to the multitude Yesterday morning, at six
o'clock, I went down to the bathing-place, attended by my servant
Clinker, who waited on the beach as usual--The wind blowing from the
north, and the weather being hazy, the water proved so chill, that when
I rose from my first plunge, I could not help sobbing and bawling out,
from the effects of the cold. Clinker, who heard me cry, and saw me
indistinctly a good way without the guide, buffetting the waves, took it
for granted I was drowning, and rushing into the sea, clothes and all,
overturned the guide in his hurry to save his master. I had swam out
a few strokes, when hearing a noise, I turned about and saw Clinker,
already up to his neck, advancing towards me, with all the wildness of
terror in his aspect--Afraid he would get out of his depth, I made haste
to meet him, when, all of a sudden, he seized me by one ear, dragged me
bellowing with pain upon the dry beach, to the astonishment of all the
people, men, and women, and children there assembled.

I was so exasperated by the pain of my ear, and the disgrace of being
exposed in such an attitude, that, in the first transport I struck him
down; then, running back into the sea, took shelter in the machine where
my clothes had been deposited. I soon recollected myself so far as to do
justice to the poor fellow, who, in great simplicity of heart, had acted
from motives of fidelity and affection--Opening the door of the machine,
which was immediately drawn on shore, I saw him standing by the wheel,
dropping like a water-work, and trembling from head to foot; partly from
cold, and partly from the dread of having offended his master--I made
my acknowledgments for the blow he had received, assured him I was
not angry, and insisted upon his going home immediately, to shift his
clothes; a command which he could hardly find in his heart to execute,
so well disposed was he to furnish the mob with further entertainment
at my expence. Clinker's intention was laudable without all doubt, but,
nevertheless, I am a sufferer by his simplicity--I have had a burning
heat, and a strange buzzing noise in that ear, ever since it was so
roughly treated; and I cannot walk the street without being pointed at;
as the monster that was hauled naked a-shore upon the beach--Well, I
affirm that folly is often more provoking than knavery, aye and more
mischievous too; and whether a man had not better choose a sensible
rogue, than an honest simpleton for his servant, is no matter of doubt
with

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE SCARBOROUGH, July 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

We made a precipitate retreat from Scarborough, owing to the excessive
delicacy of our 'squire, who cannot bear the thoughts of being
proetereuntium digito monstratus.

One morning, while he was bathing in the sea, his man Clinker took it
in his head that his master was in danger of drowning; and, in this
conceit, plunging into the water, he lugged him out naked on the beach,
and almost pulled off his ear in the operation. You may guess how this
atchievement was relished by Mr Bramble, who is impatient, irascible,
and has the most extravagant ideas of decency and decorum in the
oeconomy of his own person--In the first ebullition of his choler, he
knocked Clinker down with his fist; but he afterwards made him amends
for his outrage, and, in order to avoid further notice of the people,
among whom this incident had made him remarkable, he resolved to leave
Scarborough next day.

We set out accordingly over the moors, by the way of Whitby, and began
our journey betimes, in hopes of reaching Stockton that night; but
in this hope we were disappointed--In the afternoon, crossing a deep
gutter, made by a torrent, the coach was so hard strained, that one of
the irons, which connect the frame, snapt, and the leather sling on the
same side, cracked in the middle. The shock was so great, that my sister
Liddy struck her head against Mrs Tabitha's nose with such violence that
the blood flowed; and Win. Jenkins was darted through a small window in
that part of the carriage next the horses, where she stuck like a bawd
in the pillory, till she was released by the hand of Mr Bramble. We
were eight miles distant from any place where we could be supplied with
chaises, and it was impossible to proceed with the coach, until the
damage should be repaired--in this dilemma, we discovered a blacksmith's
forge on the edge of a small common, about half a mile from the scene
of our disaster, and thither the postilions made shift to draw the
carriage, slowly, while the company walked a-foot; but we found the
black-smith had been dead some days; and his wife, who had been lately
delivered, was deprived of her senses, under the care of a nurse, hired
by the parish. We were exceedingly mortified at this disappointment,
which, however, was surmounted by the help of Humphry Clinker, who is a
surprising compound of genius and simplicity. Finding the tools of
the defunct, together with some coals in the smithy, he unscrewed the
damaged iron in a twinkling, and, kindling a fire, united the broken
pieces with equal dexterity and dispatch--While he was at work upon
this operation, the poor woman in the straw, struck with the well-known
sound of the hammer and anvil, started up, and, notwithstanding all the
nurse's efforts, came running into the smithy, where, throwing her arms
about Clinker's neck, 'Ah, Jacob (cried she) how could you leave me in
such a condition?'

This incident was too pathetic to occasion mirth--it brought tears into
the eyes of all present. The poor widow was put to bed again; and we
did not leave the village without doing something for her benefit--Even
Tabitha's charity was awakened on this occasion. As for the
tender-hearted Humphry Clinker, he hammered the iron and wept at the
same time--But his ingenuity was not confined to his own province of
farrier and black-smith--It was necessary to join the leather sling,
which had been broke; and this service he likewise performed, by means
of a broken awl, which he new-pointed and ground, a little hemp, which
he spun into lingels, and a few tacks which he made for the purpose.
Upon the whole, we were in a condition to proceed in little more than
an hour; but even this delay obliged us to pass the night at
Gisborough--Next day we crossed the Tees at Stockton, which is a neat
agreeable town; and there we resolved to dine, with purpose to lie at
Durham.

Whom should we meet in the yard, when we alighted, but Martin the
adventurer? Having handed out the ladies, and conducted them into an
apartment, where he payed his compliments to Mrs Tabby, with his usual
address, he begged leave to speak to my uncle in another room; and
there, in some confusion, he made an apology for having taken the
liberty to trouble him with a letter at Stevenage. He expressed his
hope, that Mr Bramble had bestowed some consideration on his unhappy
case, and repeated his desire of being taken into his service.

My uncle, calling me into the room, told him, that we were both
very well inclined to rescue him from a way of life that was equally
dangerous and dishonourable; and that he should have no scruples in
trusting to his gratitude and fidelity, if he had any employment
for him, which he thought would suit his qualifications and his
circumstances; but that all the departments he had mentioned in his
letter, were filled up by persons of whose conduct he had no reason to
complain; of consequence he could not, without injustice, deprive any
one of them of his bread. Nevertheless, he declared himself ready to
assist him in any feasible project, either with his purse or credit.

Martin seemed deeply touched at this declaration--The tear started
in his eye, while he said, in a faultering accent--'Worthy sir--your
generosity oppresses me--I never dreamed of troubling you for any
pecuniary assistance--indeed I have no occasion--I have been so lucky
at billiards and betting in different places, at Buxton, Harrigate,
Scarborough, and Newcastle races, that my stock in ready-money amounts
to three hundred pounds, which I would willingly employ, in prosecuting
some honest scheme of life; but my friend, justice Buzzard, has set
so many springs for my life, that I am under the necessity of either
retiring immediately to a remote part of the country, where I can enjoy
the protection of some generous patron, or of quitting the kingdom
altogether. It is upon this alternative that I now beg leave to ask your
advice. I have had information of all your route, since I had the honour
to see you at Stevenage; and, supposing you would come this way from
Scarborough, I came hither last night from Darlington, to pay you my
respects.'

'It would be no difficult matter to provide you with an asylum in the
country (replied my uncle); but a life of indolence and obscurity
would not suit with your active and enterprizing disposition--I would
therefore advise you to try your fortune in the East Indies--I will
give you a letter to a friend in London, who will recommend you to the
direction, for a commission in the company's service; and if that cannot
be obtained, you will at least be received as a volunteer--in which
case, you may pay for your passage, and I shall undertake to procure you
such credentials, that you will not be long without a commission.'

Martin embraced the proposal with great eagerness; it was therefore
resolved, that he should sell his horse, and take a passage by sea
for London, to execute the project without delay--In the mean time he
accompanied us to Durham, were we took up our quarters for the night.
Here, being furnished with letters from my uncle, he took his leave of
us, with strong symptoms of gratitude and attachment, and set out for
Sunderland, in order to embark in the first collier, bound for the
river Thames. He had not been gone half an hour, when we were joined
by another character, which promised something extraordinary--A tall,
meagre figure, answering, with his horse, the description of Don Quixote
mounted on Rozinante, appeared in the twilight at the inn door, while my
aunt and Liddy stood at a window in the dining-room--He wore a coat,
the cloth of which had once been scarlet, trimmed with Brandenburgs, now
totally deprived of their metal, and he had holstercaps and housing
of the same stuff and same antiquity. Perceiving ladies at the window
above, he endeavoured to dismount with the most graceful air he could
assume; but the ostler neglecting to hold the stirrup when he wheeled
off his right foot, and stood with his whole weight on the other, the
girth unfortunately gave way, the saddle turned, down came the cavalier
to the ground, and his hat and perriwig falling off, displayed a
head-piece of various colours, patched and plaistered in a woeful
condition--The ladies, at the window above, shrieked with affright, on
the supposition that the stranger had received some notable damages
in his fall; but the greatest injury he had sustained arose from the
dishonour of his descent, aggravated by the disgrace of exposing the
condition of his cranium; for certain plebeians that were about the
door, laughed aloud, in the belief that the captain had got either a
scald head, or a broken head, both equally opprobrious.

He forthwith leaped up in a fury, and snatching one of his pistols,
threatened to put the ostler to death, when another squall from the
women checked his resentment. He then bowed to the window, while he
kissed the butt-end of his pistol, which he replaced; adjusted his wig
in great confusion, and led his horse into the stable--By this time I
had come to the door, and could not help gazing at the strange figure
that presented itself to my view. He would have measured above six
feet in height had he stood upright; but he stooped very much; was very
narrow in the shoulders, and very thick in the calves of his legs, which
were cased in black spatterdashes--As for his thighs, they were long
and slender, like those of a grasshopper; his face was, at least, half
a yard in length, brown and shrivelled, with projecting cheek-bones,
little grey eyes on the greenish hue, a large hook-nose, a pointed chin,
a mouth from ear to car, very ill furnished with teeth, and a high,
narrow fore-head, well furrowed with wrinkles. His horse was exactly
in the stile of its rider; a resurrection of dry bones, which (as we
afterwards learned) he valued exceedingly, as the only present he had
ever received in his life.

Having seen this favourite steed properly accommodated in the stable, he
sent up his compliments to the ladies, begging permission to thank them
in person for the marks of concern they had shewn at his disaster in
the court yard--As the 'squire said they could not decently decline
his visit, he was shewn up stairs and paid his respects in the Scotch
dialect, with much formality 'Leddies (said he), perhaps ye may be
scandaleezed at the appearance of my heed made, when it was uncovered by
accident; but I can assure you, the condition you saw it in, is neither
the effects of diseases, nor of drunkenness: but an honest scar received
in the service of my country.' He then gave us to understand, that
having been wounded at Ticonderoga, in America, a party of Indians
rifled him, scalped him, broke his scull with the blow of a tomahawk,
and left him for dead on the field of battle; but that being afterwards
found with signs of life, he had been cured in the French hospital,
though the loss of substance could not be repaired; so that the scull
was left naked in several places, and these he covered with patches.

There is no hold by which an Englishman is sooner taken than that of
compassion--We were immediately interested in behalf of this veteran.
Even Tabby's heart was melted; but our pity was warmed with indignation,
when we learned, that in the course of two sanguinary wars, he had been
wounded, maimed, mutilated, taken, and enslaved, without ever having
attained a higher rank than that of lieutenant--My uncle's eyes gleamed,
and his nether lip quivered, while he exclaimed, 'I vow to God, sir,
your case is a reproach to the service--The injustice you have met
with is so flagrant'--'I must crave your pardon, sir (cried the other,
interrupting him), I complain of no injustice--I purchased an ensigncy
thirty years ago; and, in the course of service rose to a lieutenant,
according to my seniority'--'But in such a length of time (resumed the
'squire), you must have seen a great many young officers put over your
head'--'Nevertheless (said he), I have no cause to murmur--They bought
their preferment with their money--I had no money to carry to market
that was my misfortune; but no body was to blame'--'What! no friend
to advance a sum of money?' (said Mr Bramble) 'Perhaps, I might have
borrowed money for the purchase of a company (answered the other);
but that loan must have been refunded; and I did not chuse to incumber
myself with a debt of a thousand pounds, to be payed from an income
of ten shillings a-day.' 'So you have spent the best part of your life
(cried Mr Bramble), your youth, your blood, and your constitution,
amidst the dangers, the difficulties, the horrors and hardships of
a war, for the consideration of three or four shillings a-day a
consideration--' 'Sir (replied the Scot, with great warmth), you are the
man that does me injustice, if you say or think I have been actuated by
any such paltry consideration--I am a gentleman; and entered the service
as other gentlemen do, with such hopes and sentiments as honourable
ambition inspires--If I have not been lucky in the lottery of life, so
neither do I think myself unfortunate--I owe to no man a farthing; I can
always command a clean shirt, a mutton-chop, and a truss of straw; and
when I die, I shall leave effects sufficient to defray the expence of my
burial.'

My uncle assured him, he had no intention to give him the least offence,
by the observations he had made; but, on the contrary, spoke from a
sentiment of friendly regard to his interest--The lieutenant thanked
him with a stiffness of civility, which nettled our old gentleman, who
perceived that his moderation was all affected; for, whatsoever his
tongue might declare, his whole appearance denoted dissatisfaction--In
short, without pretending to judge of his military merit, I think I may
affirm, that this Caledonian is a self-conceited pedant, aukward, rude,
and disputacious--He has had the benefit of a school-education, seems
to have read a good number of books, his memory is tenacious, and he
pretends to speak several different languages; but he is so addicted to
wrangling, that he will cavil at the clearest truths, and, in the pride
of argumentation, attempt to reconcile contradictions--Whether his
address and qualifications are really of that stamp which is agreeable
to the taste of our aunt, Mrs Tabitha, or that indefatigable maiden is
determined to shoot at every sort of game, certain it is she has begun
to practice upon the heart of the lieutenant, who favoured us with his
company to supper.

I have many other things to say of this man of war, which I shall
communicate in a post or two; mean while, it is but reasonable that you
should be indulged with some respite from those weary lucubrations of

Yours, J. MELFORD NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, July 10.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last I treated you with a high flavoured dish, in the character
of the Scotch lieutenant, and I must present him once more for your
entertainment. It was our fortune to feed upon him the best part of
three days; and I do not doubt that he will start again in our way
before we shall have finished our northern excursion. The day after our
meeting with him at Durham proved so tempestuous that we did not choose
to proceed on our journey; and my uncle persuaded him to stay till
the weather should clear up, giving him, at the same time, a general
invitation to our mess. The man has certainly gathered a whole budget
of shrewd observations, but he brings them forth in such an ungracious
manner as would be extremely disgusting, if it was not marked by that
characteristic oddity which never fails to attract the attention--He and
Mr Bramble discoursed, and even disputed, on different subjects in war,
policy, the belles lettres, law, and metaphysics; and sometimes they
were warmed into such altercation as seemed to threaten an abrupt
dissolution of their society; but Mr Bramble set a guard over his own
irascibility, the more vigilantly as the officer was his guest; and
when, in spite of all his efforts, he began to wax warm, the other
prudently cooled in the same proportion.

Mrs Tabitha chancing to accost her brother by the familiar diminutive
of Matt, 'Pray, sir (said the lieutenant), 'is your name Matthias?' You
must know it is one of our uncle's foibles to be ashamed of his name
Matthew, because it is puritanical; and this question chagrined him
so much, that he answered, 'No, by G-d!' in a very abrupt tone of
displeasure.--The Scot took umbrage at the manner of his reply, and
bristling up, 'If I had known (said he) that you did not care to tell
your name, I should not have asked the question--The leddy called you
Matt, and I naturally thought it was Matthias:--perhaps, it may be
Methuselah, or Metrodorus, or Metellus, or Mathurinus, or Malthinnus, or
Matamorus, or--' 'No (cried my uncle laughing), it is neither of those,
captain: my name is Matthew Bramble, at, your service.--The truth is,
have a foolish pique at the name of Matthew, because it favours of
those canting hypocrites, who, in Cromwell's time, christened all their
children by names taken from the scripture.' 'A foolish pique indeed.
(cried Mrs Tabby), and even sinful, to fall out with your name because
it is taken from holy writ.--I would have you to know, you was called
after great-uncle Matthew ap Madoc ap Meredith, esquire, of Llanwysthin,
in Montgomeryshire, justice of the quorum, and crusty ruttleorum, a
gentleman of great worth and property, descended in a strait line, by
the female side, from Llewellyn, prince of Wales.'

This genealogical anecdote seemed to make some impression upon the
North-Briton, who bowed very low to the descendant of Llewellyn, and
observed that he himself had the honour of a scriptural nomination. The
lady expressing a desire of knowing his address, he said, he designed
himself Lieutenant Obadiah Lismahago; and in order to assist her memory,
he presented her with a slip of paper inscribed with these three words,
which she repeated with great emphasis, declaring, it was one of the
most noble and sonorous names she had ever heard. He observed that
Obadiah was an adventitious appellation, derived from his
great-grandfather, who had been one of the original covenanters; but
Lismahago was the family surname, taken from a place in Scotland so called. Helikewise dropped some hints about the antiquity of his pedigree, adding,
with a smile of self-denial, Sed genus et proavos, et quoe non fecimus
ipsi, vix ea nostra voco, which quotation he explained in deference
to the ladies; and Mrs Tabitha did not fail to compliment him on his
modesty in waving the merit of his ancestry, adding, that it was the
less necessary to him, as he had such a considerable fund of his
own. She now began to glew herself to his favour with the grossest
adulation.--She expatiated upon the antiquity and virtues of the
Scottish nation, upon their valour, probity, learning, and politeness.
She even descended to encomiums on his own personal address, his
gallantry, good sense, and erudition.--She appealed to her brother,
whether the captain was not the very image of our cousin governor
Griffith. She discovered a surprising eagerness to know the particulars
of his life, and asked a thousand questions concerning his atchievements
in war; all which Mr Lismahago answered with a sort of jesuitical
reserve, affecting a reluctance to satisfy her curiosity on a subject
that concerned his own exploits.

By dint of her interrogations, however, we learned, that he and ensign
Murphy had made their escape from the French hospital at Montreal, and
taken to the woods, in hope of reaching some English settlement; but
mistaking their route, they fell in with a party of Miamis, who carried
them away in captivity. The intention of these Indians was to give one
of them as an adopted son to a venerable sachem, who had lost his own
in the course of the war, and to sacrifice the other according to the
custom of the country. Murphy, as being the younger and handsomer of the
two, was designed to fill the place of the deceased, not only as the
son of the sachem, but as the spouse of a beautiful squaw, to whom his
predecessor had been betrothed; but in passing through the different
whigwhams or villages of the Miamis, poor Murphy was so mangled by the
women and children, who have the privilege of torturing all prisoners
in their passage, that, by the time they arrived at the place of the
sachem's residence, he was rendered altogether unfit for the purposes of
marriage: it was determined therefore, in the assembly of the warriors,
that ensign Murphy should be brought to the stake, and that the lady
should be given to lieutenant Lismahago, who had likewise received his
share of torments, though they had not produced emasculation.--A joint
of one finger had been cut, or rather sawed off with a rusty knife; one
of his great toes was crushed into a mash betwixt two stones; some of
his teeth were drawn, or dug out with a crooked nail; splintered reeds
had been thrust up his nostrils and other tender parts; and the calves
of his legs had been blown up with mines of gunpowder dug in the flesh
with the sharp point of the tomahawk.

The Indians themselves allowed that Murphy died with great heroism,
singing, as his death song, the Drimmendoo, in concert with Mr
Lismahago, who was present at the solemnity. After the warriors and the
matrons had made a hearty meal upon the muscular flesh which they pared
from the victim, and had applied a great variety of tortures, which he
bore without flinching, an old lady, with a sharp knife, scooped out
one of his eyes, and put a burning coal in the socket. The pain of this
operation was so exquisite that he could not help bellowing, upon which
the audience raised a shout of exultation, and one of the warriors
stealing behind him, gave him the coup de grace with a hatchet.

Lismahago's bride, the squaw Squinkinacoosta, distinguished herself on
this occasion.--She shewed a great superiority of genius in the tortures
which she contrived and executed with her own hands.--She vied with the
stoutest warrior in eating the flesh of the sacrifice; and after all
the other females were fuddled with dram-drinking, she was not so
intoxicated but that she was able to play the game of the platter with
the conjuring sachem, and afterwards go through the ceremony of her own
wedding, which was consummated that same evening. The captain had lived
very happily with this accomplished squaw for two years, during which
she bore him a son, who is now the representative of his mother's tribe;
but, at length, to his unspeakable grief, she had died of a fever,
occasioned by eating too much raw bear, which they had killed in a
hunting excursion.

By this time, Mr Lismahago was elected sachem, acknowledged first
warrior of the Badger tribe, and dignified with the name or epithet of
Occacanastaogarora, which signifies nimble as a weasel; but all these
advantages and honours he was obliged to resign, in consequence of being
exchanged for the orator of the community, who had been taken prisoner
by the Indians that were in alliance with the English. At the peace, he
had sold out upon half pay, and was returned to Britain, with a view
to pass the rest of his life in his own country, where he hoped to
find some retreat where his slender finances would afford him a decent
subsistence. Such are the outlines of Mr Lismahago's history, to which
Tabitha did seriously incline her ear;--indeed, she seemed to be taken
with the same charms that captivated the heart of Desdemona, who loved
the Moor for the dangers he had past.

The description of poor Murphy's sufferings, which threw my sister Liddy
into a swoon, extracted some sighs from the breast of Mrs Tabby: when
she understood he had been rendered unfit for marriage, she began to
spit, and ejaculated, 'Jesus, what cruel barbarians!' and she made wry
faces at the lady's nuptial repast; but she was eagerly curious to know
the particulars of her marriage-dress; whether she wore high-breasted
stays or bodice, a robe of silk or velvet, and laces of Mechlin or
minionette--she supposed, as they were connected with the French,
she used rouge, and had her hair dressed in the Parisian fashion. The
captain would have declined giving a catagorical explanation of all
these particulars, observing, in general, that the Indians were
too tenacious of their own customs to adopt the modes of any nation
whatsoever; he said, moreover, that neither the simplicity of their
manners nor the commerce of their country, would admit of those articles
of luxury which are deemed magnificence in Europe; and that they were
too virtuous and sensible to encourage the introduction of any fashion
which might help to render them corrupt and effeminate.

These observations served only to inflame her desire of knowing the
particulars about which she had enquired; and, with all his evasion,
he could not help discovering the following circumstances--that
his princess had neither shoes, stockings, shift, nor any kind of
linen--that her bridal dress consisted of a petticoat of red bays, and a
fringed blanket, fastened about her shoulders with a copper skewer; but
of ornaments she had great plenty.--Her hair was curiously plaited, and
interwoven with bobbins of human bone--one eye-lid was painted green,
and the other yellow; the cheeks were blue, the lips white, the teeth
red, and there was a black list drawn down the middle of the forehead
as far as the tip of the nose--a couple of gaudy parrot's feathers were
stuck through the division of the nostrils--there was a blue stone set
in the chin, her ear-rings consisted of two pieces of hickery, of the
size and shape of drum-sticks--her arms and legs were adorned with
bracelets of wampum--her breast glittered with numerous strings of glass
beads--she wore a curious pouch, or pocket of woven grass, elegantly
painted with various colours--about her neck was hung the fresh scalp
of a Mohawk warrior, whom her deceased lover had lately slain in
battle--and, finally, she was anointed from head to foot with bear's
grease, which sent forth a most agreeable odour.

One would imagine that these paraphernalia would not have been much
admired by a modern fine lady; but Mrs Tabitha was resolved to approve
of all the captains connexions.--She wished, indeed, the squaw had been
better provided with linen; but she owned there was much taste and
fancy in her ornaments; she made no doubt, therefore, that madam
Squinkinacoosta was a young lady of good sense and rare accomplishments,
and a good christian at bottom. Then she asked whether his consort had
been high church or low-church, presbyterian or anabaptist, or had been
favoured with any glimmering of the new light of the gospel? When he
confessed that she and her whole nation were utter strangers to the
christian faith, she gazed at him with signs of astonishment, and
Humphry Clinker, who chanced to be in the room, uttered a hollow groan.

After some pause, 'In the name of God, captain Lismahago (cried she),
what religion do they profess?' 'As to religion, madam (answered
the lieutenant), it is among those Indians a matter of great
simplicity--they never heard of any Alliance between Church and
State.--They, in general, worship two contending principles; one the
Fountain of all Good, the other the source of all evil. The common
people there, as in other countries, run into the absurdities of
superstition; but sensible men pay adoration to a Supreme Being, who
created and sustains the universe.' 'O! what pity (exclaimed the pious
Tabby), that some holy man has not been inspired to go and convert these
poor heathens!'

The lieutenant told her, that while he resided among them, two French
missionaries arrived, in order to convert them to the catholic religion;
but when they talked of mysteries and revelations, which they could
neither explain nor authenticate, and called in the evidence of miracles
which they believed upon hearsay; when they taught that the Supreme
Creator of Heaven and Earth had allowed his only Son, his own equal in
power and glory, to enter the bowels of a woman, to be born as a
human creature, to be insulted, flagellated, and even executed as a
malefactor; when they pretended to create God himself, to swallow,
digest, revive, and multiply him ad infinitum, by the help of a little
flour and water, the Indians were shocked at the impiety of their
presumption.--They were examined by the assembly of the sachems
who desired them to prove the divinity of their mission by some
miracle.--They answered, that it was not in their power.--'If you were
really sent by Heaven for our conversion (said one of the sachems), you
would certainly have some supernatural endowments, at least you would
have the gift of tongues, in order to explain your doctrine to the
different nations among which you are employed; but you are so ignorant
of our language, that you cannot express yourselves even on the most
trifling subjects.' In a word, the assembly were convinced of their
being cheats, and even suspected them of being spies: they ordered them
a bag of Indian corn apiece, and appointed a guide to conduct them to
the frontiers; but the missionaries having more zeal than discretion,
refused to quit the vineyard.--They persisted in saying mass, in
preaching, baptizing, and squabbling with the conjurers, or priests
of the country, till they had thrown the whole community into
confusion.--Then the assembly proceeded to try them as impious
impostors, who represented the Almighty as a trifling, weak, capricious
being, and pretended to make, unmake, and reproduce him at pleasure;
they were, therefore, convicted of blasphemy and sedition, and condemned
to the stale, where they died singing Salve regina, in a rapture of joy,
for the crown of martyrdom which they had thus obtained.

In the course of this conversation, lieutenant Lismahago dropt some
hints by which it appeared he himself was a free-thinker. Our aunt
seemed to be startled at certain sarcasms he threw out against the creed
of saint Athanasius--He dwelt much upon the words, reason, philosophy,
and contradiction in terms--he bid defiance to the eternity of
hell-fire; and even threw such squibs at the immortality of the soul, as
singed a little the whiskers of Mrs Tabitha's faith; for, by this
time she began to look upon Lismahago as a prodigy of learning and
sagacity.--In short, he could be no longer insensible to the advances
she made towards his affection; and although there was something
repulsive in his nature, he overcame it so far as to make some return
to her civilities.--Perhaps, he thought it would be no bad scheme, in
a superannuated lieutenant on half-pay, to effect a conjunction with an
old maid, who, in all probability, had fortune enough to keep him easy
and comfortable in the fag-end of his days--An ogling correspondence
forthwith commenced between this amiable pair of originals--He began
to sweeten the natural acidity of his discourse with the treacle of
compliment and commendation--He from time to time offered her snuff, of
which he himself took great quantities, and even made her a present of a
purse of silk grass, woven by the hands of the amiable Squinkinacoosta,
who had used it as a shot-pouch in her hunting expeditions.

From Doncaster northwards, all the windows of all the inns are scrawled
with doggeral rhimes, in abuse of the Scotch nation; and what surprised
me very much, I did not perceive one line written in the way of
recrimination--Curious to hear what Lismahago would say on this subject,
I pointed out to him a very scurrilous epigram against his countrymen,
which was engraved on one of the windows of the parlour where we
sat.--He read it with the most starched composure; and when I asked his
opinion of the poetry, 'It is vara terse and vara poignant (said he);
but with the help of a wat dish-clout, it might be rendered more clear
and parspicuous.--I marvel much that some modern wit has not published a
collection of these essays under the title of the Glaziers Triumph over
Sawney the Scot--I'm persuaded it would be a vara agreeable offering to
the patriots of London and Westminster.' When I expressed some surprize
that the natives of Scotland, who travel this way, had not broke all the
windows upon the road, 'With submission (replied the lieutenant), that
were but shallow policy--it would only serve to make the satire more
cutting and severe; and I think it is much better to let it stand in the
window, than have it presented in the reckoning.'

My uncle's jaws began to quiver with indignation.--He said, the
scribblers of such infamous stuff deserved to be scourged at the cart's
tail for disgracing their country with such monuments of malice and
stupidity.--'These vermin (said he) do not consider, that they are
affording their fellow subjects, whom they abuse, continual matter
of self-gratulation, as well as the means of executing the most manly
vengeance that can be taken for such low, illiberal attacks. For my
part, I admire the philosophic forbearance of the Scots, as much as I
despise the insolence of those wretched libellers, which is akin to
the arrogance of the village cock, who never crows but upon his own
dunghill.' The captain, with an affectation of candour, observed, that
men of illiberal minds were produced in every soil; that in supposing
those were the sentiments of the English in general, he should pay
too great a compliment to is own country, which was not of consequence
enough to attract the envy of such a flourishing and powerful people.

Mrs Tabby broke forth again in praise of his moderation, and declared
that Scotland was the soil which produced every virtue under heaven.
When Lismahago took his leave for the night, she asked her brother
if the captain was not the prettiest gentleman he had ever seen; and
whether there was not something wonderfully engaging in his aspect?--Mr
Bramble having eyed her sometime in silence, 'Sister (said he), the
lieutenant is, for aught I know, an honest man and a good officer--he
has a considerable share of understanding, and a title to more
encouragement than he seems to have met with in life; but I cannot, with
a safe conscience, affirm, that he is the prettiest gentleman I ever
saw; neither can I descern any engaging charm in his countenance, which,
I vow to God, is, on the contrary, very hard-favoured and forbidding.'

I have endeavoured to ingratiate myself with this North-Briton, who is
really a curiosity; but he has been very shy of my conversation ever
since I laughed at his asserting that the English tongue was spoke with
more propriety at Edinburgh than at London. Looking at me with a double
squeeze of souring in his aspect, 'If the old definition be true (said
he), that risibility is the distinguishing characteristic of a rational
creature, the English are the most distinguished for rationality of any
people I ever knew.' I owned, that the English were easily struck with
any thing that appeared ludicrous, and apt to laugh accordingly; but it
did not follow, that, because they were more given to laughter, they had
more rationality than their neighbours: I said, such an inference
would be an injury to the Scots, who were by no means defective in
rationality, though generally supposed little subject to the impressions
of humour.

The captain answered, that this supposition must have been deduced
either from their conversation or their compositions, of which the
English could not possibly judge with precision, as they did not
understand the dialect used by the Scots in common discourse, as well
as in their works of humour. When I desired to know what those works
of humour were, he mentioned a considerable number of pieces, which
he insisted were equal in point of humour to any thing extant in any
language dead or living--He, in particular, recommended a collection of
detached poems, in two small volumes, intituled, The Ever-Green, and
the works of Allan Ramsay, which I intend to provide myself with at
Edinburgh.--He observed, that a North-Briton is seen to a disadvantage
in an English company, because he speaks in a dialect that they can't
relish, and in a phraseology which they don't understand.--He therefore
finds himself under a restraint, which is a great enemy to wit and
humour.--These are faculties which never appear in full lustre, but when
the mind is perfectly at ease, and, as an excellent writer says, enjoys
her elbow-room.

He proceeded to explain his assertion that the English language was
spoken with greater propriety at Edinburgh than in London. He said, what
we generally called the Scottish dialect was, in fact, true, genuine old
English, with a mixture of some French terms and idioms, adopted in a
long intercourse betwixt the French and Scotch nations; that the modern
English, from affectation and false refinement, had weakened, and even
corrupted their language, by throwing out the guttural sounds, altering
the pronunciation and the quantity, and disusing many words and terms
of great significance. In consequence of these innovations, the works
of our best poets, such as Chaucer, Spenser, and even Shakespeare, were
become, in many parts, unintelligible to the natives of South Britain,
whereas the Scots, who retain the antient language, understand them
without the help of a glossary. 'For instance (said he), how have
your commentators been puzzled by the following expression in the
Tempest--He's gentle and not fearful: as if it was a paralogism to say,
that being gentle, he must of course be courageous: but the truth is,
one of the original meanings, if not the sole meaning, of that word was,
noble, high-minded; and to this day, a Scotch woman, in the situation of
the young lady in the Tempest, would express herself nearly in the same
terms--Don't provoke him; for being gentle, that is, high-spirited, he
won't tamely bear an insult. Spenser, in the very first stanza of his
Fairy Queen, says,

   A gentle knight was pricking on the plain;
   Which knight, far from being tame and fearful, was so stout that
   Nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.

To prove that we had impaired the energy of our language by false
refinement, he mentioned the following words, which, though widely
different in signification, are pronounced exactly in the same manner
wright, write, right, rite; but among the Scots, these words are as
different in pronunciation, as they are in meaning and orthography;
and this is the case with many others which he mentioned by way of
illustration.--He, moreover, took notice, that we had (for what reason
he could never learn) altered the sound of our vowels from that which is
retained by all the nations in Europe; an alteration which rendered
the language extremely difficult to foreigners, and made it
almost impracticable to lay down general rules for orthography and
pronunciation. Besides, the vowels were no longer simple sounds in
the mouth of an Englishman, who pronounced both i and u as dipthongs.
Finally, he affirmed, that we mumbled our speech with our lips and
teeth, and ran the words together without pause or distinction, in such
a manner, that a foreigner, though he understood English tolerably well,
was often obliged to have recourse to a Scotchman to explain what a
native of England had said in his own language.

The truth of this remark was confirmed by Mr Bramble from his own
experience; but he accounted for it on another principle. He said,
the same observation would hold in all languages; that a Swiss talking
French was more easily understood than a Parisian, by a foreigner who
had not made himself master of the language; because every language
had its peculiar recitative, and it would always require more pains,
attention, and practice, to acquire both the words and the music, than
to learn the words only; and yet no body would deny, that the one
was imperfect without the other: he therefore apprehended, that the
Scotchman and the Swiss were better understood by learners, because they
spoke the words only, without the music, which they could not rehearse.
One would imagine this check might have damped the North Briton; but it
served only to agitate his humour for disputation.--He said, if every
nation had its own recitative or music, the Scots had theirs, and the
Scotchman who had not yet acquired the cadence of the English, would
naturally use his own in speaking their language; therefore, if he
was better understood than the native, his recitative must be more
intelligible than that of the English; of consequence, the dialect of
the Scots had an advantage over that of their fellow-subjects, and this
was another strong presumption that the modern English had corrupted
their language in the article of pronunciation.

The lieutenant was, by this time, become so polemical, that every time
he opened his mouth out flew a paradox, which he maintained with all the
enthusiasm of altercation; but all his paradoxes favoured strong of a
partiality for his own country. He undertook to prove that poverty was
a blessing to a nation; that oatmeal was preferable to wheat-flour; and
that the worship of Cloacina, in temples which admitted both sexes, and
every rank of votaries promiscuously, was a filthy species of idolatry
that outraged every idea of delicacy and decorum. I did not so much
wonder at his broaching these doctrines, as at the arguments, equally
whimsical and ingenious, which he adduced in support of them.

In fine, lieutenant Lismahago is a curiosity which I have not yet
sufficiently perused; and therefore I shall be sorry when we lose his
company, though, God knows, there is nothing very amiable in his manner
or disposition.--As he goes directly to the south-west division of
Scotland, and we proceed in the road to Berwick, we shall part tomorrow
at a place called Feltonbridge; and, I dare say, this separation will
be very grievous to our aunt Mrs Tabitha, unless she has received some
flattering assurance of his meeting her again. If I fail in my purpose
of entertaining you with these unimportant occurrences, they will at
least serve as exercises of patience, for which you are indebted to


Yours always, J. MELFORD MORPETH, July 13.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

I have now reached the northern extremity of England, and see, close to
my chamber-window, the Tweed gliding through the arches of that bridge
which connects this suburb to the town of Berwick.--Yorkshire you have
seen, and therefore I shall say nothing of that opulent province.
The city of Durham appears like a confused heap of stones and brick,
accumulated so as to cover a mountain, round which a river winds its
brawling course. The Streets are generally narrow, dark, and unpleasant,
and many of them almost impassible in consequence of their declivity.
The cathedral is a huge gloomy pile; but the clergy are well lodged.--
The bishop lives in a princely manner--the golden prebends keep
plentiful tables--and, I am told, there is some good sociable company in
the place; but the country, when viewed from the top of Gateshead-Fell,
which extends to Newcastle, exhibits the highest scene of cultivation
that ever I beheld. As for Newcastle, it lies mostly in a bottom, on the
banks of the Tyne, and makes an appearance still more disagreeable than
that of Durham; but it is rendered populous and rich by industry and
commerce; and the country lying on both sides the river, above the town,
yields a delightful prospect of agriculture and plantation. Morpeth and
Alnwick are neat, pretty towns, and this last is famous for the castle
which has belonged so many ages to the noble house of Piercy, earls of
Northumberland.--It is, doubtless, a large edifice, containing a great
number of apartments, and stands in a commanding situation; but the
strength of it seems to have consisted not so much in its site, or the
manner in which it is fortified, as in the valour of its defendants.

Our adventures since we left Scarborough, are scarce worth reciting;
and yet I must make you acquainted with my sister Tabby's progress in
husband-hunting, after her disappointments at Bath and London. She had
actually begun to practise upon a certain adventurer, who was in fact
a highwayman by profession; but he had been used to snares much more
dangerous than any she could lay, and escaped accordingly. Then she
opened her batteries upon an old weather-beaten Scotch lieutenant,
called Lismahago, who joined us at Durham, and is, I think, one of the
most singular personages I ever encountered--His manner is as harsh
as his countenance; but his peculiar turn of thinking, and his pack of
knowledge made up of the remnants of rarities, rendered his conversation
desirable, in spite of his pedantry and ungracious address. I have often
met with a crab-apple in a hedge, which I have been tempted to eat for
its flavour, even while I was disgusted by its austerity. The spirit of
contradiction is naturally so strong in Lismahago, that I believe in
my conscience he has rummaged, and read, and studied with indefatigable
attention, in order to qualify himself to refute established maxims, and
thus raise trophies for the gratification of polemical pride.--Such is
the asperity of his self-conceit, that he will not even acquiesce in a
transient compliment made to his own individual in particular, or to his
country in general.

When I observed, that he must have read a vast number of books to be
able to discourse on such a variety of subjects, he declared he had read
little or nothing, and asked how he should find books among the woods
of America, where he had spent the greatest part of his life. My nephew
remarking that the Scots in general were famous for their learning, he
denied the imputation, and defied him to prove it from their works--'The
Scots (said he) have a slight tincture of letters, with which they make
a parade among people who are more illiterate than themselves; but they
may be said to float on the surface of science, and they have made very
small advances in the useful arts.' 'At least (cried Tabby), all
the world allows that the Scots behaved gloriously in fighting and
conquering the savages of America.' 'I can assure you, madam, you have
been misinformed (replied the lieutenant); in that continent the
Scots did nothing more than their duty, nor was there one corps in his
majesty's service that distinguished itself more than another.--Those
who affected to extol the Scots for superior merit, were no friends to
that nation.'

Though he himself made free with his countrymen, he would not suffer
any other person to glance a sarcasm at them with impunity. One of the
company chancing to mention lord B--'s inglorious peace, the lieutenant
immediately took up the cudgels in his lordship's favour, and
argued very strenuously to prove that it was the most honourable and
advantageous peace that England had ever made since the foundation of
the monarchy.--Nay, between friends, he offered such reasons on this
subject, that I was really confounded, if not convinced.--He would not
allow that the Scots abounded above their proportion in the army and
navy of Great-Britain, or that the English had any reason to say his
countrymen had met with extraordinary encouragement in the service.
'When a South and North-Briton (said he) are competitors for a place
or commission, which is in the disposal of an English minister or an
English general, it would be absurd to suppose that the preference will
not be given to the native of England, who has so many advantages over
his rival.--First and foremost, he has in his favour that laudable
partiality, which, Mr Addison says, never fails to cleave to the heart
of an Englishman; secondly, he has more powerful connexions, and a
greater share of parliamentary interest, by which those contests are
generally decided; and lastly, he has a greater command of money to
smooth the way to his success. For my own part (said he), I know no
Scotch officer, who has risen in the army above the rank of a subaltern,
without purchasing every degree of preferment either with money or
recruits; but I know many gentlemen of that country, who, for want of
money and interest, have grown grey in the rank of lieutenants; whereas
very few instances of this ill-fortune are to be found among the natives
of South-Britain.--Not that I would insinuate that my countrymen have
the least reason to complain. Preferment in the service, like success
in any other branch of traffic, will naturally favour those who have
the greatest stock of cash and credit, merit and capacity being supposed
equal on all sides.'

But the most hardy of all this original's positions were these: That
commerce would, sooner or later, prove the ruin of every nation, where
it flourishes to any extent--that the parliament was the rotten part of
the British constitution--that the liberty of the press was a national
evil--and that the boasted institution of juries, as managed in England,
was productive of shameful perjury and flagrant injustice. He observed,
that traffick was an enemy to all the liberal passions of the soul,
founded on the thirst of lucre, a sordid disposition to take advantage
of the necessities of our fellow creatures.--He affirmed, the nature
of commerce was such, that it could not be fixed or perpetuated, but,
having flowed to a certain height, would immediately begin to ebb, and
so continue till the channels should be left almost dry; but there
was no instance of the tide's rising a second time to any considerable
influx in the same nation. Mean while the sudden affluence occasioned
by trade, forced open all the sluices of luxury and overflowed the land
with every species of profligacy and corruption; a total pravity of
manners would ensue, and this must be attended with bankruptcy and ruin.
He observed of the parliament, that the practice of buying boroughs,
and canvassing for votes, was an avowed system of venality, already
established on the ruins of principle, integrity, faith, and good order,
in consequence of which the elected and the elector, and, in short, the
whole body of the people, were equally and universally contaminated and
corrupted. He affirmed, that of a parliament thus constituted, the crown
would always have influence enough to secure a great majority in its
dependence, from the great number of posts, places, and pensions it
had to bestow; that such a parliament would (as it had already done)
lengthen the term of its sitting and authority, whenever the prince
should think it for his interest to continue the representatives, for,
without doubt, they had the same right to protect their authority ad
infinitum, as they had to extend it from three to seven years.--With a
parliament, therefore, dependent upon the crown, devoted to the prince,
and supported by a standing army, garbled and modelled for the purpose,
any king of England may, and probably some ambitious sovereign will,
totally overthrow all the bulwarks of the constitution; for it is not
to be supposed that a prince of high spirit will tamely submit to be
thwarted in all his measures, abused and insulted by a populace of
unbridled ferocity, when he has it in his power to crush all opposition
under his feet with the concurrence of the legislature. He said, he
should always consider the liberty of the press as a national evil,
while it enabled the vilest reptile to soil the lustre of the most
shining merit, and furnished the most infamous incendiary with the means
of disturbing the peace and destroying the good order of the community.
He owned, however, that under due restrictions, it would be a valuable
privilege; but affirmed, that at present there was no law in England
sufficient to restrain it within proper bounds.

With respect to juries, he expressed himself to this effect:--juries
are generally composed of illiterate plebeians, apt to be mistaken,
easily misled, and open to sinister influence; for if either of the
parties to be tried, can gain over one of the twelve jurors, he has
secured the verdict in his favour; the juryman thus brought over will,
in despight of all evidence and conviction, generally hold out till his
fellows are fatigued, and harassed, and starved into concurrence; in
which case the verdict is unjust, and the jurors are all perjured: but
cases will often occur, when the jurors are really divided in opinion,
and each side is convinced in opposition to the other; but no verdict
will be received, unless they are unanimous, and they are all bound, not
only in conscience, but by oath, to judge and declare according to their
conviction.--What then will be the consequence?--They must either
starve in company, or one side must sacrifice their conscience to their
convenience, and join in a verdict which they believe to be false. This
absurdity is avoided in Sweden, where a bare majority is sufficient; and
in Scotland, where two thirds of the jury are required to concur in the
verdict.

You must not imagine that all these deductions were made on his part,
without contradictions on mine.--No--the truth is, I found myself piqued
in point of honour, at his pretending to be so much wiser than his
neighbours.--I questioned all his assertions, started innumerable
objections, argued and wrangled with uncommon perseverance, and grew
very warm, and even violent, in the debate.--Sometimes he was puzzled,
and once or twice, I think, fairly refuted; but from those falls he rose
again, like Antaeus, with redoubled vigour, till at length I was tired,
exhausted, and really did not know how to proceed, when luckily he
dropped a hint, by which he discovered he had been bred to the law;
a confession which enabled me to retire from the dispute with a good
grace, as it could not be supposed that a man like me, who had been bred
to nothing, should be able to cope with a veteran in his own profession.
I believe, however, that I shall for some time continue to chew the cud
of reflection upon many observations which this original discharged.

Whether our sister Tabby was really struck with his conversation, or is
resolved to throw at every thing she meets in the shape of a man, till
she can fasten the matrimonial noose, certain it is, she has taken
desperate strides towards the affection of Lismahago, who cannot be said
to have met her half way, though he does not seem altogether insensible
to her civilities.--She insinuated more than once how happy we should be
to have his company through that part of Scotland which we proposed
to visit, till at length he plainly told us, that his road was totally
different from that which we intended to take; that, for his part, his
company would be of very little service to us in our progress, as he was
utterly unacquainted with the country, which he had left in his early
youth, consequently, he could neither direct us in our enquiries, nor
introduce us to any family of distinction. He said, he was stimulated
by an irresistible impulse to revisit the paternus lar, or patria domus,
though he expected little satisfaction, inasmuch as he understood that
his nephew, the present possessor, was but ill qualified to support the
honour of the family.--He assured us, however, as we design to return by
the west road, that he will watch our motions, and endeavour to pay his
respects to us at Dumfries.--Accordingly he took his leave of us at a
place half way betwixt Morpeth and Alnwick, and pranced away in great
state, mounted on a tall, meagre, raw-boned, shambling grey gelding,
without e'er a tooth in his head, the very counter-part of the rider;
and, indeed, the appearance of the two was so picturesque, that I would
give twenty guineas to have them tolerably presented on canvas.

Northumberland is a fine county, extending to the Tweed, which is a
pleasant pastoral stream; but you will be surprised when I tell you
that the English side of that river is neither so well cultivated nor
so populous as the other.--The farms are thinly scattered, the lands
uninclosed, and scarce a gentleman's seat is to be seen in some miles
from the Tweed; whereas the Scots are advanced in crowds to the very
brink of the river, so that you may reckon above thirty good houses, in
the compass of a few miles, belonging to proprietors whose ancestors had
fortified castles in the same situations, a circumstance that shews what
dangerous neighbours the Scots must have formerly been to the northern
counties of England.

Our domestic oeconomy continues on the old footing.--My sister Tabby
still adheres to methodism, and had the benefit of a sermon at Wesley's
meeting in Newcastle; but I believe the Passion of love has in some
measure abated the fervour of devotion both in her and her woman,
Mrs Jenkins, about whose good graces there has been a violent contest
betwixt my nephew's valet, Mr Dutton, and my man, Humphry Clinker.--Jery
has been obliged to interpose his authority to keep the peace, and to
him I have left the discussion of that important affair, which had like
to have kindled the flames of discord in the family of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE TWEEDMOUTH, July 15.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

In my two last you had so much of Lismahago, that I suppose you are
glad he is gone off the stage for the present.--I must now descend
to domestic occurrences.--Love, it seems, is resolved to assert his
dominion over all the females of our family.--After having practised
upon poor Liddy's heart, and played strange vagaries with our aunt
Mrs Tabitha, he began to run riot in the affections of her woman, Mrs
Winifred Jenkins, whom I have had occasion to mention more than once in
the course of our memoirs. Nature intended Jenkins for something very
different from the character of her mistress; yet custom and habit have
effected a wonderful resemblance betwixt them in many particulars. Win,
to be sure, is much younger and more agreeable in her person; she is
likewise tender-hearted and benevolent, qualities for which her mistress
is by no means remarkable, no more than she is for being of a timorous
disposition, and much subject to fits of the mother, which are the
infirmities of Win's constitution: but then she seems to have adopted
Mrs Tabby's manner with her cast cloaths.--She dresses and endeavours
to look like her mistress, although her own looks are much more
engaging.--She enters into her scheme of oeconomy, learns her phrases,
repeats her remarks, imitates her stile in scolding the inferior
servants, and, finally, subscribes implicitly to her system of
devotion.--This, indeed, she found the more agreeable, as it was in a
great measure introduced and confirmed by the ministry of Clinker,
with whose personal merit she seems to have been struck ever since he
exhibited the pattern of his naked skin at Marlborough.

Nevertheless, though Humphry had this double hank upon her inclinations,
and exerted all his power to maintain the conquest he had made, he found
it impossible to guard it on the side of vanity, where poor Win was as
frail as any female in the kingdom. In short, my rascal Dutton professed
himself her admirer, and, by dint of his outlandish qualifications,
threw his rival Clinker out of the saddle of her heart. Humphry may be
compared to an English pudding, composed of good wholesome flour and
suet, and Dutton to a syllabub or iced froth, which, though agreeable
to the taste, has nothing solid or substantial. The traitor not only
dazzled her, with his second-hand finery, but he fawned, and flattered,
and cringed--he taught her to take rappee, and presented her with
a snuff-box of papier mache--he supplied her with a powder for her
teeth--he mended her complexion, and he dressed her hair in the Paris
fashion--he undertook to be her French master and her dancing-master,
as well as friseur, and thus imperceptibly wound himself into her good
graces. Clinker perceived the progress he had made, and repined in
secret.--He attempted to open her eyes in the way of exhortation, and
finding it produced no effect had recourse to prayer. At Newcastle,
while he attended Mrs Tabby to the methodist meeting his rival
accompanied Mrs Jenkins to the play. He was dressed in a silk coat, made
at Paris for his former master, with a tawdry waistcoat of tarnished
brocade; he wore his hair in a great bag with a huge solitaire, and a
long sword dangled from his thigh. The lady was all of a flutter with
faded lutestring, washed gauze, and ribbons three times refreshed; but
she was most remarkable for the frisure of her head, which rose, like
a pyramid, seven inches above the scalp, and her face was primed and
patched from the chin up to the eyes; nay, the gallant himself had
spared neither red nor white in improving the nature of his own
complexion. In this attire, they walked together through the high street
to the theatre, and as they passed for players ready dressed for
acting, they reached it unmolested; but as it was still light when they
returned, and by that time the people had got information of their real
character and condition, they hissed and hooted all the way, and Mrs
Jenkins was all bespattered with dirt, as well as insulted with
the opprobrious name of painted Jezabel, so that her fright and
mortification threw her into an hysteric fit the moment she came home.

Clinker was so incensed at Dutton, whom he considered as the cause of
her disgrace, that he upbraided him severely for having turned the
poor woman's brain. The other affected to treat him with contempt, and
mistaking his forbearance for want of courage, threatened to horse-whip
him into good manners. Humphry then came to me, humbly begging I
would give him leave to chastise my servant for his insolence--'He has
challenged me to fight him at sword's point (said he); but I might as
well challenge him to make a horse-shoe, or a plough iron; for I know no
more of the one than he does of the other.--Besides, it doth not become
servants to use those weapons, or to claim the privilege of gentlemen
to kill one another when they fall out; moreover, I would not have
his blood upon my conscience for ten thousand times the profit or
satisfaction I should get by his death; but if your honour won't be
angry, I'll engage to gee 'en a good drubbing, that, may hap, will do
'en service, and I'll take care it shall do 'en no harm.' I said, I had
no objection to what he proposed, provided he could manage matters so as
not to be found the aggressor, in case Dutton should prosecute him for
an assault and battery.

Thus licensed, he retired; and that same evening easily provoked
his rival to strike the first blow, which Clinker returned with such
interest that he was obliged to call for quarter, declaring, at the same
time, that he would exact severe and bloody satisfaction the moment we
should pass the border, when he could run him through the body without
fear of the consequence.--This scene passed in presence of lieutenant
Lismahago, who encouraged Clinker to hazard a thrust of cold iron with
his antagonist. 'Cold iron (cried Humphry) I shall never use against
the life of any human creature; but I am so far from being afraid of
his cold iron, that I shall use nothing in my defence but a good cudgel,
which shall always be at his service.' In the mean time, the fair
cause of this contest, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, seemed overwhelmed with
affliction, and Mr Clinker acted much on the reserve, though he did not
presume to find fault with her conduct.

The dispute between the two rivals was soon brought to a very unexpected
issue. Among our fellow-lodgers at Berwick, was a couple from London,
bound to Edinburgh, on the voyage of matrimony. The female was the
daughter and heiress of a pawnbroker deceased, who had given her
guardians the slip, and put herself under the tuition of a tall
Hibernian, who had conducted her thus far in quest of a clergyman to
unite them in marriage, without the formalities required by the law
of England. I know not how the lover had behaved on the road, so as to
decline in the favour of his inamorata; but, in all probability, Dutton
perceived a coldness on her side, which encouraged him to whisper,
it was a pity she should have cast affections upon a taylor, which he
affirmed the Irishman to be. This discovery completed her disgust, of
which my man taking the advantage, began to recommend himself to her
good graces, and the smooth-tongued rascal found no difficulty to
insinuate himself into the place of her heart, from which the other had
been discarded--Their resolution was immediately taken. In the morning,
before day, while poor Teague lay snoring a-bed, his indefatigable rival
ordered a post-chaise, and set out with the lady for Coldstream, a few
miles up the Tweed, where there was a parson who dealt in this branch of
commerce, and there they were noosed, before the Irishman ever dreamt
of the matter. But when he got up at six o'clock, and found the bird was
flown, he made such a noise as alarmed the whole house. One of the first
persons he encountered, was the postilion returned from Coldstream,
where he had been witness to the marriage, and over and above an
handsome gratuity, had received a bride's favour, which he now wore in
his cap--When the forsaken lover understood they were actually married,
and set out for London; and that Dutton had discovered to the lady, that
he (the Hibernian) was a taylor, he had like to have run distracted. He
tore the ribbon from the fellow's cap, and beat it about his ears.
He swore he would pursue him to the gates of hell, and ordered
a post-chaise and four to be got ready as soon as possible; but,
recollecting that his finances would not admit of this way of
travelling, he was obliged to countermand this order.

For my part, I knew nothing at all of what had happened, till the
postilion brought me the keys of my trunk and portmanteau, which he had
received from Dutton, who sent me his respects, hoping I would excuse
him for his abrupt departure, as it was a step upon which his fortune
depended. Before I had time to make my uncle acquainted with this
event, the Irishman burst into my chamber, without any introduction,
exclaiming,--'By my soul, your sarvant has robbed me of five
thousand pounds, and I'll have satisfaction, if I should be hanged
tomorrow.'--When I asked him who he was, 'My name (said he) is Master
Macloughlin but it should be Leighlin Oneale, for I am come from
Tir-Owen the Great; and so I am as good a gentleman as any in Ireland;
and that rogue, your sarvant, said I was a taylor, which was as big
a lie as if he had called me the pope--I'm a man of fortune, and have
spent all I had; and so being in distress, Mr Coshgrave, the fashioner
in Shuffolk-street, tuck me out, and made me his own private shecretary:
by the same token, I was the last he bailed; for his friends obliged him
to tie himself up, that he would bail no more above ten pounds; for why,
becaase as how, he could not refuse any body that asked, and therefore
in time would have robbed himself of his whole fortune, and, if he had
lived long at that rate, must have died bankrupt very soon and so I
made my addresses to Miss Skinner, a young lady of five thousand pounds
fortune, who agreed to take me for better nor worse; and, to be sure,
this day would have put me in possession, if it had not been for that
rogue, your sarvant, who came like a tief, and stole away my property,
and made her believe I was a taylor; and that she was going to marry the
ninth part of a man: but the devil burn my soul, if ever I catch him on
the mountains of Tulloghobegly, if I don't shew him that I'm nine times
as good a man as he, or e'er a bug of his country.'

When he had rung out his first alarm, I told him I was sorry he had
allowed himself to be so jockied; but it was no business of mine; and
that the fellow who robbed him of his bride, had likewise robbed me of
my servant--'Didn't I tell you then (cried he) that Rogue was his true
Christian name.--Oh if I had but one fair trust with him upon the sod,
I'd give him lave to brag all the rest of his life.'

My uncle hearing the noise, came in, and being informed of this
adventure, began to comfort Mr Oneale for the lady's elopement;
observing that he seemed to have had a lucky escape, that it was better
she should elope before, than after marriage--The Hibernian was of a
very different opinion. He said, 'If he had been once married, she might
have eloped as soon as she pleased; he would have taken care that she
should not have carried her fortune along with her--Ah (said he) she's
a Judas Iscariot, and has betrayed me with a kiss; and, like Judas, she
carried the bag, and has not left me money enough to bear my expences
back to London; and so I'm come to this pass, and the rogue that was
the occasion of it has left you without a sarvant, you may put me in his
place; and by Jasus, it is the best thing you can do.'--I begged to be
excused, declaring I could put up with any inconvenience, rather than
treat as a footman the descendant of Tir-Owen the Great. I advised
him to return to his friend, Mr Cosgrave, and take his passage from
Newcastle by sea, towards which I made him a small present, and he
retired, seemingly resigned to his evil fortune. I have taken upon trial
a Scotchman, called Archy M'Alpin, an old soldier, whose last master, a
colonel, lately died at Berwick. The fellow is old and withered; but he
has been recommended to me for his fidelity, by Mrs Humphreys, a very
good sort of a woman, who keeps the inn at Tweedmouth, and is much
respected by all the travellers on this road.

Clinker, without doubt, thinks himself happy in the removal of a
dangerous rival, and he is too good a Christian, to repine at Dutton's
success. Even Mrs Jenkins will have reason to congratulate herself upon
this event, when she cooly reflects upon the matter; for, howsoever she
was forced from her poise for a season, by snares laid for her vanity,
Humphry is certainly the north-star to which the needle of her affection
would have pointed at the long run. At present, the same vanity is
exceedingly mortified, upon finding herself abandoned by her new
admirer, in favour of another inamorata. She received the news with a
violent burst of laughter, which soon brought on a fit of crying; and
this gave the finishing blow to the patience of her mistress, which had
held out beyond all expectation. She now opened all those floodgates of
reprehension, which had been shut so long. She not only reproached
her with her levity and indiscretion, but attacked her on the score
of religion, declaring roundly that she was in a state of apostacy
and reprobation; and finally, threatened to send her a packing at this
extremity of the kingdom. All the family interceded for poor Winifred,
not even excepting her slighted swain, Mr Clinker, who, on his knees,
implored and obtained her pardon.

There was, however, another consideration that gave Mrs Tabitha some
disturbance. At Newcastle, the servants had been informed by some
wag, that there was nothing to eat in Scotland, but oat-meal and
sheep's-heads; and lieutenant Lismahago being consulted, what he said
served rather to confirm than to refute the report. Our aunt being
apprised of this circumstance, very gravely advised her brother to
provide a sumpter horse with store of hams, tongues, bread, biscuit, and
other articles for our subsistence, in the course of our peregrination,
and Mr Bramble as gravely replied, that he would take the hint into
consideration: but, finding no such provision was made, she now revived
the proposal, observing that there was a tolerable market at Berwick,
where we might be supplied; and that my man's horse would serve as a
beast of burthen--The 'squire, shrugging his shoulders, eyed her askance
with a look of ineffable contempt: and, after some pause, 'Sister (said
he), I can hardly persuade myself you are serious.' She was so little
acquainted with the geography of the island, that she imagined we could
not go to Scotland but by sea; and, after we had passed through the town
of Berwick, when he told her we were upon Scottish ground, she could
hardly believe the assertion--If the truth must be told, the South
Britons in general are woefully ignorant in this particular. What,
between want of curiosity, and traditional sarcasms, the effect of
ancient animosity, the people at the other end of the island know as
little of Scotland as of Japan.

If I had never been in Wales, I should have been more struck with the
manifest difference in appearance betwixt the peasants and commonalty
on different sides of the Tweed. The boors of Northumberland are
lusty fellows, fresh complexioned, cleanly, and well cloathed; but the
labourers in Scotland are generally lank, lean, hard-featured, sallow,
soiled, and shabby, and their little pinched blue caps have a beggarly
effect. The cattle are much in the same stile with their drivers,
meagre, stunted, and ill equipt. When I talked to my uncle on this
subject, he said, 'Though all the Scottish hinds would not bear to be
compared with those of the rich counties of South Britain, they would
stand very well in competition with the peasants of France, Italy, and
Savoy--not to mention the mountaineers of Wales, and the red-shanks of
Ireland.'

We entered Scotland by a frightful moor of sixteen miles, which promises
very little for the interior parts of the kingdom; but the prospect
mended as we advanced. Passing through Dunbar, which is a neat little
town, situated on the sea-side, we lay at a country inn, where our
entertainment far exceeded our expectation; but for this we cannot give
the Scots credit, as the landlord is a native of England. Yesterday we
dined at Haddington, which has been a place of some consideration, but
is now gone to decay; and in the evening arrived at this metropolis, of
which I can say very little. It is very romantic, from its situation
on the declivity of a hill, having a fortified castle at the top, and a
royal palace at the bottom. The first thing that strikes the nose of
a stranger, shall be nameless; but what first strikes the eye, is the
unconscionable height of the houses, which generally rise to five, six,
seven, and eight stories, and, in some places (as I am assured),
to twelve. This manner of building, attended with numberless
inconveniences, must have been originally owing to want of room. Certain
it is, the town seems to be full of people: but their looks, their
language, and their customs, are so different from ours, that I can
hardly believe myself in Great-Britain.

The inn at which we put up (if it may be so called) was so filthy and
disagreeable in all respects, that my uncle began to fret, and his
gouty symptoms to recur--Recollecting, however, that he had a letter
of recommendation to one Mr Mitchelson, a lawyer, he sent it by his
servant, with a compliment, importing that we would wait upon him next
day in person; but that gentleman visited us immediately, and insisted
upon our going to his own house, until he could provide lodgings for our
accommodation. We gladly accepted, of his invitation, and repaired to
his house, where we were treated with equal elegance and hospitality, to
the utter confusion of our aunt, whose prejudices, though beginning to
give way, were not yet entirely removed. To-day, by the assistance
of our friend, we are settled in convenient lodgings, up four pair
of stairs, in the High-street, the fourth story being, in this city,
reckoned more genteel than the first. The air is, in all probability,
the better; but it requires good lungs to breathe it at this distance
above the surface of the earth.--While I do remain above it, whether
higher or lower, provided I breathe at all,


I shall ever be, Dear Phillips, yours, J. MELFORD July 18.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

That part of Scotland contiguous to Berwick, nature seems to have
intended as a barrier between two hostile nations. It is a brown desert
of considerable extent, that produces nothing but heath and fern; and
what rendered it the more dreary when we passed, there was a thick fog
that hindered us from seeing above twenty yards from the carriage--My
sister began to make wry faces, and use her smelling-bottle; Liddy
looked blank, and Mrs Jenkins dejected; but in a few hours these clouds
were dissipated; the sea appeared upon our right, and on the left the
mountains retired a little, leaving an agreeable plain betwixt them
and the beach; but, what surprised us all, this plain, to the extent of
several miles, was covered with as fine wheat as ever I saw in the most
fertile parts of South Britain--This plentiful crop is raised in the
open field, without any inclosure, or other manure than the alga marina,
or seaweed, which abounds on this coast; a circumstance which shews
that the soil and climate are favourable; but that agriculture in this
country is not yet brought to that perfection which it has attained
in England. Inclosures would not only keep the grounds warm, and the
several fields distinct, but would also protect the crop from the high
winds, which are so frequent in this part of the island.

Dunbar is well situated for trade, and has a curious bason, where ships
of small burthen may be perfectly secure; but there is little appearance
of business in the place--From thence, all the way to Edinburgh, there
is a continual succession of fine seats, belonging to noblemen and
gentlemen; and as each is surrounded by its own parks and plantation,
they produce a very pleasing effect in a country which lies otherwise
open and exposed. At Dunbar there is a noble park, with a lodge,
belonging to the Duke of Roxburgh, where Oliver Cromwell had his
head-quarters, when Lesley, at the head of a Scotch army, took
possession of the mountains in the neighbourhood, and hampered him in
such a manner, that he would have been obliged to embark and get away by
sea, had not the fanaticism of the enemy forfeited the advantage which
they had obtained by their general's conduct--Their ministers, by
exhortation, prayer, assurance, and prophecy, instigated them to go
down and slay the Philistines in Gilgal, and they quitted their ground
accordingly, notwithstanding all that Lesley could do to restrain
the madness of their enthusiasm--When Oliver saw them in motion, he
exclaimed, 'Praised be the Lord, he hath delivered them into the hands
of his servant!' and ordered his troops to sing a psalm of thanksgiving,
while they advanced in order to the plain, where the Scots were routed
with great slaughter.

In the neighbourhood of Haddington, there is a gentleman's house, in
the building of which, and the improvements about it, he is said to have
expended forty thousand pounds: but I cannot say I was much pleased
with either the architecture or the situation; though it has in front
a pastoral stream, the banks of which are laid out in a very agreeable
manner. I intended to pay my respects to Lord Elibank, whom I had
the honour to know at London many years ago. He lives in this part of
Lothian; but was gone to the North, on a visit--You have often heard
me mention this nobleman, whom I have long revered for his humanity and
universal intelligence, over and above the entertainment arising
from originality of his character--At Musselburgh, however, I had the
good-fortune to drink tea with my old friend Mr Cardonel; and at his
house I met with Dr C--, the parson of the parish, whose humour and
conversation inflamed me with a desire of being better acquainted with
his person--I am not at all surprised that these Scots make their way in
every quarter of the globe.

This place is but four miles from Edinburgh, towards which we proceeded
along the sea-shore, upon a firm bottom of smooth sand, which the tide
had left uncovered in its retreat--Edinburgh, from this avenue, is not
seen to much advantage--We had only an imperfect view of the Castle
and upper parts of the town, which varied incessantly according to the
inflexions of the road, and exhibited the appearance of detached spires
and turrets, belonging to some magnificent edifice in ruins. The palace
of Holyrood house stands on the left, as you enter the Canon-gate--This
is a street continued from hence to the gate called Nether Bow, which is
now taken away; so that there is no interruption for a long mile, from
the bottom to the top of the hill on which the castle stands in a most
imperial situation--Considering its fine pavement, its width, and the
lofty houses on each side, this would be undoubtedly one of the noblest
streets in Europe, if an ugly mass of mean buildings, called the
Lucken-Booths, had not thrust itself, by what accident I know not, into
the middle of the way, like Middle-Row in Holborn. The city stands upon
two hills, and the bottom between them; and, with all its defects, may
very well pass for the capital of a moderate kingdom.--It is full of
people, and continually resounds with the noise of coaches and other
carriages, for luxury as well as commerce. As far as I can perceive,
here is no want of provisions--The beef and mutton are as delicate
here as in Wales; the sea affords plenty of good fish; the bread is
remarkably fine; and the water is excellent, though I'm afraid not
in sufficient quantity to answer all the purposes of cleanliness and
convenience; articles in which, it must be allowed, our fellow-subjects
are a little defective--The water is brought in leaden pipes from a
mountain in the neighbourhood, to a cistern on the Castle-hill, from
whence it is distributed to public conduits in different parts of the
city. From these it is carried in barrels, on the backs of male and
female porters, up two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight
pairs of stairs, for the use of particular families--Every story is
a complete house, occupied by a separate family; and the stair being
common to them all, is generally left in a very filthy condition; a man
must tread with great circumspection to get safe housed with unpolluted
shoes--Nothing can form a stronger contrast, than the difference
betwixt the outside and inside of the door, for the good-women of this
metropolis are remarkably nice in the ornaments and propriety of their
apartments, as if they were resolved to transfer the imputation from
the individual to the public. You are no stranger to their method of
discharging all their impurities from their windows, at a certain hour
of the night, as the custom is in Spain, Portugal, and some parts of
France and Italy--A practice to which I can by no means be reconciled;
for notwithstanding all the care that is taken by their scavengers to
remove this nuisance every morning by break of day, enough still remains
to offend the eyes, as well as other organs of those whom use has not
hardened against all delicacy of sensation.

The inhabitants seem insensible to these impressions, and are apt to
imagine the disgust that we avow is little better than affectation; but
they ought to have some compassion for strangers, who have not been used
to this kind of sufferance; and consider, whether it may not be worth
while to take some pains to vindicate themselves from the reproach that,
on this account, they bear among their neighbours. As to the surprising
height of their houses, it is absurd in many respects; but in one
particular light I cannot view it without horror; that is, the dreadful
situation of all the families above, in case the common staircase should
be rendered impassable by a fire in the lower stories--In order to
prevent the shocking consequences that must attend such an accident, it
would be a right measure to open doors of communication from one house
to another, on every story, by which the people might fly from such
a terrible visitation. In all parts of the world, we see the force of
habit prevailing over all the dictates of convenience and sagacity. All
the people of business at Edinburgh, and even the genteel company, may
be seen standing in crowds every day, from one to two in the afternoon,
in the open street, at a place where formerly stood a market-cross,
which (by the bye) was a curious piece of Gothic architecture, still to
be seen in lord Sommerville's garden in this neighbourhood--I say, the
people stand in the open street from the force of custom, rather than
move a few yards to an Exchange that stands empty on one side, or to the
Parliament-close on the other, which is a noble square adorned with a
fine equestrian statue of king Charles II.--The company thus assembled,
are entertained with a variety of tunes, played upon a set of bells,
fixed in a steeple hard by--As these bells are well-toned, and the
musician, who has a salary from the city, for playing upon them with
keys, is no bad performer, the entertainment is really agreeable, and
very striking to the ears of a stranger.

The public inns of Edinburgh are still worse than those of London; but
by means of a worthy gentleman, to whom I was recommended, we have
got decent lodgings in the house of a widow gentlewoman of the name of
Lockhart; and here I shall stay until I have seen every thing that
is remarkable in and about this capital. I now begin to feel the good
effects of exercise--I eat like a farmer, sleep from mid-night till
eight in the morning without interruption, and enjoy a constant tide of
spirits, equally distant from inanition and excess; but whatever ebbs
or flows my constitution may undergo, my heart will still declare that I
am,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate friend and servant, MATT. BRAMBLE EDR.
July 18.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

The 'squire has been so kind as to rap my bit of nonsense under the
kiver of his own sheet--O, Mary Jones! Mary Jones! I have had trials and
trembulation. God help me! I have been a vixen and a griffin these many
days--Sattin has had power to temp me in the shape of van Ditton,
the young 'squire's wally de shamble; but by God's grease he did
not purvail--I thoft as how, there was no arm in going to a play at
Newcastle, with my hair dressed in the Parish fashion; and as for the
trifle of paint, he said as how my complexion wanted touch, and so I
let him put it on with a little Spanish owl; but a mischievous mob of
colliers, and such promiscous ribble rabble, that could bare no smut
but their own, attacked us in the street, and called me hoar and painted
Issabel, and splashed my close, and spoiled me a complete set of blond
lace triple ruffles, not a pin the worse for the ware--They cost me
seven good sillings, to lady Griskin's woman at London.

When I axed Mr Clinker what they meant by calling me Issabel, he put the
byebill into my hand, and I read of van Issabel a painted harlot, that
vas thrown out of a vindore, and the dogs came and licked her blood.
But I am no harlot; and, with God's blessing, no dog shall have my poor
blood to lick: marry, Heaven forbid, amen! As for Ditton, after all his
courting, and his compliment, he stole away an Irishman's bride, and
took a French leave of me and his master; but I vally not his going a
farting; but I have had hanger on his account--Mistriss scoulded like
mad; thof I have the comfit that all the family took my part, and even
Mr Clinker pleaded for me on his bended knee; thof, God he knows, he
had raisins enuff to complain; but he's a good sole, abounding with
Christian meekness, and one day will meet with his reward.

And now, dear Mary, we have got to Haddingborrough, among the Scots, who
are civil enuff for our money, thof I don't speak their lingo--But they
should not go for to impose upon foreigners; for the bills in their
houses say, they have different easements to let; and behold there is
nurro geaks in the whole kingdom, nor any thing for poor sarvants, but
a barrel with a pair of tongs thrown a-cross; and all the chairs in the
family are emptied into this here barrel once a-day; and at ten o'clock
at night the whole cargo is flung out of a back windore that looks into
some street or lane, and the maids calls gardy loo to the passengers
which signifies Lord have mercy upon you! and this is done every night
in every house in Haddingborrough; so you may guess, Mary Jones, what a
sweet savour comes from such a number of profuming pans; but they say it
is wholesome, and, truly, I believe it is; for being in the vapours, and
thinking of Issabel and Mr Clinker, I was going into a fit of astericks,
when this fiff, saving your presence, took me by the nose so powerfully
that I sneezed three times, and found myself wonderfully refreshed; and
this to be sure is the raisin why there are no fits in Haddingborrough.

I was likewise made believe, that there was nothing to be had but
oatmeal and seeps-heads; but if I hadn't been a fool, I mought have
known there could be no heads without kerkasses--This very blessed day
I dined upon a delicate leg of Velsh mutton and cully-flower; and as
for the oat-meal, I leave that to the sarvants of the country, which are
pore drudges, many of them without shoes or stockings--Mr Clinker tells
me here is a great call of the gospel; but I wish, I wish some of
our family be not fallen off from the rite way--O, if I was given to
tailbaring, I have my own secrets to discover--There has been a deal
of huggling and flurtation betwixt mistress and an ould Scotch officer,
called Kismycago. He looks for all the orld like the scare-crow that our
gardener has set up to frite away the sparrows; and what will come of
it, the Lord knows; but come what will, it shall never be said that I
menchioned a syllabub of the matter--Remember me kindly to Saul and the
kitten--I hope they got the horn-buck, and will put it to a good yuse,
which is the constant prayer of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS ADDINGBOROUGH, July 18.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

If I stay much longer at Edinburgh, I shall be changed into a downright
Caledonian--My uncle observes, that I have already acquired something of
the country accent. The people here are so social and attentive in their
civilities to strangers, that I am insensibly sucked into the channel of
their manners and customs, although they are in fact much more different
from ours than you can imagine--That difference, however, which struck
me very much at my first arrival, I now hardly perceive, and my ear is
perfectly reconciled to the Scotch accent, which I find even agreeable
in the mouth of a pretty woman--It is a sort of Doric dialect, which
gives an idea of amiable simplicity--You cannot imagine how we have
been caressed and feasted in the good town of Edinburgh of which we are
become free denizens and guild brothers, by the special favour of the
magistracy.

I had a whimsical commission from Bath, to a citizen of this metropolis.
Quin, understanding our intention to visit Edinburgh, pulled out a
guinea, and desired the favour I would drink it at a tavern, with a
particular friend and bottle-companion of his, Mr R-- C--, a lawyer of
this city--I charged myself with the commission, and, taking the guinea,
'You see (said I) I have pocketed your bounty.' 'Yes (replied Quin,
laughing); and a headake into the bargain, if you drink fair.' I made
use of this introduction to Mr C--, who received me with open arms,
and gave me the rendezvous, according to the cartel. He had provided a
company of jolly fellows, among whom I found myself extremely happy;
and did Mr C-- and Quin all the justice in my power; but, alas, I was no
more than a tiro among a troop of veterans, who had compassion upon my
youth and conveyed me home in the morning by what means I know not--Quin
was mistaken, however, as to the head-ake; the claret was too good to
treat me so roughly.

While Mr Bramble holds conferences with the graver literati of the
place, and our females are entertained at visits by the Scotch ladies,
who are the best and kindest creatures upon earth, I pass my time among
the bucks of Edinburgh; who, with a great share of spirit and vivacity,
have a certain shrewdness and self-command that is not often found
among their neighbours, in the high-day of youth and exultation--Not
a hint escapes a Scotchman that can be interpreted into offence by any
individual in the company; and national reflections are never heard--In
this particular, I must own, we are both unjust and ungrateful to the
Scots; for, as far as I am able to judge, they have a real esteem for
the natives of South-Britain; and never mention our country, but with
expressions of regard--Nevertheless, they are far from being servile
imitators of our modes and fashionable vices. All their customs and
regulations of public and private oeconomy, of business and diversion,
are in their own stile. This remarkably predominates in their looks,
their dress and manner, their music, and even their cookery. Our 'squire
declares, that he knows not another people upon earth, so strongly
marked with a national character--Now we are upon the article of
cookery, I must own, some of their dishes are savoury, and even
delicate; but I am not yet Scotchman enough to relish their singed
sheep's-head and haggice, which were provided at our request, one day at
Mr Mitchelson's, where we dined--The first put me in mind of the history
of Congo, in which I had read of negroes' heads sold publickly in
the markets; the last, being a mess of minced lights, livers, suet,
oat-meal, onions, and pepper, inclosed in a sheep's stomach, had a very
sudden effect upon mine, and the delicate Mrs Tabby changed colour; when
the cause of our disgust was instantaneously removed at the nod of our
entertainer. The Scots, in general, are attached to this composition,
with a sort of national fondness, as well as to their oat-meal bread;
which is presented at every table, in thin triangular cakes, baked upon
a plate of iron, called a girdle; and these, many of the natives, even
in the higher ranks of life, prefer to wheaten-bread, which they have
here in perfection--You know we used to vex poor Murray of Baliol
college, by asking, if there was really no fruit but turnips in
Scotland?--Sure enough, I have seen turnips make their appearance, not
as a desert, but by way of hors d'oeuvres, or whets, as radishes are
served betwixt more substantial dishes in France and Italy; but it must
be observed, that the turnips of this country are as much superior in
sweetness, delicacy, and flavour, to those in England, as a musk-melon
is to the stock of a common cabbage. They are small and conical, of
a yellowish colour, with a very thin skin and, over and above their
agreeable taste, are valuable for their antiscorbutic quality--As to the
fruit now in season, such as cherries, gooseberries, and currants, there
is no want of them at Edinburgh; and in the gardens of some gentlemen,
who live in the neighbourhood, there is now a very favourable appearance
of apricots, peaches, nectarines, and even grapes: nay, I have seen
a very fine shew of pineapples within a few miles of this metropolis.
Indeed, we have no reason to be surprised at these particulars, when we
consider how little difference there is, in fact, betwixt this climate
and that of London.

All the remarkable places in the city and its avenues, for ten miles
around, we have visited, much to our satisfaction. In the Castle are
some royal apartments, where the sovereign occasionally resided; and
here are carefully preserved the regalia of the kingdom, consisting of
a crown, said to be of great value, a sceptre, and a sword of state,
adorned with jewels--Of these symbols of sovereignty, the people are
exceedingly jealous--A report being spread during the sitting of the
union-parliament, that they were removed to London, such a tumult arose,
that the lord commissioner would have been torn to pieces, if he had not
produced them for the satisfaction of the populace.

The palace of Holyrood-house is an elegant piece of architecture, but
sunk in an obscure, and, as I take it, unwholesome bottom, where
one would imagine it had been placed on purpose to be concealed. The
apartments are lofty, but unfurnished; and as for the pictures of
the Scottish kings, from Fergus I. to king William, they are paultry
daubings, mostly by the same hand, painted either from the imagination,
or porters hired to sit for the purpose. All the diversions of London
we enjoy at Edinburgh, in a small compass. Here is a well
conducted concert, in which several gentlemen perform on different
instruments--The Scots are all musicians--Every man you meet plays on
the flute, the violin, or violoncello; and there is one nobleman, whose
compositions are universally admired--Our company of actors is very
tolerable; and a subscription is now on foot for building a new theatre;
but their assemblies please me above all other public exhibitions.

We have been at the hunters' ball, where I was really astonished to see
such a number of fine women--The English, who have never crossed the
Tweed, imagine erroneously, that the Scotch ladies are not remarkable
for personal attractions; but, I can declare with a safe conscience, I
never saw so many handsome females together, as were assembled on this
occasion. At the Leith races, the best company comes hither from the
remoter provinces; so that, I suppose, we had all the beauty of the
kingdom concentrated as it were into one focus; which was, indeed, so
vehement, that my heart could hardly resist its power. Between friends,
it has sustained some damage from the bright eyes of the charming miss
R[ento]n, whom I had the honour to dance with at the ball--The countess
of Melville attracted all eyes, and the admiration of all present--She
was accompanied by the agreeable miss Grieve, who made many conquests;
nor did my sister Liddy pass unnoticed in the assembly--She is become
a toast at Edinburgh, by the name of the Fair Cambrian, and has already
been the occasion of much wine-shed; but the poor girl met with an
accident at the ball, which has given us great disturbance.

A young gentleman, the express image of that rascal Wilson, went up
to ask her to dance a minuet; and his sudden appearance shocked her so
much, that she fainted away--I call Wilson a rascal, because, if he had
been really a gentleman, with honourable intentions, he would have,
ere now, appeared in his own character--I must own, my blood boils
with indignation when I think of that fellow's presumption; and Heaven
confound me if I don't--But I won't be so womanish as to rail--Time
will, perhaps, furnish occasion--Thank God, the cause of Liddy's
disorder remains a secret. The lady directress of the ball, thinking she
was overcome by the heat of the place, had her conveyed to another room,
where she soon recovered so well, as to return and join in the country
dances, in which the Scotch lasses acquit themselves with such spirit
and agility, as put their partners to the height of their mettle. I
believe our aunt, Mrs Tabitha, had entertained hopes of being able to
do some execution among the cavaliers at this assembly. She had been
several days in consultation with milliners and mantua-makers, preparing
for the occasion, at which she made her appearance in a full suit of
damask, so thick and heavy, that the sight of it alone, at this season
of the year, was sufficient to draw drops of sweat from any man
of ordinary imagination--She danced one minuet with our friend Mr
Mitchelson, who favoured her so far, in the spirit of hospitality and
politeness; and she was called out a second time by the young laird of
Ballymawhawple, who, coming in by accident, could not readily find any
other partner; but as the first was a married man, and the second payed
no particular homage to her charms, which were also over-looked by the
rest of the company, she became dissatisfied and censorious--At supper,
she observed that the Scotch gentlemen made a very good figure, when
they were a little improved by travelling; and therefore it was pity
they did not all take the benefit of going abroad. She said the women
were awkward, masculine creatures; that, in dancing, they lifted their
legs like so many colts; that they had no idea of graceful motion, and
put on their clothes in a frightful manner; but if the truth must
be told, Tabby herself was the most ridiculous figure, and the worst
dressed of the whole assembly. The neglect of the male sex rendered
her malcontent and peevish; she now found fault with every thing at
Edinburgh, and teized her brother to leave the place, when she was
suddenly reconciled to it on a religious consideration--There is a sect
of fanaticks, who have separated themselves from the established kirk,
under the name of Seceders--They acknowledge no earthly head of the
church, reject lay-patronage, and maintain the methodist doctrines of
the new birth, the new light, the efficacy of grace, the insufficiency
of works, and the operations of the spirit. Mrs Tabitha, attended by
Humphry Clinker, was introduced to one of their conventicles, where they
both received much edification; and she has had the good fortune to
come acquainted with a pious Christian, called Mr Moffat, who is very
powerful in prayer, and often assists her in private exercises of
devotion.

I never saw such a concourse of genteel company at any races in England,
as appeared on the course of Leith--Hard by, in the fields called the
Links, the citizens of Edinburgh divert themselves at a game called
golf, in which they use a curious kind of bats, tipt with horn, and
small elastic balls of leather, stuffed with feathers, rather less than
tennis balls, but of a much harder consistence--This they strike with
such force and dexterity from one hole to another, that they will fly
to an incredible distance. Of this diversion the Scots are so fond, that
when the weather will permit, you may see a multitude of all ranks,
from the senator of justice to the lowest tradesman, mingled together in
their shirts, and following the balls with the utmost eagerness. Among
others, I was shewn one particular set of golfers, the youngest of
whom was turned of fourscore--They were all gentlemen of independent
fortunes, who had amused themselves with this pastime for the best part
of a century, without having ever felt the least alarm from sickness or
disgust; and they never went to bed, without having each the best
part of a gallon of claret in his belly. Such uninterrupted exercise,
co-operating with the keen air from the sea, must, without all doubt,
keep the appetite always on edge, and steel the constitution against all
the common attacks of distemper.

The Leith races gave occasion to another entertainment of a very
singular nature--There is at Edinburgh a society or corporation of
errand-boys, called cawdies, who ply in the streets at night with paper
lanthorns, and are very serviceable in carrying messages--These fellows,
though shabby in their appearance, and rudely familiar in their address,
are wonderfully acute, and so noted for fidelity, that there is no
instance of [a] cawdy's having betrayed his trust--Such is their
intelligence, that they know, not only every individual of the place,
but also every stranger, by that time he has been four and twenty hours
in Edinburgh; and no transaction, even the most private, can escape
their notice. They are particularly famous for their dexterity in
executing one of the functions of Mercury; though, for my own part, I
never employed them in this department of business--Had I occasion
for any service of this nature, my own man, Archy M'Alpine, is as well
qualified as e'er a cawdie in Edinburgh; and I am much mistaken, if he
has not been heretofore of their fraternity. Be that as it may, they
resolved to give a dinner and a ball at Leith, to which they formally
invited all the young noblemen and gentlemen that were at the races; and
this invitation was reinforced by an assurance that all the celebrated
ladies of pleasure would grace the entertainment with their company.--I
received a card on this occasion, and went thither with half a dozen of
my acquaintance.--In a large hall the cloth was laid on a long range of
tables joined together, and here the company seated themselves, to
the number of about fourscore, lords, and lairds, and other gentlemen,
courtezans and cawdies mingled together, as the slaves and their masters
were in the time of the Saturnalia in ancient Rome.--The toast master,
who sat at the upper end, was one Cawdie Fraser, a veteran pimp,
distinguished for his humour and sagacity, well known and much respected
in his profession by all the guests, male and female, that were here
assembled.--He had bespoke the dinner and the wine: he had taken care
that all his brethren should appear in decent apparel and clean
linen; and he himself wore a periwig with three tails in honour of the
festival.--I assure you the banquet was both elegant and plentiful,
and seasoned with a thousand sallies, that promoted a general spirit
of mirth and good humour.--After the desert, Mr Fraser proposed the
following toasts, which I don't pretend to explain. 'The best in
Christendom.'--'Gibbs' contract.'--'The beggar's benison,'--'King and
kirk.'--'Great Britain and Ireland.' Then, filling a bumper, and turning
to me, 'Mester Malford (said he), may a' unkindness cease betwixt John
Bull and his sister Moggy.'--The next person he singled out, was a
nobleman who had been long abroad.--'Ma lord (cried Fraser), here is a
bumper to a' those noblemen who have virtue enough to spend their rents
in their ain countray.'--He afterwards addressed himself to a member of
parliament in these words:--'Meester--I'm sure ye'll ha' nae objection
to my drinking, disgrace and dule to ilka Scot, that sells his
conscience and his vote.'--He discharged a third sarcasm at a person
very gaily dressed, who had risen from small beginnings, and made a
considerable fortune at play.--Filling his glass, and calling him by
name, 'Lang life (said he), to the wylie loon that gangs a-field with a
toom poke at his lunzie, and comes hame with a sackful of siller.'--All
these toasts being received with loud bursts of applause, Mr Fraser
called for pint glasses, and filled his own to the brim: then standing
up, and all his brethren following his example, 'Ma lords and gentlemen
(cried he), here is a cup of thanks for the great and undeserved honour
you have done your poor errand-boys this day.'--So saying, he and they
drank off their glasses in a trice, and quitting their seats, took their
station each behind one of the other guests; exclaiming, 'Noo we're your
honours cawdies again.'

The nobleman who had bore the first brunt of Mr Fraser's satire,
objected to his abdication. He said, as the company was assembled by
invitation from the cawdies, he expected they were to be entertained at
their expense. 'By no means, my lord (cried Fraser), I wad na he guilty
of sic presumption for the wide warld--I never affronted a gentleman
since I was born; and sure at this age I wonnot offer an indignity to
sic an honourable convention.' 'Well (said his Lordship) as you have
expended some wit, you have a right to save your money. You have given
me good counsel, and I take it in good part. As you have voluntarily
quitted your seat, I will take your place with the leave of the good
company, and think myself happy to be hailed, Father of the Feast.' He
was forthwith elected into the chair, and complimented in a bumper in
his new character.

The claret continued to circulate without interruption, till the glasses
seemed to dance upon the table, and this, perhaps, was a hint to the
ladies to call for music--At eight in the evening the ball began in
another apartment: at midnight we went to supper; but it was broad day
before I found the way to my lodgings; and, no doubt, his Lordship had a
swinging bill to discharge.

In short, I have lived so riotously for some weeks, that my uncle
begins to be alarmed on the score of my constitution, and very seriously
observes, 'that all his own infirmities are owing to such excesses
indulged in his youth--Mrs Tabitha says it would be more to the
advantage of my soul as well as body, if, instead of frequenting these
scenes of debauchery, I would accompany Mr Moffat and her to hear a
sermon of the reverend Mr M'Corkindale.--Clinker often exhorts me, with
a groan, to take care of my precious health; and even Archy M'Alpine,
when he happens to be overtaken (which is oftener the case than I could
wish), reads me a long lecture upon temperance and sobriety; and is
so very wise and sententious, that, if I could provide him with
a professor's chair, I would willingly give up the benefit of his
amonitions and service together; for I was tutor-sick at alma mater.

I am not, however, so much engrossed by the gaieties of Edinburgh, but
that I find time to make parties in the family way. We have not only
seen all the villas and villages within ten miles of the capital, but
we have also crossed the Firth, which is an arm of the sea seven miles
broad, that divides Lothian from the shire, or, as the Scots call it,
the kingdom of Fife. There is a number of large open sea-boats that ply
on this passage from Leith to Kinghorn, which is a borough on the
other side. In one of these our whole family embarked three days ago,
excepting my sister, who, being exceedingly fearful of the water, was
left to the care of Mrs Mitchelson. We had an easy and quick passage
into Fife, where we visited a number of poor towns on the sea-side,
including St Andrew's, which is the skeleton of a venerable city; but we
were much better pleased with some noble and elegant seats and castles,
of which there is a great number in that part of Scotland. Yesterday
we took boat again on our return to Leith, with fair wind and agreeable
weather; but we had not advanced half-way when the sky was suddenly
overcast, and the wind changing, blew directly in our teeth so that we
were obliged to turn, or tack the rest of the way. In a word, the gale
increased to a storm of wind and rain, attended with such a fog, that
we could not see the town of Leith, to which we were bound, nor even the
castle of Edinburgh, notwithstanding its high situation. It is not to be
doubted but that we were all alarmed on this occasion. And at the same
time, most of the passengers were seized with a nausea that produced
violent retchings. My aunt desired her brother to order the boatmen, to
put back to Kinghorn, and this expedient he actually proposed; but they
assured him there was no danger. Mrs Tabitha finding them obstinate,
began to scold, and insisted upon my uncle's exerting his authority as
a justice of the peace. Sick and peevish as he was, he could not help
laughing at this wise proposal, telling her, that his commission did not
extend so far, and, if it did, he should let the people take their own
way; for he thought it would be great presumption in him to direct them
in the exercise of their own profession. Mrs Winifred Jenkins made a
general clearance with the assistance of Mr Humphry Clinker, who joined
her both in prayer and ejaculation.--As he took it for granted that we
should not be long in this world, he offered some spiritual consolation
to Mrs Tabitha, who rejected it with great disgust, bidding him keep his
sermons for those who had leisure to hear such nonsense.--My uncle sat,
collected in himself, without speaking; my man Archy had recourse to a
brandy-bottle, with which he made so free, that I imagined he had sworn
to die of drinking any thing rather than sea-water: but the brandy had
no more effect upon him in the way of intoxication, than if it had been
sea-water in good earnest.--As for myself, I was too much engrossed by
the sickness at my stomach, to think of any thing else. Meanwhile the
sea swelled mountains high, the boat pitched with such violence, as if
it had been going to pieces; the cordage rattled, the wind roared; the
lightning flashed, the thunder bellowed, and the rain descended in
a deluge--Every time the vessel was put about, we ship'd a sea that
drenched us all to the skin.--When, by dint of turning, we thought to
have cleared the pier head, we were driven to leeward, and then the
boatmen themselves began to fear that the tide would fail before we
should fetch up our lee-way: the next trip, however, brought us into
smooth water, and we were safely landed on the quay, about one o'clock
in the afternoon.--'To be sure (cried Tabby, when she found herself
on terra firma), we must all have perished, if we had not been the
particular care of Providence.' 'Yes (replied my uncle), but I am much
of the honest highlander's mind--after he had made such a passage
as this: his friend told him he was much indebted to
Providence;--"Certainly (said Donald), but, by my saul, mon, I'se ne'er
trouble Providence again, so long as the brig of Stirling stands."'--You
must know the brig, or bridge of Stirling, stands above twenty miles
up the river Forth, of which this is the outlet--I don't find that our
'squire has suffered in his health from this adventure; but poor Liddy
is in a peaking way--I'm afraid this unfortunate girl is uneasy in her
mind; and this apprehension distracts me, for she is really an amiable
creature.

We shall set out to-morrow or next day for Stirling and Glasgow; and we
propose to penetrate a little way into the Highlands, before we turn our
course to the southward--In the mean time, commend me to all our friends
round Carfax, and believe me to be, ever yours,

EDINBURGH, Aug. 8. J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS.

I should be very ungrateful, dear Lewis, if I did not find myself
disposed to think and speak favourably of this people, among whom I have
met with more kindness, hospitality, and rational entertainment, in a
few weeks, than ever I received in any other country during the whole
course of my life.--Perhaps, the gratitude excited by these benefits may
interfere with the impartiality of my remarks; for a man is as apt to
be prepossessed by particular favours as to be prejudiced by private
motives of disgust. If I am partial, there is, at least, some merit
in my conversion from illiberal prejudices which had grown up with my
constitution.

The first impressions which an Englishman receives in this country, will
not contribute to the removal of his prejudices; because he refers every
thing he sees to a comparison with the same articles in his own country;
and this comparison is unfavourable to Scotland in all its exteriors,
such as the face of the country in respect to cultivation, the
appearance of the bulk of the people, and the language of conversation
in general.--I am not so far convinced by Mr Lismahago's arguments, but
that I think the Scots would do well, for their own sakes, to adopt
the English idioms and pronunciation; those of them especially, who are
resolved to push their fortunes in South-Britain--I know, by experience,
how easily an Englishman is influenced by the ear, and how apt he is
to laugh, when he hears his own language spoken with a foreign or
provincial accent--I have known a member of the house of commons speak
with great energy and precision, without being able to engage attention,
because his observations were made in the Scotch dialect, which (no
offence to lieutenant Lismahago) certainly gives a clownish air even
to sentiments of the greatest dignity and decorum.--I have declared my
opinion on this head to some of the most sensible men of this country,
observing, at the same time, that if they would employ a few natives of
England to teach the pronunciation of our vernacular tongue, in twenty
years there would be no difference, in point of dialect, between the
youth of Edinburgh and of London.

The civil regulations of this kingdom and metropolis are taken from
very different models from those of England, except in a few particular
establishments, the necessary consequences of the union.--Their college
of justice is a bench of great dignity, filled with judges of character
and ability.--I have heard some causes tried before this venerable
tribunal; and was very much pleased with the pleadings of their
advocates, who are by no means deficient either in argument or
elocution. The Scottish legislation is founded, in a great measure, on
the civil law; consequently, their proceedings vary from those of the
English tribunals; but, I think, they have the advantage of us in their
method of examining witnesses apart, and in the constitution of their
jury, by which they certainly avoid the evil which I mentioned in my
last from Lismahago's observation.

The university of Edinburgh is supplied with excellent professors in all
the sciences; and the medical school, in particular, is famous all over
Europe.--The students of this art have the best opportunity of learning
it to perfection, in all its branches, as there are different courses
for the theory of medicine and the practice of medicine; for anatomy,
chemistry, botany, and the materia medica, over and above those of
mathematics and experimental philosophy; and all these are given by men
of distinguished talents. What renders this part of education still more
complete, is the advantage of attending the infirmary, which is the best
instituted charitable foundation that I ever knew. Now we are talking
of charities, here are several hospitals, exceedingly well endowed, and
maintained under admirable regulations; and these are not only useful,
but ornamental to the city. Among these, I shall only mention the
general work-house, in which all the poor, not otherwise provided for,
are employed, according to their different abilities, with such judgment
and effect, that they nearly maintain themselves by their labour,
and there is not a beggar to be seen within the precincts of this
metropolis. It was Glasgow that set the example of this establishment,
about thirty years ago.--Even the kirk of Scotland, so long reproached
with fanaticism and canting, abounds at present with ministers
celebrated for their learning, and respectable for their moderation.--I
have heard their sermons with equal astonishment and pleasure.--The good
people of Edinburgh no longer think dirt and cobwebs essential to the
house of God.--Some of their churches have admitted such ornaments
as would have excited sedition, even in England, a little more than a
century ago; and Psalmody is here practised and taught by a professor
from the cathedral of Durham:--I should not be surprised, in a few
years, to hear it accompanied with an organ.

Edinburgh is a hot-bed of genius.--I have had the good fortune to be
made acquainted with many authors of the first distinction; such as the
two Humes, Robertson, Smith, Wallace, Blair, Ferguson, Wilkie, &c. and I
have found them all as agreeable in conversation as they are instructive
and entertaining in their writings. These acquaintances I owe to the
friendship of Dr Carlyle, who wants nothing but inclination to figure
with the rest upon paper. The magistracy of Edinburgh is changed every
year by election, and seems to be very well adapted both for state and
authority.--The lord provost is equal in dignity to the lord mayor
of London; and the four bailies are equivalent to the rank of
aldermen.--There is a dean of guild, who takes cognizance of mercantile
affairs; a treasurer; a town-clerk; and the council is composed
of deacons, one of whom is returned every year, in rotation, as
representative of every company of artificers or handicraftsmen. Though
this city, from the nature of its situation, can never be made either
very convenient or very cleanly, it has, nevertheless, an air of
magnificence that commands respect.--The castle is an instance of the
sublime in scite and architecture.--Its fortifications are kept in good
order, and there is always in it a garrison of regular soldiers, which
is relieved every year; but it is incapable of sustaining a siege
carried on according to the modern operations of war.--The castle hill,
which extends from the outward gate to the upper end of the high street,
is used as a public walk for the citizens, and commands a prospect,
equally extensive and delightful, over the county of Fife, on the other
side of the Frith, and all along the sea-coast, which is covered with a
succession of towns that would seem to indicate a considerable share of
commerce; but, if the truth must be told, these towns have been falling
to decay ever since the union, by which the Scots were in a
great measure deprived of their trade with France.--The palace of
Holyrood-house is a jewel in architecture, thrust into a hollow where
it cannot be seen; a situation which was certainly not chosen by the
ingenious architect, who must have been confined to the site of the old
palace, which was a convent. Edinburgh is considerably extended on the
south side, where there are divers little elegant squares built in the
English manner; and the citizens have planned some improvements on the
north, which, when put in execution, will add greatly to the beauty and
convenience of this capital.

The sea-port is Leith, a flourishing town, about a mile from the city,
in the harbour of which I have seen above one hundred ships lying all
together. You must know, I had the curiosity to cross the Frith in a
passage boat, and stayed two days in Fife, which is remarkably fruitful
in corn, and exhibits a surprising number of fine seats, elegantly
built, and magnificently furnished. There is an incredible number of
noble houses in every part of Scotland that I have seen.--Dalkeith,
Pinkie, Yester, and lord Hopton's [Hopetoun's], all of them within four
or five miles of Edinburgh, are princely palaces, in every one of which
a sovereign might reside at his case.--I suppose the Scots affect these
monuments of grandeur.--If I may be allowed to mingle censure with my
remarks upon a people I revere, I must observe, that their weak side
seems to be vanity.--I am afraid that even their hospitality is not
quite free of ostentation. I think I have discovered among them uncommon
pains taken to display their fine linen, of which, indeed, they have
great plenty, their furniture, plate, housekeeping, and variety of
wines, in which article, it must be owned, they are profuse, if not
prodigal--A burgher of Edinburgh, not content to vie with a citizen of
London, who has ten times his fortune, must excel him in the expence as
well as elegance of his entertainments.

Though the villas of the Scotch nobility and gentry have generally
an air of grandeur and state, I think their gardens and parks are not
comparable to those of England; a circumstance the more remarkable, as I
was told by the ingenious Mr Phillip Miller of Chelsea, that almost all
the gardeners of South-Britain were natives of Scotland. The verdure of
this country is not equal to that of England.--The pleasure-grounds are,
in my opinion, not so well laid out according to the genius loci; nor
are the lawns, and walks, and hedges kept in such delicate order.--The
trees are planted in prudish rows, which have not such an agreeable
natural effect, as when they are thrown into irregular groupes, with
intervening glades; and firs, which they generally raise around their
houses, look dull and funereal in the summer season.--I must confess,
indeed, that they yield serviceable timber, and good shelter against the
northern blasts; that they grow and thrive in the most barren soil, and
continually perspire a fine balsam of turpentine, which must render the
air very salutary and sanative to lungs of a tender texture.

Tabby and I have been both frightened in our return by sea from the
coast of Fife--She was afraid of drowning, and I of catching cold, in
consequence of being drenched with sea-water; but my fears as well as
hers, have been happily disappointed. She is now in perfect health; I
wish I could say the same of Liddy--Something uncommon is the matter
with that poor girl; her colour fades, her appetite fails, and her
spirits flag--She is become moping and melancholy, and is often found
in tears--Her brother suspects internal uneasiness on account of Wilson,
and denounces vengeance against that adventurer.--She was, it seems,
strongly affected at the ball by the sudden appearance of one Mr Gordon,
who strongly resembles the said Wilson; but I am rather suspicious that
she caught cold by being overheated with dancing.--I have consulted Dr
Gregory, an eminent physician of an amiable character, who advises the
highland air, and the use of goat-milk whey, which, surely, cannot have
a bad effect upon a patient who was born and bred among the mountains of
Wales--The doctors opinion is the more agreeable, as we shall find those
remedies in the very place which I proposed as the utmost extent of our
expedition--I mean the borders of Argyle.

Mr Smollett, one of the judges of the commissary court, which is now
sitting, has very kindly insisted upon our lodging at his country-house,
on the banks of Lough-Lomond, about fourteen miles beyond Glasgow. For
this last city we shall set out in two days, and take Stirling in our
way, well provided with recommendations from our friends at Edinburgh,
whom, I protest, I shall leave with much regret. I am so far from
thinking it any hardship to live in this country, that, if I was obliged
to lead a town life, Edinburgh would certainly be the headquarters of


Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE EDIN., August 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I am now little short of the Ultima Thule, if this appellation properly
belongs to the Orkneys or Hebrides. These last are now lying before me,
to the amount of some hundreds, scattered up and down the Deucalidonian
sea, affording the most picturesque and romantic prospect I ever
beheld--I write this letter in a gentleman's house, near the town of
Inverary which may be deemed the capital of the West Highlands, famous
for nothing so much as for the stately castle begun, and actually
covered in by the late duke of Argyle, at a prodigious expence--Whether
it will ever be completely finished is a question.--

But, to take things in order--We left Edinburgh ten days ago; and the
further North we proceed, we find Mrs Tabitha the less manageable; so
that her inclinations are not of the nature of the loadstone; they point
not towards the pole. What made her leave Edinburgh with reluctance at
last, if we may believe her own assertions, was a dispute which she left
unfinished with Mr Moffat, touching the eternity of hell torments. That
gentleman, as he advanced in years, began to be sceptical on this head,
till, at length, he declared open war against the common acceptation of
the word eternal. He is now persuaded, that eternal signifies no more
than an indefinite number of years; and that the most enormous sinner
may be quit for nine millions, nine hundred thousand, nine hundred and
ninety-nine years of hell-fire; which term or period, as he very well
observes, forms but an inconsiderable drop, as it were, in the ocean of
eternity--For this mitigation he contends, as a system agreeable to the
ideas of goodness and mercy, which we annex to the supreme Being--Our
aunt seemed willing to adopt this doctrine in favour of the wicked; but
he hinted that no person whatever was so righteous as to be exempted
entirely from punishment in a future state; and that the most pious
Christian upon earth might think himself very happy to get off for
a fast of seven or eight thousand years in the midst of fire and
brimstone. Mrs Tabitha revolted at this dogma, which filled her at once
with horror and indignation--She had recourse to the opinion of Humphry
Clinker, who roundly declared it was the popish doctrine of purgatory,
and quoted scripture in defence of the fire everlasting, prepared for
the devil and his angels--The reverend master Mackcorkendal, and all the
theologists and saints of that persuasion were consulted, and some of
them had doubts about the matter; which doubts and scruples had begun to
infect our aunt, when we took our departure from Edinburgh.

We passed through Linlithgow, where there was an elegant royal palace,
which is now gone to decay, as well as the town itself--This too is
pretty much the case with Stirling, though it still boasts of a fine
old castle in which the kings of Scotland were wont to reside in their
minority--But Glasgow is the pride of Scotland, and, indeed, it might
very well pass for an elegant and flourishing city in any part of
Christendom. There we had the good fortune to be received into the house
of Mr Moore, an eminent surgeon, to whom we were recommended by one of
our friends at Edinburgh; and, truly, he could not have done us more
essential service--Mr Moore is a merry facetious companion, sensible and
shrewd, with a considerable fund of humour; and his wife an agreeable
woman, well bred, kind, and obliging. Kindness, which I take to be
the essence of good-nature and humanity, is the distinguishing
characteristic of the Scotch ladies in their own country--Our landlord
shewed us every thing, and introduced us to all the world at Glasgow;
where, through his recommendation, we were complimented with the freedom
of the town. Considering the trade and opulence of this place, it cannot
but abound with gaiety and diversions. Here is a great number of young
fellows that rival the youth of the capital in spirit and expence; and
I was soon convinced, that all the female beauties of Scotland were
not assembled at the hunters ball in Edinburgh--The town of Glasgow
flourishes in learning as well as in commerce--Here is an university,
with professors in all the different branches of science, liberally
endowed, and judiciously chosen--It was vacation time when I passed,
so that I could not entirely satisfy my curiosity; but their mode of
education is certainly preferable to ours in some respects. The students
are not left to the private instruction of tutors; but taught in public
schools or classes, each science by its particular professor or regent.

My uncle is in raptures with Glasgow--He not only visited all the
manufactures of the place, but made excursions all round to Hamilton,
Paisley, Renfrew, and every other place within a dozen miles, where
there was any thing remarkable to be seen in art or nature. I believe
the exercise, occasioned by those jaunts, was of service to my sister
Liddy, whose appetite and spirits begin to revive--Mrs Tabitha displayed
her attractions as usual, and actually believed she had entangled one
Mr Maclellan, a rich inkle-manufacturer, in her snares; but when matters
came to an explanation, it appeared that his attachment was altogether
spiritual, founded upon an intercourse of devotion, at the meeting of
Mr John Wesley; who, in the course of his evangelical mission, had come
hither in person--At length, we set out for the banks of Lough-Lomond,
passing through the little borough of Dumbarton, or (as my uncle will
have it) Dunbritton, where there is a castle, more curious than any
thing of the kind I had ever seen. It is honoured with a particular
description by the elegant Buchanan, as an arx inexpugnabilis,
and, indeed, it must have been impregnable by the antient manner of
besieging. It is a rock of considerable extent, rising with a double
top, in an angle formed by the confluence of two rivers, the Clyde and
the Leven; perpendicular and inaccessible on all sides, except in one
place where the entrance is fortified; and there is no rising ground
in the neighbourhood from whence it could be damaged by any kind of
battery.

From Dumbarton, the West Highlands appear in the form of huge, dusky
mountains, piled one over another; but this prospect is not at all
surprising to a native of Glamorgan--We have fixed our headquarters
at Cameron, a very neat country-house belonging to commissary Smollet,
where we found every sort of accommodation we could desire--It is
situated like a Druid's temple, in a grove of oak, close by the side
of Lough-Lomond, which is a surprising body of pure transparent water,
unfathomably deep in many places, six or seven miles broad, four and
twenty miles in length, displaying above twenty green islands, covered
with wood; some of them cultivated for corn, and many of them stocked
with red deer--They belong to different gentlemen, whose seats are
scattered along the banks of the lake, which are agreeably romantic
beyond all conception. My uncle and I have left the women at Cameron, as
Mrs Tabitha would by no means trust herself again upon the water, and
to come hither it was necessary to cross a small inlet of the sea, in an
open ferry-boat--This country appears more and more wild and savage the
further we advance; and the People are as different from the Low-land
Scots, in their looks, garb, and language, as the mountaineers of
Brecknock are from the inhabitants of Herefordshire.

When the Lowlanders want to drink a chearupping-cup, they go to the
public house, called the Change-house, and call for a chopine of
two-penny, which is a thin, yeasty beverage, made of malt; not quite so
strong as the table-beer of England,--This is brought in a pewter stoop,
shaped like a skittle, from whence it is emptied into a quaff; that is,
a curious cup made of different pieces of wood, such as box and ebony,
cut into little staves, joined alternately, and secured with delicate
hoops, having two cars or handles--It holds about a gill, is sometimes
tipt round the mouth with silver, and has a plate of the same metal at
bottom, with the landlord's cypher engraved.--The Highlanders, on the
contrary, despise this liquor, and regale themselves with whisky; a malt
spirit, as strong as geneva, which they swallow in great quantities,
without any signs of inebriation. They are used to it from the cradle,
and find it an excellent preservative against the winter cold, which
must be extreme on these mountains--I am told that it is given with
great success to infants, as a cordial in the confluent smallpox, when
the eruption seems to flag, and the symptoms grow unfavourable--The
Highlanders are used to eat much more animal food than falls to the
share of their neighbours in the Low-country--They delight in hunting;
have plenty of deer and other game, with a great number of sheep,
goats, and black-cattle running wild, which they scruple not to kill as
vension, without being much at pains to ascertain the property.

Inverary is but a poor town, though it stands immediately under the
protection of the duke of Argyle, who is a mighty prince in this part of
Scotland. The peasants live in wretched cabins, and seem very poor; but
the gentlemen are tolerably well lodged, and so loving to strangers,
that a man runs some risque of his life from their hospitality--It must
be observed that the poor Highlanders are now seen to disadvantage. They
have been not only disarmed by act of parliament, but also deprived of
their ancient garb, which was both graceful and convenient; and what
is a greater hardship still, they are compelled to wear breeches; a
restraint which they cannot bear with any degree of patience: indeed,
the majority wear them, not in the proper place, but on poles or long
staves over their shoulders--They are even debarred the use of their
striped stuff called Tartane, which was their own manufacture, prized
by them above all the velvets, brocades, and tissues of Europe and Asia.
They now lounge along in loose great coats, of coarse russet, equally
mean and cumbersome, and betray manifest marks of dejection--Certain it
is, the government could not have taken a more effectual method to break
their national spirit.

We have had princely sport in hunting the stag on these mountains. These
are the lonely hills of Morven, where Fingal and his heroes enjoyed the
same pastime; I feel an enthusiastic pleasure when I survey the brown
heath that Ossian wont to tread; and hear the wind whistle through
the bending grass--When I enter our landlord's hall, I look for the
suspended harp of that divine bard, and listen in hopes of hearing the
aerial sound of his respected spirit--The poems of Ossian are in every
mouth--A famous antiquarian of this country, the laird of Macfarlane, at
whose house we dined a few days ago, can repeat them all in the original
Gallick, which has a great affinity to the Welch, not only in the
general sound, but also in a great number of radical words; and I make
no doubt that they are both sprung from the same origin. I was not a
little surprised, when asking a Highlander one day, if he knew where we
should find any game? he replied, 'hu niel Sassenagh', which signifies
no English: the very same answer I should have received from a Welchman,
and almost in the same words. The Highlanders have no other name for
the people of the Low-country, but Sassenagh, or Saxons; a strong
presumption, that the Lowland Scots and the English are derived from the
same stock--The peasants of these hills strongly resemble those of Wales
in their looks, their manners, and habitations; every thing I see, and
hear, and feel, seems Welch--The mountains, vales, and streams; the
air and climate; the beef, mutton, and game, are all Welch--It must be
owned, however, that this people are better Provided than we in some
articles--They have plenty of red deer and roebuck, which are fat
and delicious at this season of the year. Their sea teems with amazing
quantities of the finest fish in the world, and they find means to
procure very good claret at a very small expence.

Our landlord is a man of consequence in this part of the country; a
cadet from the family of Argyle and hereditary captain of one of his
castles--His name, in plain English, is Dougal Campbell; but as there is
a great number of the same appellation, they are distinguished (like
the Welch) by patronimics; and as I have known an antient Briton called
Madoc ap-Morgan ap-Jenkin, ap-Jones, our Highland chief designs himself
Dou'l Mac-amish mac-'oul ichian, signifying Dougal, the son of James,
the son of Dougal, the son of John. He has travelled in the course
of his education, and is disposed to make certain alterations in his
domestic oeconomy; but he finds it impossible to abolish the ancient
customs of the family; some of which are ludicrous enough--His piper for
example, who is an hereditary officer of the household, will not part
with the least particle of his privileges. He has a right to wear the
kilt, or ancient Highland dress, with the purse, pistol, and durk--a
broad yellow ribbon, fixed to the chanter-pipe, is thrown over his
shoulder, and trails along the ground, while he performs the function of
his minstrelsy; and this, I suppose, is analogous to the pennon or flag
which was formerly carried before every knight in battle.--He plays
before the laird every Sunday in his way to the kirk, which he circles
three times, performing the family march which implies defiance to all
the enemies of the clan; and every morning he plays a full hour by the
clock, in the great hall, marching backwards and forwards all the time,
with a solemn pace, attended by the laird's kinsmen, who seem much
delighted with the music--In this exercise, he indulges them with a
variety of pibrochs or airs, suited to the different passions, which he
would either excite or assuage.

Mr Campbell himself, who performs very well on the violin, has an
invincible antipathy to the sound of the Highland bagpipe, which
sings in the nose with a most alarming twang, and, indeed, is quite
intolerable to ears of common sensibility, when aggravated by the echo
of a vaulted hall--He therefore begged the piper would have some
mercy upon him, and dispense with this part of the morning service--A
consultation of the clan being held on this occasion, it was unanimously
agreed, that the laird's request could not be granted without a
dangerous encroachment upon the customs of the family--The piper
declared, he could not give up for a moment the privilege he derived
from his ancestors; nor would the laird's relations forego an
entertainment which they valued above all others--There was no remedy;
Mr Campbell, being obliged to acquiesce, is fain to stop his ears with
cotton; to fortify his head with three or four night-caps and every
morning retire into the penetralia of his habitation, in order to avoid
this diurnal annoyance. When the music ceases, he produces himself at an
open window that looks into the courtyard, which is by this time filled
with a crowd of his vassals and dependents, who worship his first
appearance, by uncovering their heads, and bowing to the earth with
the most humble prostration. As all these people have something to
communicate in the way of proposal, complaint, or petition, they wait
patiently till the laird comes forth, and, following him in his walks,
are favoured each with a short audience in his turn. Two days ago, he
dispatched above an hundred different sollicitors, in walking with us to
the house of a neighbouring gentleman, where we dined by invitation.
Our landlord's housekeeping is equally rough and hospitable, and savours
much of the simplicity of ancient times: the great hall, paved with flat
stones, is about forty-five feet by twenty-two, and serves not only for
a dining-room, but also for a bedchamber, to gentlemen-dependents and
hangers-on of the family. At night, half a dozen occasional beds are
ranged on each side along the wall. These are made of fresh heath,
pulled up by the roots, and disposed in such a manner as to make a very
agreeable couch, where they lie, without any other covering than the
plaid--My uncle and I were indulged with separate chambers and down beds
which we begged to exchange for a layer of heath; and indeed I never
slept so much to my satisfaction. It was not only soft and elastic, but
the plant, being in flower, diffused an agreeable fragrance, which is
wonderfully refreshing and restorative.

Yesterday we were invited to the funeral of an old lady, the grandmother
of a gentleman in this neighbourhood, and found ourselves in the midst
of fifty people, who were regaled with a sumptuous feast, accompanied by
the music of a dozen pipers. In short, this meeting had all the air of
a grand festival; and the guests did such honour to the entertainment,
that many of them could not stand when we were reminded of the business
on which we had met. The company forthwith taking horse, rode in a very
irregular cavalcade to the place of interment, a church, at the distance
of two long miles from the castle. On our arrival, however, we found
we had committed a small oversight, in leaving the corpse behind; so we
were obliged to wheel about, and met the old gentlewoman half way, being
carried upon poles by the nearest relations of her family, and attended
by the coronach, composed of a multitude of old hags, who tore their
hair, beat their breasts, and howled most hideously. At the grave, the
orator, or senachie, pronounced the panegyric of the defunct, every
period being confirmed by a yell of the coronach. The body was committed
to the earth, the pipers playing a pibroch all the time; and all the
company standing uncovered. The ceremony was closed with the discharge
of pistols; then we returned to the castle, resumed the bottle, and
by midnight there was not a sober person in the family, the females
excepted. The 'squire and I were, with some difficulty, permitted to
retire with our landlord in the evening; but our entertainer was a
little chagrined at our retreat; and afterwards seemed to think it a
disparagement to his family, that not above a hundred gallons of whisky
had been drunk upon such a solemn occasion. This morning we got up by
four, to hunt the roebuck, and, in half an hour, found breakfast ready
served in the hall. The hunters consisted of Sir George Colquhoun and
me, as strangers (my uncle not chusing to be of the party), of the laird
in person, the laird's brother, the laird's brother's son, the laird's
sister's son, the laird's father's brother's son, and all their foster
brothers, who are counted parcel of the family: but we were attended by
an infinite number of Gaelly's, or ragged Highlanders without shoes or
stockings.

The following articles formed our morning's repast: one kit of boiled
eggs; a second, full of butter; a third full of cream; an entire cheese,
made of goat's milk; a large earthen pot full of honey; the best part
of a ham; a cold venison pasty; a bushel of oat meal, made in thin cakes
and bannocks, with a small wheaten loaf in the middle for the strangers;
a large stone bottle full of whisky, another of brandy, and a kilderkin
of ale. There was a ladle chained to the cream kit, with curious wooden
bickers to be filled from this reservoir. The spirits were drank out of
a silver quaff, and the ale out of hems: great justice was done to the
collation by the guest in general; one of them in particular ate above
two dozen of hard eggs, with a proportionable quantity of bread, butter,
and honey; nor was one drop of liquor left upon the board. Finally,
a large roll of tobacco was presented by way of desert, and every
individual took a comfortable quid, to prevent the bad effects of the
morning air. We had a fine chace over the mountains, after a roebuck,
which we killed, and I got home time enough to drink tea with Mrs
Campbell and our 'squire. To-morrow we shall set out on our return for
Cameron. We propose to cross the Frith of Clyde, and take the towns of
Greenock and Port-Glasgow in our way. This circuit being finished, we
shall turn our faces to the south, and follow the sun with augmented
velocity, in order to enjoy the rest of the autumn in England, where
Boreas is not quite so biting as he begins already to be on the tops
of these northern hills. But our progress from place to place shall
continue to be specified in these detached journals of

Yours always, J. MELFORD ARGYLSHIRE, Sept. 3.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

About a fortnight is now elapsed, since we left the capital of Scotland,
directing our course towards Stirling, where we lay. The castle of this
place is such another as that of Edinburgh, and affords a surprising
prospect of the windings of the river Forth, which are so extraordinary,
that the distance from hence to Alloa by land, is but forty miles, and
by water it is twenty-four. Alloa is a neat thriving town, that depends
in a great measure on the commerce of Glasgow, the merchants of which
send hither tobacco and other articles, to be deposited in warehouses
for exportation from the Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited
a flourishing iron-work, where, instead of burning wood, they use coal,
which they have the art of clearing in such a manner as frees it from
the sulphur, that would otherwise render the metal too brittle for
working. Excellent coal is found in almost every part of Scotland.

The soil of this district produces scarce any other grain but oats, lid
barley; perhaps because it is poorly cultivated, and almost altogether
uninclosed. The few inclosures they have consist of paultry walls of
loose stones gathered from the fields, which indeed they cover, as if
they had been scattered on purpose. When I expressed my surprize that
the peasants did not disencumber their grounds of these stones; a
gentleman, well acquainted with the theory as well as practice of
farming, assured me that the stones, far from being prejudicial, were
serviceable to the crop. This philosopher had ordered a field of his own
to be cleared, manured and sown with barley, and the produce was more
scanty than before. He caused the stones to be replaced, and next year
the crop was as good as ever. The stones were removed a second time,
and the harvest failed; they were again brought back, and the ground
retrieved its fertility. The same experiment has been tried in different
parts of Scotland with the same success--Astonished at this information,
I desired to know in what manner he accounted for this strange
phenomenon; and he said there were three ways in which the stones
might be serviceable. They might possibly restrain an excess in the
perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative sweats, by which
the human body is sometimes wasted and consumed. They might act as so
many fences to protect the tender blade from the piercing winds of the
spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion of the sun, they might increase
the warmth, so as to mitigate the natural chilness of the soil
and climate--But, surely this excessive perspiration might be more
effectually checked by different kinds of manure, such as ashes, lime,
chalk, or marl, of which last it seems there are many pits in this
kingdom: as for the warmth, it would be much more equally obtained by
inclosures; the cultivation would require less labour; and the ploughs,
harrows, and horses, would not suffer half the damage which they now
sustain.

These north-western parts are by no means fertile in corn. The ground is
naturally barren and moorish. The peasants are poorly lodged, meagre
in their looks, mean in their apparel, and remarkably dirty. This last
reproach they might easily wash off, by means of those lakes, rivers,
and rivulets of pure water, with which they are so liberally supplied by
nature. Agriculture cannot be expected to flourish where the farms are
small, the leases short, and the husbandman begins upon a rack rent,
without a sufficient stock to answer the purposes of improvement. The
granaries of Scotland are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of East
and Mid-Lothian, the Carse of Gowrie, in Perthshire, equal in fertility
to any part of England, and some tracts in Aberdeenshire and Murray,
where I am told the harvest is more early than in Northumberland,
although they lie above two degrees farther north. I have a strong
curiosity to visit many places beyond the Forth and the Tay, such as
Perth, Dundee, Montrose, and Aberdeen, which are towns equally elegant
and thriving; but the season is too far advanced to admit of this
addition to my original plan.

I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow, which, to the best of my
recollection and judgment, is one of the prettiest towns in Europe; and,
without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing in Great Britain.
In short, it is a perfect bee-hive in point of industry. It stands
partly on a gentle declivity; but the greatest part of it is in a plain,
watered by the river Clyde. The streets are straight, open, airy, and
well paved; and the houses lofty and well built of hewn stone. At the
upper end of the town, there is a venerable cathedral, that may be
compared with York-minster or West-minster; and, about the middle of the
descent from this to the Cross, is the college, a respectable pile
of building, with all manner of accommodation for the professors and
students, including an elegant library, and a observatory well provided
with astronomical instruments. The number of inhabitants is said to
amount to thirty thousand; and marks of opulence and independency appear
in every quarter of this commercial city, which, however, is not without
its inconveniences and defects. The water of their public pumps is
generally hard and brackish, an imperfection the loss excusable, as
the river Clyde runs by their doors, in the lower part of the town; and
there are rivulets and springs above the cathedral, sufficient to fill a
large reservoir with excellent water, which might be thence distributed
to all the different parts of the city. It is of more consequence to
consult the health of the inhabitants in this article than to employ so
much attention in beautifying their town with new streets, squares, and
churches. Another defect, not so easily remedied, is the shallowness
of the river, which will not float vessels of any burthen within ten or
twelve miles of the city; so that the merchants are obliged to load and
unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow, situated about fourteen
miles nearer the mouth of the Frith, where it is about two miles broad.

The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of enterprise--Mr Moore, a
surgeon, to whom I was recommended from Edinburgh, introduced me to all
the principal merchants of the place. Here I became acquainted with
Mr Cochran, who may be stiled one of the sages of this kingdom. He was
first magistrate at the time of the last rebellion. I sat as member
when he was examined in the house of commons, upon which occasion Mr P--
observed he had never heard such a sensible evidence given at that bar.
I was also introduced to Dr John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman
spirit, who is the father of the linen manufacture in this place, and
was the great promoter of the city workhouse, infirmary, and other works
of public utility. Had he lived in ancient Rome, he would have been
honoured with a statue at the public expence. I moreover conversed with
one Mr G--ssf--d, whom I take to be one of the greatest merchants in
Europe. In the last war, he is said to have had at one time five and
twenty ships with their cargoes, his own property, and to have traded
for above half a million sterling a-year. The last war was a fortunate
period for the commerce of Glasgow--The merchants, considering that
their ships bound for America, launching out at once into the Atlantic
by the north of Ireland, pursued a track very little frequented
by privateers, resolved to insure one another, and saved a very
considerable sum by this resolution, as few or none of their ships were
taken--You must know I have a sort of national attachment to this part
of Scotland--The great church dedicated to St Mongah, the river Clyde,
and other particulars that smack of our Welch language and customs,
contribute to flatter me with the notion, that these people are the
descendants of the Britons, who once possessed this country. Without
all question, this was a Cumbrian kingdom: its capital was Dumbarton (a
corruption of Dunbritton) which still exists as a royal borough, at
the influx of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. The same
neighbourhood gave birth to St Patrick, the apostle of Ireland, at a
place where there is still a church and village, which retain his name.
Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman wall, built in the reign
of Antonine, from the Clyde to the Forth, and fortified with castles, to
restrain the incursions of the Scots or Caledonians, who inhabited
the West-Highlands. In a line parallel to this wall, the merchants of
Glasgow have determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the two Firths
which will be of incredible advantage to their commerce, in transporting
merchandize from one side of the island to the other.

From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde, which is a delightful stream,
adorned on both sides with villas, towns, and villages. Here is no want
of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields interspersed; but on this side
of Glasgow, there is little other grain than oats and barley; the first
are much better, the last much worse, than those of the same species in
England. I wonder, there is so little rye, which is a grain that will
thrive in almost any soil; and it is still more surprising, that the
cultivation of potatoes should be so much neglected in the Highlands,
where the poor people have not meal enough to supply them with bread
through the winter. On the other side of the river are the towns of
Paisley and Renfrew. The first, from an inconsiderable village, is
become one of the most flourishing places of the kingdom, enriched
by the linen, cambrick, flowered lawn, and silk manufactures. It was
formerly noted for a rich monastery of the monks of Clugny, who wrote
the famous Scoti-Chronicon, called The Black Book of Paisley. The old
abbey still remains, converted into a dwelling-house, belonging to the
earl of Dundonald. Renfrew is a pretty town, on the banks of Clyde,
capital of the shire, which was heretofore the patrimony of the Stuart
family, and gave the title of baron to the king's eldest son, which is
still assumed by the prince of Wales.

The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at Dunbritton, where it
widens into an aestuary or frith, being augmented by the influx of the
Leven. On this spot stands the castle formerly called Alcluyd, washed,
by these two rivers on all sides, except a narrow isthmus, which at
every spring-tide is overflowed. The whole is a great curiosity, from
the quality and form of the rock, as well as from the nature of its
situation--We now crossed the water of Leven, which, though nothing near
so considerable as the Clyde, is much more transparent, pastoral, and
delightful. This charming stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and
through a tract of four miles pursues its winding course, murmuring over
a bed of pebbles, till it joins the Frith at Dunbritton. A very little
above its source, on the lake, stands the house of Cameron, belonging to
Mr Smollett, so embosomed in an oak wood, that we did not see it till
we were within fifty yards of the door. I have seen the Lago di Garda,
Albano, De Vico, Bolsena, and Geneva, and, upon my honour, I prefer
Lough-Lomond to them all, a preference which is certainly owing to the
verdant islands that seem to float upon its surface, affording the most
inchanting objects of repose to the excursive view. Nor are the banks
destitute of beauties, which even partake of the sublime. On this side
they display a sweet variety of woodland, cornfield, and pasture, with
several agreeable villas emerging as it were out of the lake, till, at
some distance, the prospect terminates in huge mountains covered with
heath, which being in the bloom, affords a very rich covering of purple.
Every thing here is romantic beyond imagination. This country is justly
stiled the Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't doubt but it may vie with
Arcadia in every thing but climate.--I am sure it excels it in verdure,
wood, and water.--What say you to a natural bason of pure water, near
thirty miles long, and in some places seven miles broad, and in many
above a hundred fathom deep, having four and twenty habitable islands,
some of them stocked with deer, and all of them covered with wood;
containing immense quantities of delicious fish, salmon, pike, trout,
perch, flounders, eels, and powans, the last a delicate kind of
fresh-water herring peculiar to this lake; and finally communicating
with the sea, by sending off the Leven, through which all those species
(except the powan) make their exit and entrance occasionally?

Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to this river, by Dr
Smollett, who was born on the banks of it, within two miles of the
place where I am now writing.--It is at least picturesque and accurately
descriptive, if it has no other merit.--There is an idea of truth in an
agreeable landscape taken from nature, which pleases me more than the
gayest fiction which the most luxuriant fancy can display.

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper is full, I must reserve
them till the next occasion. I shall only observe at present, that I am
determined to penetrate at least forty miles into the Highlands, which
now appear like a vast fantastic vision in the clouds, inviting the
approach of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Aug. 28.

ODE TO LEVEN-WATER

On Leven's banks, while free to rove, And tune the rural pipe to love; I
envied not the happiest swain That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.

Pure stream! in whose transparent wave My youthful limbs I wont to
lave; No torrents stain thy limpid source; No rocks impede thy dimpling
course, That sweetly warbles o'er its bed, With white, round, polish'd
pebbles spread; While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood In myriads cleave
thy crystal flood; The springing trout in speckled pride; The salmon,
monarch of the tide; The ruthless pike, intent on war; The silver eel,
and motled par.*

Devolving from thy parent lake, A charming maze thy waters make, By
bow'rs of birch, and groves of pine, And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.

Still on thy banks so gayly green, May num'rous herds and flocks be
seen, And lasses chanting o'er the pail, And shepherds piping in the
dale, And ancient faith that knows no guile, And industry imbrown'd with
toil, And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd, The blessings they enjoy
to guard.

     * The par is a small fish, not unlike the smelt, which it
     rivals in delicacy and flavour.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

If I was disposed to be critical, I should say this house of Cameron is
too near the lake, which approaches, on one side, to within six or seven
yards of the window. It might have been placed in a higher site, which
would have afforded a more extensive prospect and a drier atmosphere;
but this imperfection is not chargeable on the present proprietor, who
purchased it ready built, rather than be at the trouble of repairing his
own family-house of Bonhill, which stands two miles from hence on the
Leven, so surrounded with plantation, that it used to be known by the
name of the Mavis (or thrush) Nest. Above that house is a romantic glen
or clift of a mountain, covered with hanging woods having at bottom a
stream of fine water that forms a number of cascades in its descent to
join the Leven; so that the scene is quite enchanting. A captain of a
man of war, who had made the circuit of the globe with Mr Anson, being
conducted to this glen, exclaimed, 'Juan Fernandez, by God!'

Indeed, this country would be a perfect paradise, if it was not, like
Wales, cursed with a weeping climate, owing to the same cause in both,
the neighbourhood of high mountains, and a westerly situation, exposed
to the vapours of the Atlantic ocean. This air, however, notwithstanding
its humidity, is so healthy, that the natives are scarce ever visited by
any other disease than the smallpox, and certain cutaneous evils, which
are the effects of dirty living, the great and general reproach of the
commonalty of this kingdom. Here are a great many living monuments of
longaevity; and among the rest a person, whom I treat with singular
respect, as a venerable druid, who has lived near ninety years,
without pain or sickness, among oaks of his own planting.--He was once
proprietor of these lands; but being of a projecting spirit, some of
his schemes miscarried, and he was obliged to part with his possession,
which hath shifted hands two or three times since that period; but every
succeeding proprietor hath done every thing in his power, to make
his old age easy and comfortable. He has a sufficiency to procure
the necessaries of life; and he and his old woman reside in a small
convenient farm-house, having a little garden which he cultivates with
his own hands. This ancient couple live in great health, peace, and
harmony, and, knowing no wants, enjoy the perfection of content. Mr
Smollet calls him the admiral, because he insists upon steering his
pleasure-boat upon the lake; and he spends most of his time in ranging
through the woods, which he declares he enjoys as much as if they were
still his own property--I asked him the other day, if he was never sick,
and he answered, Yes; he had a slight fever the year before the union.
If he was not deaf, I should take much pleasure in his conversation; for
he is very intelligent, and his memory is surprisingly retentive--These
are the happy effects of temperance, exercise, and good nature--
Notwithstanding all his innocence, however, he was the cause of great
perturbation to my man Clinker, whose natural superstition has been
much injured, by the histories of witches, fairies, ghosts, and goblins,
which he has heard in this country--On the evening after our arrival,
Humphry strolled into the wood, in the course of his meditation, and all
at once the admiral stood before him, under the shadow of a spreading
oak. Though the fellow is far from being timorous in cases that are not
supposed preternatural, he could not stand the sight of this apparition,
but ran into the kitchen, with his hair standing on end, staring wildly,
and deprived of utterance. Mrs Jenkins, seeing him in this condition,
screamed aloud, 'Lord have mercy upon us, he has seen something!' Mrs
Tabitha was alarmed, and the whole house in confusion. When he was
recruited with a dram, I desired him to explain the meaning of all this
agitation; and, with some reluctance, he owned he had seen a spirit,
in the shape of an old man with a white beard, a black cap, and a plaid
night-gown. He was undeceived by the admiral in person, who, coming in
at this juncture, appeared to be a creature of real flesh and blood.

Do you know how we fare in this Scottish paradise? We make free with our
landlord's mutton, which is excellent, his poultry-yard, his garden,
his dairy, and his cellar, which are all well stored. We have delicious
salmon, pike, trout, perch, par, &c. at the door, for the taking. The
Frith of Clyde, on the other side of the hill, supplies us with mullet,
red and grey, cod, mackarel, whiting, and a variety of sea-fish,
including the finest fresh herrings I ever tasted. We have sweet, juicy
beef, and tolerable veal, with delicate bread from the little town of
Dunbritton; and plenty of partridge, growse, heath cock, and other game
in presents.

We have been visited by all the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, and they
have entertained us at their houses, not barely with hospitality, but
with such marks of cordial affection, as one would wish to find among
near relations, after an absence of many years.

I told you, in my last, I had projected an excursion to the Highlands,
which project I have now happily executed, under the auspices of Sir
George Colquhoun, a colonel in the Dutch service, who offered himself
as our conductor on this occasion. Leaving our women at Cameron, to
the care and inspection of Lady H-- C--, we set out on horseback for
Inverary, the county town of Argyle, and dined on the road with the
Laird of Macfarlane, the greatest genealogist I ever knew in any
country, and perfectly acquainted with all the antiquities of Scotland.

The Duke of Argyle has an old castle in Inverary, where he resides when
he is in Scotland; and hard by is the shell of a noble Gothic palace,
built by the last duke, which, when finished, will be a great ornament
to this part of the Highlands. As for Inverary, it is a place of very
little importance.

This country is amazingly wild, especially towards the mountains, which
are heaped upon the backs of one another, making a most stupendous
appearance of savage nature, with hardly any signs of cultivation, or
even of population. All is sublimity, silence, and solitude. The people
live together in glens or bottoms, where they are sheltered from the
cold and storms of winter: but there is a margin of plain ground spread
along the sea side, which is well inhabited and improved by the arts of
husbandry; and this I take to be one of the most agreeable tracts of the
whole island; the sea not only keeps it warm, and supplies it with fish,
but affords one of the most ravishing prospects in the whole world; I
mean the appearance of the Hebrides, or Western Islands to the number
of three hundred, scattered as far as the eye can reach, in the most
agreeable confusion. As the soil and climate of the Highlands are but
ill adapted to the cultivation of corn, the people apply themselves
chiefly to the breeding and feeding of black cattle, which turn to good
account. Those animals run wild all the winter, without any shelter or
subsistence, but what they can find among the heath. When the snow lies
so deep and hard, that they cannot penetrate to the roots of the grass,
they make a diurnal progress, guided by a sure instinct, to the seaside
at low water, where they feed on the alga marina, and other plants that
grow upon the beach.

Perhaps this branch of husbandry, which required very little attendance
and labour, is one of the principal causes of that idleness and want of
industry, which distinguishes these mountaineers in their own country.
When they come forth into the world, they become as diligent and alert
as any people upon earth. They are undoubtedly a very distinct species
from their fellow subjects of the Lowlands, against whom they indulge
an ancient spirit of animosity; and this difference is very discernible
even among persons of family and education. The Lowlanders are generally
cool and circumspect, the Highlanders fiery and ferocious:' but this
violence of their passions serves only to inflame the zeal of their
devotion to strangers, which is truly enthusiastic.

We proceeded about twenty miles beyond Inverary, to the house of a
gentleman, a friend of our conductor, where we stayed a few days, and
were feasted in such a manner, that I began to dread the consequence to
my constitution.

Notwithstanding the solitude that prevails among these mountains, there
is no want of people in the Highlands. I am credibly informed that the
duke of Argyle can assemble five thousand men in arms, of his own clan
and surname, which is Campbell; and there is besides a tribe of the same
appellation, whose chief' is the Earl of Breadalbine. The Macdonalds
are as numerous, and remarkably warlike: the Camerons, M'Leods, Frasers,
Grants, M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Phersons, M'Intoshes, are powerful clans;
so that if all the Highlanders, including the inhabitants of the Isles,
were united, they could bring into the field an army of forty thousand
fighting men, capable of undertaking the most dangerous enterprize. We
have lived to see four thousand of them, without discipline, throw
the whole kingdom of Great Britain into confusion. They attacked and
defeated two armies of regular troops accustomed to service. They
penetrated into the centre of England; and afterwards marched back
with deliberation, in the face of two other armies, through an enemy's
country, where every precaution was taken to cut off their retreat. I
know not any other people in Europe, who, without the use or knowledge
of arms, will attack regular forces sword in hand, if their chief
will head them in battle. When disciplined, they cannot fail of being
excellent soldiers. They do not walk like the generality of mankind, but
trot and bounce like deer, as if they moved upon springs. They greatly
excel the Lowlanders in all the exercises that require agility; they are
incredibly abstemious, and patient of hunger and fatigue,--so steeled
against the weather, that in travelling, even when the ground is covered
with snow, they never look for a house, or any other shelter but their
plaid, in which they wrap themselves up, and go to sleep under the cope
of heaven. Such people, in quality of soldiers, must be invincible,
when the business is to perform quick marches in a difficult country,
to strike sudden strokes, beat up the enemy's quarters, harrass their
cavalry, and perform expeditions without the formality of magazines,
baggage, forage, and artillery. The chieftainship of the Highlanders
is a very dangerous influence operating at the extremity of the island,
where the eyes and hands of government cannot be supposed to see [and]
act with precision and vigour. In order to break the force of clanship,
administration has always practised the political maxim, Divide et
impera. The legislature hath not only disarmed these mountaineers, but
also deprived them of their antient garb, which contributed in a great
measure to keep up their military spirit; and their slavish tenures are
all dissolved by act of parliament; so that they are at present as
free and independent of their chiefs, as the law can make them: but the
original attachment still remains, and is founded on something prior to
the feudal system, about which the writers of this age have made such a
pother, as if it was a new discovery, like the Copernican system. Every
peculiarity of policy, custom, and even temperament, is affectedly
traced to this origin, as if the feudal constitution had not been common
to almost all the natives of Europe. For my part, I expect to see the
use of trunk-hose and buttered ale ascribed to the influence of the
feudal system. The connection between the clans and their chiefs is,
without all doubt, patriarchal. It is founded on hereditary regard
and affection, cherished through a long succession of ages. The clan
consider the chief as their father, they bear his name, they believe
themselves descended from his family, and they obey him as their lord,
with all the ardour of filial love and veneration; while he, on his
part, exerts a paternal authority, commanding, chastising, rewarding,
protecting, and maintaining them as his own children. If the legislature
would entirely destroy this connection, it must compel the Highlanders
to change their habitation and their names. Even this experiment has
been formerly tried without success--In the reign of James VI a battle
was fought within a few short miles of this place, between two clans,
the M'Gregors and the Colquhouns, in which the latter were defeated: the
Laird of M'Gregor made such a barbarous use of his victory, that he was
forfeited and outlawed by act of parliament: his lands were given to the
family of Montrose, and his clan were obliged to change their name.
They obeyed so far, as to call themselves severally Campbell, Graham, or
Drummond, the surnames of the families of Argyle, Montrose, and Perth,
that they might enjoy the protection of those houses; but they still
added M'Gregor to their new appellation; and as their chief was deprived
of his estate, they robbed and plundered for his subsistence.--Mr
Cameron of Lochiel, the chief of that clan, whose father was attainted
for having been concerned in the last rebellion, returning from France
in obedience to a proclamation and act of parliament, passed at the
beginning of the late war, payed a visit to his own country, and hired a
farm in the neighbourhood of his father's house, which had been burnt
to the ground. The clan, though ruined and scattered, no sooner heard of
his arrival than they flocked to him from all quarters, to welcome his
return, and in a few days stocked his farm with seven hundred black
cattle, which they had saved in the general wreck of their affairs: but
their beloved chief, who was a promising youth, did not live to enjoy
the fruits of their fidelity and attachment.

The most effectual method I know to weaken, and at length destroy this
influence, is to employ the commonalty in such a manner as to give them
a taste of property and independence. In vain the government grants them
advantageous leases on the forfeited estates, if they have no property
to prosecute the means of improvement--The sea is an inexhaustible fund
of riches; but the fishery cannot be carried on without vessels, casks,
salt, lines, nets, and other tackle. I conversed with a sensible man of
this country, who, from a real spirit of patriotism had set up a fishery
on the coast, and a manufacture of coarse linen, for the employment of
the poor Highlanders. Cod is here in such plenty, that he told me he
had seen several hundred taken on one line, at one hawl--It must be
observed, however, that the line was of immense length, and had two
thousand hooks, baited with muscles; but the fish was so superior to
the cod caught on the banks of Newfoundland, that his correspondent at
Lisbon sold them immediately at his own price, although Lent was just
over when they arrived, and the people might be supposed quite cloyed
with this kind of diet--His linen manufacture was likewise in a
prosperous way, when the late war intervening, all his best hands were
pressed into the service.

It cannot be expected, that the gentlemen of this country should execute
commercial schemes to render their vassals independent; nor, indeed, are
such schemes suited to their way of life and inclination; but a company
of merchants might, with proper management, turn to good account a
fishery established in this part of Scotland--Our people have a strange
itch to colonize America, when the uncultivated parts of our own island
might be settled to greater advantage.

After having rambled through the mountains and glens of Argyle, we
visited the adjacent islands of Ila, Jura, Mull, and Icomkill. In the
first, we saw the remains of a castle, built in a lake, where Macdonald,
lord or king of the isles, formerly resided. Jura is famous for having
given birth to one Mackcrain, who lived one hundred and eighty years
in one house, and died in the reign of Charles the Second. Mull affords
several bays, where there is safe anchorage: in one of which, the
Florida, a ship of the Spanish armada, was blown up by one of Mr
Smollett's ancestors--About forty years ago, John duke of Argyle is
said to have consulted the Spanish registers, by which it appeared,
that this ship had the military chest on board--He employed experienced
divers to examine the wreck; and they found the hull of the vessel still
entire, but so covered with sand, that they could not make their way
between decks; however, they picked up several pieces of plate, that
were scattered about in the bay, and a couple of fine brass cannon.

Icolmkill, or Iona, is a small island which St Columba chose for his
habitation--It was respected for its sanctity, and college or seminary
of ecclesiastics--Part of its church is still standing, with the
tombs of several Scottish, Irish, and Danish sovereigns, who were
here interred--These islanders are very bold and dexterous watermen,
consequently the better adapted to the fishery: in their manners they
are less savage and impetuous than their countrymen on the continent;
and they speak the Erse or Gaelick in its greatest purity.

Having sent round our horses by land, we embarked in the distinct of
Cowal, for Greenock, which is a neat little town, on the other side of
the Frith, with a curious harbour formed by three stone jetties, carried
out a good way into the sea--Newport-Glasgow is such another place,
about two miles higher up. Both have a face of business and plenty, and
are supported entirely by the shipping of Glasgow, of which I counted
sixty large vessels in these harbours--Taking boat again at Newport,
we were in less than an hour landed on the other side, within two short
miles of our head-quarters, where we found our women in good health and
spirits. They had been two days before joined by Mr. Smollett and his
lady, to whom we have such obligations as I cannot mention, even to you,
without blushing.

To-morrow we shall bid adieu to the Scotch Arcadia, and begin our
progress to the southward, taking our way by Lanerk and Nithsdale,
to the west borders of England. I have received so much advantage and
satisfaction from this tour, that if my health suffers no revolution in
the winter, I believe I shall be tempted to undertake another
expedition to the Northern extremity of Caithness, unencumbered by those
impediments which now clog the heels of,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Sept. 6.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

Never did poor prisoner long for deliverance, more than I have longed
for an opportunity to disburthen my cares into your friendly bosom;
and the occasion which now presents itself, is little less than
miraculous--Honest Saunders Macawly, the travelling Scotchman, who goes
every year to Wales, is now at Glasgow, buying goods, and coming to pay
his respects to our family, has undertaken to deliver this letter
into your own hand--We have been six weeks in Scotland, and seen the
principal towns of the kingdom, where we have been treated with
great civility--The people are very courteous; and the country being
exceedingly romantic, suits my turn and inclinations--I contracted some
friendships at Edinburgh, which is a large and lofty city, full of gay
company; and, in particular, commenced an intimate correspondence with
one miss R--t--n, an amiable young lady of my own age, whose charms
seemed to soften, and even to subdue the stubborn heart of my brother
Jery; but he no sooner left the place than he relapsed into his former
insensibility--I feel, however, that this indifference is not the family
constitution--I never admitted but one idea of love, and that has taken
such root in my heart, as to be equally proof against all the pulls of
discretion, and the frosts of neglect.

Dear Letty! I had an alarming adventure at the hunters ball in
Edinburgh--While I sat discoursing with a friend in a corner, all at
once the very image of Wilson stood before me, dressed exactly as he was
in the character of Aimwell! It was one Mr Gordon, whom I had not seen
before--Shocked at the sudden apparition, I fainted away, and threw the
whole assembly in confusion--However, the cause of my disorder remained
a secret to every body but my brother, who was likewise struck with
the resemblance, and scolded after we came home--I am very sensible
of Jery's affection, and know he spoke as well with a view to my own
interest and happiness, as in regard to the honour of the family; but
I cannot bear to have my wounds probed severely--I was not so much
affected by the censure he passed upon my own indiscretion, as with the
reflection he made on the conduct of Wilson. He observed, that if he
was really the gentleman he pretended to be, and harboured nothing but
honourable designs, he would have vindicated his pretensions in the face
of day--This remark made a deep impression upon my mind--I endeavoured
to conceal my thoughts; and this endeavour had a bad effect upon my
health and spirits; so it was thought necessary that I should go to the
Highlands, and drink the goat-milk-whey.

We went accordingly to Lough Lomond, one of the most enchanting spots
in the whole world; and what with this remedy, which I had every morning
fresh from the mountains, and the pure air, and chearful company, I
have recovered my flesh and appetite; though there is something still
at bottom, which it is not in the power of air, exercise, company, or
medicine to remove--These incidents would not touch me so nearly, if I
had a sensible confidant to sympathize with my affliction, and comfort
me with wholesome advice--I have nothing of this kind, except Win
Jenkins, who is really a good body in the main, but very ill qualified
for such an office--The poor creature is weak in her nerves, as well
as in her understanding; otherwise I might have known the true name and
character of that unfortunate youth--But why do I call him unfortunate?
perhaps the epithet is more applicable to me for having listened to the
false professions of--But, hold! I have as yet no right, and sure I have
no inclination to believe any thing to the prejudice of his honour--In
that reflection I shall still exert my patience. As for Mrs Jenkins, she
herself is really an object of compassion--Between vanity, methodism,
and love, her head is almost turned. I should have more regard for her,
however, if she had been more constant in the object of her affection;
but, truly, she aimed at conquest, and flirted at the same time with my
uncle's footman, Humphrey Clinker, who is really a deserving young man,
and one Dutton, my brother's valet de chambre, a debauched fellow; who,
leaving Win in the lurch, ran away with another man's bride at Berwick.

My dear Willis, I am truly ashamed of my own sex--We complain of
advantages which the men take of our youth, inexperience, insensibility,
and all that; but I have seen enough to believe, that our sex in general
make it their business to ensnare the other; and for this purpose,
employ arts which are by no means to be justified--In point of
constancy, they certainly have nothing to reproach the male part of
the creation--My poor aunt, without any regard to her years and
imperfections, has gone to market with her charms in every place where
she thought she had the least chance to dispose of her person, which,
however, hangs still heavy on her hands--I am afraid she has used even
religion as a decoy, though it has not answered her expectation--She has
been praying, preaching, and catechising among the methodists, with
whom this country abounds; and pretends to have such manifestations and
revelations, as even Clinker himself can hardly believe, though the poor
fellow is half crazy with enthusiasm. As for Jenkins, she affects
to take all her mistress's reveries for gospel. She has also her
heart-heavings and motions of the spirit; and God forgive me if I think
uncharitably, but all this seems to me to be downright hypocrisy and
deceit--Perhaps, indeed, the poor girl imposes on herself--She is
generally in a flutter, and is much subject to vapours--Since we came
to Scotland, she has seen apparitions, and pretends to prophesy--If I
could put faith in all these supernatural visitations, I should think
myself abandoned of grace; for I have neither seen, heard, nor felt
anything of this nature, although I endeavour to discharge the duties
of religion with all the sincerity, zeal, and devotion, that is in the
power of,

Dear Letty, your ever affectionate, LYDIA MELFORD GLASGOW, Sept. 7.

We are so far on our return to Brambleton-hall; and I would fain hope
we shall take Gloucester in our way, in which case I shall have the
inexpressible pleasure of embracing my dear Willis--Pray remember me to
my worthy governess.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

Sunders Macully, the Scotchman, who pushes directly for Vails, has
promised to give it you into your own hand, and therefore I would not
miss the opportunity to let you know as I am still in the land of the
living: and yet I have been on the brink of the other world since I sent
you my last letter.--We went by sea to another kingdom called Fife, and
coming back, had like to have gone to pot in a storm.--What between the
frite and sickness, I thought I should have brought my heart up; even
Mr Clinker was not his own man for eight and forty hours after we
got ashore. It was well for some folks that we scaped drownding; for
mistress was very frexious, and seemed but indifferently prepared for
a change; but, thank God, she was soon put in a better frame by the
private exaltations of the reverend Mr Macrocodile.--We afterwards
churned to Starling and Grascow, which are a kiple of handsome towns;
and then we went to a gentleman's house at Loff-Loming, which is a
wonderful sea of fresh water, with a power of hylands in the midst
on't.--They say as how it has n'er a bottom, and was made by a musician
and, truly, I believe it; for it is not in the coarse of nature.--It has
got waves without wind, fish without fins, and a floating hyland; and
one of them is a crutch-yard, where the dead are buried; and always
before the person dies, a bell rings of itself to give warning.

O Mary! this is the land of congyration--The bell knolled when we
were there--I saw lights, and heard lamentations.--The gentleman, our
landlord, has got another house, which he was fain to quit, on account
of a mischievous ghost, that would not suffer people to lie in their
beds. The fairies dwell in a hole of Kairmann, a mounting hard by; and
they steal away the good women that are in the straw, if so be as how
there a'n't a horshoe nailed to the door: and I was shewn an ould vitch,
called Elspath Ringavey, with a red petticoat, bleared eyes, and a mould
of grey bristles on her sin.--That she mought do me no harm, I crossed
her hand with a taster, and bid her tell my fortune; and she told me
such things descriving Mr Clinker to a hair--but it shall ne'er be said,
that I minchioned a word of the matter.--As I was troubled with fits,
she advised me to bathe in the loff, which was holy water; and so I
went in the morning to a private place along with the house-maid, and
we bathed in our birth-day soot, after the fashion of the country; and
behold whilst we dabbled in the loff, sir George Coon started up with a
gun; but we clapt our hands to our faces, and passed by him to the place
where we had left our smocks--A civil gentleman would have turned his
head another way.--My comfit is, he knew not which was which; and, as
the saying is, all cats in the dark are grey--Whilst we stayed at
Loff-Loming, he and our two squires went three or four days churning
among the wild men of the mountings; a parcel of selvidges that lie in
caves among the rocks, devour young children, speak Velch, but the vords
are different. Our ladies would not part with Mr Clinker, because he is
so stout and so pyehouse, that he fears neither man nor devils, if so be
as they don't take him by surprise.--Indeed, he was once so flurried by
an operition, that he had like to have sounded.--He made believe as if
it had been the ould edmiral; but the old edmiral could not have made
his air to stand on end, and his teeth to shatter; but he said so in
prudence, that the ladies mought not be afear'd. Miss Liddy has been
puny, and like to go into a decline--I doubt her pore art is too
tinder--but the got's-fey has set her on her legs again.--You nows
got's-fey is mother's milk to a Velch woman. As for mistress, blessed be
God, she ails nothing.--Her stomick is good, and she improves in grease
and godliness; but, for all that, she may have infections like other
people, and I believe, she wouldn't be sorry to be called your ladyship,
whenever sir George thinks proper to ax the question--But, for my part,
whatever I may see or hear, not a praticle shall ever pass the lips of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS GRASCO, Sept. 7.

Remember me, as usual, to Sall.--We are now coming home, though not the
nearest road.--I do suppose, I shall find the kitten a fine boar at my
return.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

Once more I tread upon English ground, which I like not the worse for
the six weeks' ramble I have made among the woods and mountains of
Caledonia; no offence to the land of cakes, where bannocks grow upon
straw. I never saw my uncle in such health and spirits as he now enjoys.
Liddy is perfectly recovered; and Mrs Tabitha has no reason to complain.
Nevertheless, I believe, she was, till yesterday, inclined to give the
whole Scotch nation to the devil, as a pack of insensible brutes, upon
whom her accomplishments had been displayed in vain.--At every place
where we halted, did she mount the stage, and flourished her rusty arms,
without being able to make one conquest. One of her last essays was
against the heart of Sir George Colquhoun, with whom she fought all
the weapons more than twice over.--She was grave and gay by turns--she
moralized and methodized--she laughed, and romped, and danced, and sung,
and sighed, and ogled, and lisped, and fluttered, and flattered--but all
was preaching to the desart. The baronet, being a well-bred man, carried
his civilities as far as she could in conscience expect, and, if evil
tongues are to be believed, some degrees farther; but he was too much a
veteran in gallantry, as well as in war, to fall into any ambuscade that
she could lay for his affection--While we were absent in the Highlands,
she practised also upon the laird of Ladrishmore, and even gave him
the rendezvous in the wood of Drumscailloch; but the laird had such
a reverend care of his own reputation, that he came attended with the
parson of the parish, and nothing passed but spiritual communication.
After all these miscarriages, our aunt suddenly recollected lieutenant
Lismahago, whom, ever since our first arrival at Edinburgh, she seemed
to have utterly forgot; but now she expressed her hopes of seeing him at
Dumfries, according to his promise.

We set out from Glasgow by the way of Lanerk, the county-town of
Clydesdale, in the neighbourhood of which, the whole river Clyde,
rushing down a steep rock, forms a very noble and stupendous cascade.
Next day we were obliged to halt in a small borough, until the carriage,
which had received some damage, should be repaired; and here we met
with an incident which warmly interested the benevolent spirit of Mr
Bramble--As we stood at the window of an inn that fronted the public
prison, a person arrived on horseback, genteelly, tho' plainly, dressed
in a blue frock, with his own hair cut short, and a gold-laced hat upon
his head.--Alighting, and giving his horse to the landlord, he advanced
to an old man who was at work in paving the street, and accosted him in
these words: 'This is hard work for such an old man as you.'--So
saying, he took the instrument out of his hand, and began to thump the
pavement.--After a few strokes, 'Have you never a son (said he) to ease
you of this labour?' 'Yes, an please Your honour (replied the senior),
I have three hopeful lads, but, at present, they are out of the way.'
'Honour not me (cried the stranger); but more becomes me to honour your
grey hairs. Where are those sons you talk of?' The ancient paviour said,
his eldest son was a captain in the East Indies; and the youngest had
lately inlisted as a soldier, in hopes of prospering like his brother.
The gentleman desiring to know what was become of the second, he wiped
his eyes, and owned, he had taken upon him his old father's debts, for
which he was now in the prison hard by.

The traveller made three quick steps towards the jail, then turning
short, 'Tell me (said he), has that unnatural captain sent you nothing
to relieve your distress?' 'Call him not unnatural (replied the other);
God's blessing be upon him! he sent me a great deal of money; but I made
a bad use of it; I lost it by being security for a gentleman that was
my landlord, and was stript of all I had in the world besides.' At that
instant a young man, thrusting out his head and neck between two iron
bars in the prison-window, exclaimed, 'Father! father! if my brother
William is in life, that's he!' 'I am!--I am!--(cried the stranger,
clasping the old man in his arms, and shedding a flood of tears)--I
am your son Willy, sure enough!' Before the father, who was quite
confounded, could make any return to this tenderness, a decent old woman
bolting out from the door of a poor habitation, cried, 'Where is my
bairn? where is my dear Willy?'--The captain no sooner beheld her, than
he quitted his father, and ran into her embrace.

I can assure you, my uncle, who saw and heard every thing that passed,
was as much moved as any one of the parties concerned in this pathetic
recognition--He sobbed, and wept, and clapped his hands, and hollowed,
and finally ran down into the street. By this time, the captain had
retired with his parents, and all the inhabitants of the place were
assembled at the door.--Mr Bramble, nevertheless, pressed thro' the
crowd, and entering the house, 'Captain (said he), I beg the favour of
your acquaintance. I would have travelled a hundred miles to see this
affecting scene; and I shall think myself happy if you and your parents
will dine with me at the public house.' The captain thanked him for his
kind invitation, which, he said, he would accept with pleasure; but in
the mean time, he could not think of eating or drinking, while his poor
brother was in trouble. He forthwith deposited a sum equal to the debt
in the hands of the magistrate, who ventured to set his brother at
liberty without farther process; and then the whole family repaired to
the inn with my uncle, attended by the crowd, the individuals of which
shook their townsman by the hand, while he returned their caresses
without the least sign of pride or affectation.

This honest favourite of fortune, whose name was Brown, told my uncle,
that he had been bred a weaver, and, about eighteen years ago, had,
from a spirit of idleness and dissipation, enlisted as a soldier in the
service of the East-India company; that, in the course of duty, he had
the good fortune to attract the notice and approbation of Lord Clive,
who preferred him from one step to another, till he attained the rank
of captain and pay-master to the regiment, in which capacities he
had honestly amassed above twelve thousand pounds, and, at the peace,
resigned his commission.--He had sent several remittances to his father,
who received the first only, consisting of one hundred pounds; the
second had fallen into the hands of a bankrupt; and the third had been
consigned to a gentleman of Scotland, who died before it arrived; so
that it still remained to be accounted for by his executors. He now
presented the old man with fifty pounds for his present occasions, over
and above bank notes for one hundred, which he had deposited for his
brother's release.--He brought along with him a deed ready executed, by
which he settled a perpetuity of four-score pounds upon his parents, to
be inherited by their other two sons after their decease.--He promised
to purchase a commission for his youngest brother; to take the other as
his own partner in a manufacture which he intended to set up, to give
employment and bread to the industrious; and to give five hundred
pounds, by way of dower, to his sister, who had married a farmer in low
circumstances. Finally, he gave fifty pounds to the poor of the town
where he was born, and feasted all the inhabitants without exception.

My uncle was so charmed with the character of captain Brown, that he
drank his health three times successively at dinner--He said, he was
proud of his acquaintance; that he was an honour to his country, and
had in some measure redeemed human nature from the reproach of pride,
selfishness, and ingratitude.--For my part, I was as much pleased
with the modesty as with the filial virtue of this honest soldier,
who assumed no merit from his success, and said very little of his own
transactions, though the answers he made to our inquiries were equally
sensible and laconic, Mrs Tabitha behaved very graciously to him until
she understood that he was going to make a tender of his hand to a
person of low estate, who had been his sweet-heart while he worked as
a journeyman weaver.--Our aunt was no sooner made acquainted with this
design, than she starched up her behaviour with a double proportion of
reserve; and when the company broke up, she observed with a toss of her
nose, that Brown was a civil fellow enough, considering the lowness of
his original; but that Fortune, though she had mended his circumstances,
was incapable to raise his ideas, which were still humble and plebeian.

On the day that succeeded this adventure, we went some miles out of our
road to see Drumlanrig, a seat belonging to the duke of Queensberry,
which appears like a magnificent palace erected by magic, in the midst
of a wilderness.--It is indeed a princely mansion, with suitable parks
and plantations, rendered still more striking by the nakedness of
the surrounding country, which is one of the wildest tracts in all
Scotland.--This wildness, however, is different from that of the
Highlands; for here the mountains, instead of heath, are covered with a
fine green swarth, affording pasture to innumerable flocks of sheep. But
the fleeces of this country, called Nithsdale, are not comparable to the
wool of Galloway, which is said to equal that of Salisbury plain. Having
passed the night at the castle of Drumlanrig, by invitation from
the duke himself, who is one of the best men that ever breathed, we
prosecuted our journey to Dumfries, a very elegant trading town near
the borders of England, where we found plenty of good provision and
excellent wine, at very reasonable prices, and the accommodation as good
in all respects as in any part of South-Britain. If I was confined to
Scotland for life, I would chuse Dumfries as the place of my residence.
Here we made enquiries about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing no
tidings, we proceeded by the Solway Frith, to Carlisle. You must know,
that the Solway sands, upon which travellers pass at low water, are
exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes, they become quick
in different places, and the flood rushes in so impetuously, that the
passengers are often overtaken by the sea and perish.

In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide, we perceived a
drowned horse, which Humphry Clinker, after due inspection, declared to
be the very identical beast which Mr Lismahago rode when he parted with
us at Feltonbridge in Northumberland. This information, which seemed
to intimate that our friend the lieutenant had shared the fate of his
horse, affected us all, and above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt
tears, and obliged Clinker to pull a few hairs out of the dead horse's
tail, to be worn in a ring as a remembrance of his master: but her grief
and ours was not of long duration; for one of the first persons we saw
in Carlisle, was the lieutenant in propria persona, bargaining with
a horse-dealer for another steed, in the yard of the inn where we
alighted.--Mrs Bramble was the first that perceived him, and screamed
as if she had seen a ghost; and, truly, at a proper time and place, he
might very well have passed for an inhabitant of another world; for
he was more meagre and grim than before.--We received him the more
cordially for having supposed he had been drowned; and he was not
deficient in expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. He told us,
he had enquired for us at Dumfries, and been informed by a travelling
merchant from Glasgow, that we had resolved to return by the way of
Coldstream. He said, that in passing the sands without a guide, his
horse had knocked up, and he himself must have perished, if he had not
been providentially relieved by a return post-chaise.--He moreover gave
us to understand, that his scheme of settling in his own country having
miscarried, he was so far on his way to London, with a view to embark
for North-America, where he intended to pass the rest of his days among
his old friends the Miamis, and amuse himself in finishing the education
of the son he had by his beloved Squinkinacoosta.

This project was by no means agreeable to our good aunt, who expatiated
upon the fatigues and dangers that would attend such a long voyage
by sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey by land--She enlarged
particularly on the risque he would run, with respect to the concerns
of his precious soul, among savages who had not yet received the glad
tidings of salvation; and she hinted that his abandoning Great-Britain
might, perhaps, prove fatal to the inclinations of some deserving
person, whom he was qualified to make happy for life. My uncle, who is
really a Don Quixote in generosity, understanding that Lismahago's real
reason for leaving Scotland was the impossibility of subsisting in it
with any decency upon the wretched provision of a subaltern's half-pay,
began to be warmly interested on the side of compassion.--He thought
it very hard, that a gentleman who had served his country with honour,
should be driven by necessity to spend his old age, among the refuse of
mankind, in such a remote part of the world.--He discoursed with me upon
the subject; observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant an
asylum at Brambleton-hall, if he did not foresee that his singularities
and humour of contradiction would render him an intolerable housemate,
though his conversation at some times might be both instructive and
entertaining: but, as there seemed to be something particular in
his attention to Mrs Tabitha, he and I agreed in opinion, that this
intercourse should be encouraged and improved, if possible, into a
matrimonial union; in which case there would be a comfortable provision
for both; and they might be settled in a house of their own, so that Mr
Bramble should have no more of their company than he desired.

In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has been invited to pass the
winter at Brambleton-hall, as it will be time enough to execute his
American project in the spring.--He has taken time to consider of this
proposal; mean while, he will keep us company as far as we travel in the
road to Bristol, where he has hopes of getting a passage for America.
I make no doubt but that he will postpone his voyage, and prosecute his
addresses to a happy consummation; and sure, if it produces any
fruit, it must be of a very peculiar flavour. As the weather continues
favourable, I believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire and Buxton
Wells in our way.--At any rate, from the first place where we make any
stay, you shall hear again from

Yours always, J. MELFORD CARLISLE, Sep. 12.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

The peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a poor footing all over the
kingdom; and yet they look better, and are better cloathed than those
of the same rank in Burgundy, and many other places of France and Italy;
nay, I will venture to say they are better fed, notwithstanding
the boasted wine of these foreign countries. The country people of
North-Britain live chiefly on oat-meal, and milk, cheese, butter,
and some garden-stuff, with now and then a pickled-herring, by way of
delicacy; but flesh-meat they seldom or never taste; nor any kind of
strong liquor, except two-penny, at times of uncommon festivity--Their
breakfast is a kind of hasty pudding, of oat-meal or pease-meal, eaten
with milk. They have commonly pottage for dinner, composed of cale or
cole, leeks, barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced with
bread and cheese, made of skimmed-milk--At night they sup on sowens or
flummery of oat-meal--In a scarcity of oats, they use the meal of barley
and pease, which is both nourishing and palatable. Some of them have
potatoes; and you find parsnips in every peasant's garden--They are
cloathed with a coarse kind of russet of their own making, which is
both decent and warm--They dwell in poor huts, built of loose stones and
turf, without any mortar, having a fireplace or hearth in the middle,
generally made of an old mill-stone, and a hole at top to let out the
smoke.

These people, however, are content, and wonderfully sagacious--All of
them read the Bible, and are even qualified to dispute upon the
articles of their faith; which in those parts I have seen, is entirely
Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants of Aberdeenshire are still
more acute. I once knew a Scotch gentleman at London, who had declared
war against this part of his countrymen; and swore that the impudence
and knavery of the Scots, in that quarter, had brought a reproach upon
the whole nation.

The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; and the banks of it
are every where adorned with fine villas. From the sea to its source,
we may reckon the seats of many families of the first rank, such as the
duke of Argyle at Roseneath, the earl of Bute in the isle of that name,
the earl of Glencairn at Finlayston, lord Blantyre at Areskine, the
dutchess of Douglas at Bothwell, duke Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of
Douglas at Douglas, and the earl of Hyndford at Carmichael. Hamilton is
a noble palace, magnificently furnished; and hard by is the village of
that name, one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any country.
The old castle of Douglas being burned to the ground by accident, the
late duke resolved, as head of the first family of Scotland, to have the
largest house in the kingdom, and ordered a plan for this purpose; but
there was only one wing of it finished when he died. It is to be hoped
that his nephew, who is now in possession of his great fortune, will
complete the design of his predecessor--Clydesdale is in general
populous and rich, containing a great number of gentlemen, who
are independent in their fortune; but it produces more cattle than
corn--This is also the case with Tweedale, through part of which
we passed, and Nithsdale, which is generally rough, wild, and
mountainous--These hills are covered with sheep; and this is the small
delicious mutton, so much preferable to that of the London-market. As
their feeding costs so little, the sheep are not killed till five years
old, when their flesh, juices, and flavour are in perfection; but their
fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which they are smeared to
preserve them from the rot in winter, during which they run wild night
and day, and thousands are lost under huge wreaths of snow--'Tis pity
the farmers cannot contrive some means to shelter this useful animal
from the inclemencies of a rigorous climate, especially from the
perpetual rains, which are more prejudicial than the greatest extremity
of cold weather.

On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of Drumlanrig, one
of the noblest seats in Great-Britain, belonging to the duke of
Queensberry; one of those few noblemen whose goodness of heart does
honour to human-nature--I shall not pretend to enter into a description
of this palace, which is really an instance of the sublime in
magnificence, as well as in situation, and puts one in mind of the
beautiful city of Palmyra, rising like a vision in the midst of
the wilderness. His grace keeps open house, and lives with great
splendour--He did us the honour to receive us with great courtesy, and
detain'd us all night, together with above twenty other guests, with all
their servants and horses to a very considerable number--The dutchess
was equally gracious, and took our ladies under her immediate
protection. The longer I live, I see more reason to believe that
prejudices of education are never wholly eradicated, even when they
are discovered to be erroneous and absurd. Such habits of thinking as
interest the grand passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner,
that though an effort of reason may force them from their hold for a
moment, this violence no sooner ceases, than they resume their grasp
with an increased elasticity and adhesion.

I am led into this reflection, by what passed at the duke's table after
supper. The conversation turned upon the vulgar notions of spirits and
omens, that prevail among the commonalty of North-Britain, and all the
company agreed, that nothing could be more ridiculous. One gentleman,
however, told a remarkable story of himself, by way of speculation
'Being on a party of hunting in the North (said he), I resolved to visit
an old friend, whom I had not seen for twenty years--So long he had been
retired and sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived in a moping
melancholy way, much afflicted with lowness of spirits, occasioned by
the death of his wife, whom he had loved with uncommon affection. As he
resided in a remote part of the country, and we were five gentlemen with
as many servants, we carried some provision with us from the next market
town, lest we should find him unprepared for our reception. The roads
being bad, we did not arrive at the house till two o'clock in the
afternoon; and were agreeably surprised to find a very good dinner ready
in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with six covers. My friend himself
appeared in his best apparel at the gate, and received us with open
arms, telling me he had been expecting us these two hours. Astonished at
this declaration, I asked who had given him intelligence of our coming?
and he smiled without making any other reply. However, presuming upon
our former intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon knowing; and he told me,
very gravely, he had seen me in a vision of the second sight--Nay, he
called in the evidence of his steward, who solemnly declared, that his
master had the day before apprised him of my coming, with four other
strangers, and ordered him to provide accordingly; in consequence of
which intimation, he had prepared the dinner which we were now eating;
and laid the covers according to the number foretold.' The incident
we all owned to be remarkable, and I endeavoured to account for it by
natural means. I observed, that as the gentleman was of a visionary
turn, the casual idea, or remembrance of his old friend, might suggest
those circumstances, which accident had for once realized; but that in
all probability he had seen many visions of the same kind, which were
never verified. None of the company directly dissented from my opinion;
but from the objections that were hinted, I could plainly perceive that
the majority were persuaded there was something more extraordinary in
the case.

Another gentleman of the company, addressing himself to me, 'Without all
doubt (said he), a diseased imagination is very apt to produce visions;
but we must find some other method to account for something of this
kind, that happened within these eight days in my neighbourhood--A
gentleman of a good family, who cannot be deemed a visionary in any
sense of the word, was near his own gate, in the twilight, visited by
his grandfather, who has been dead these fifteen years--The spectre was
mounted seemingly on the very horse he used to ride, with an angry and
terrible countenance, and said something, which his grandson, in the
confusion of fear, could not understand. But this was not all--He lifted
up a huge horse whip, and applied it with great violence to his back
and shoulders, on which I saw the impression with my own eyes. The
apparition was afterwards seen by the sexton of the parish, hovering
about the tomb where his body lies interred; as the man declared to
several persons in the village, before he knew what had happened to the
gentleman--Nay, he actually came to me as a justice of the peace, in
order to make oath of these particulars, which, however, I declined
administering. As for the grandson of the defunct, he is a sober,
sensible, worldly minded fellow, too intent upon schemes of interest to
give in to reveries. He would have willingly concealed the affair; but
he bawled out in the first transport of his fear, and, running into
the house, exposed his back and his sconce to the whole family; so that
there was no denying it in the sequel. It is now the common discourse of
the country, that this appearance and behaviour of the old man's spirit,
portends some great calamity to the family, and the good-woman has
actually taken to her bed in this apprehension.'

Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery, I said, I did not at
all doubt, but it would one day appear to be a deception; and, in all
probability, a scheme executed by some enemy of the person who had
sustained the assault; but still the gentleman insisted upon the
clearness of the evidence, and the concurrence of testimony, by which
two creditable witnesses, without any communication one with another,
affirmed the appearance of the same man, with whose person they were
both well acquainted--From Drumlanrig we pursued the course of the Nid
to Dumfries, which stands seven miles above the place where the river
falls into the sea; and is, after Glasgow, the handsomest town I have
seen in Scotland. The inhabitants, indeed, seem to have proposed that
city as their model; not only in beautifying their town and regulating
its police, but, also in prosecuting their schemes of commerce and
manufacture, by which they are grown rich and opulent.

We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle, where we accidentally
met with our friend Lismahago, whom we had in vain inquired after at
Dumfries and other places--It would seem that the captain, like the
prophets of old, is but little honoured in his own country, which he
has now renounced for ever--He gave me the following particulars of his
visit to his native soil--In his way to the place of his nativity, he
learned that his nephew had married the daughter of a burgeois, who
directed a weaving manufacture, and had gone into partnership with his
father-in-law: chagrined with this information, he had arrived at the
gate in the twilight, where he heard the sound of treddles in the great
hall, which had exasperated him to such a degree, that he had like to
have lost his senses: while he was thus transported with indignation,
his nephew chanced to come forth, when, being no longer master of his
passion, he cried, 'Degenerate rascal! you have made my father's house a
den of thieves;' and at the same time chastised him with his
horse-whip; then, riding round the adjoining village, he had visited
the burying-ground of his ancestors by moon-light; and, having paid
his respects to their manes, travelled all night to another part of
the country--Finding the head of the family in such a disgraceful
situation, all his own friends dead or removed from the places of their
former residence, and the expence of living increased to double of what
it had been, when he first left his native country, he had bid it an
eternal adieu, and was determined to seek for repose among the forests
of America.

I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition, which had
been described at Drumlanrig; and when I repeated the story to the
lieutenant, he was much pleased to think his resentment had been so much
more effectual than he intended; and he owned, he might at such an hour,
and in such an equipage, very well pass for the ghost of his father,
whom he was said greatly to resemble--Between friends, I fancy Lismahago
will find a retreat without going so far as the wigwams of the Miamis.
My sister Tabby is making continual advances to him, in the way of
affection; and, if I may trust to appearances, the captain is disposed
to take opportunity by the forelock. For my part, I intend to encourage
this correspondence, and shall be glad to see them united--In that case,
we shall find a way to settle them comfortably in our own neighbourhood.
I, and my servants, will get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic
gouvernante; and I shall have the benefit of Lismahago's conversation,
without being obliged to take more of his company than I desire; for
though an olla is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear to dine upon
it every day of my life.

I am much pleased with Manchester, which is one of the most agreeable
and flourishing towns in Great-Britain; and I perceive that this is
the place which hath animated the spirit, and suggested the chief
manufactures of Glasgow. We propose to visit Chatsworth, the Peak,
and Buxton, from which last place we shall proceed directly homewards,
though by easy journies. If the season has been as favourable in Wales
as in the North, your harvest is happily finished; and we have nothing
left to think of but our October, of which let Barns be properly
reminded. You will find me much better in flesh than I was at our
parting; and this short separation has given a new edge to those
sentiments of friendship with which I always have been, and ever shall
be,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE MANCHESTER, Sept. 15.




To Mrs GWILLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWYLLIM,

It has pleased Providence to bring us safe back to England, and partake
us in many pearls by land and water, in particular the Devil's Harse
a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no bottom; and, as we are
drawing huomwards, it may be proper to uprise you, that Brambleton-hall
may be in condition to receive us, after this long gurney to the islands
of Scotland. By the first of next month you may begin to make constant
fires in my brother's chamber and mine; and burn a fagget every day in
the yellow damask room: have the tester and curtains dusted, and
the featherbed and matrosses well haired, because, perhaps, with the
blissing of haven, they may be yoosed on some occasion. Let the ould
hogsheads be well skewred and seasoned for bear, as Mat is resolved to
have his seller choak fool.

If the house was mine, I would turn over a new leaf--I don't see why
the sarvants of Wales shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot cakes and
barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without troubling the botcher
above once a quarter--I hope you keep accunt of Roger's purseeding in
reverence to the buttermilk. I expect my dew when I come huom, without
baiting an ass, I'll assure you.--As you must have layed a great many
more eggs than would be eaten, I do suppose there is a power of turks,
chickings, and guzzling about the house; and a brave kergo of cheese
ready for market; and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel, saving
what the maids spun in the family.

Pray let the whole house and furniture have a thorough cleaning from top
to bottom, for the honour of Wales; and let Roger search into, and make
a general clearance of the slit holes, which the maids have in secret;
for I know they are much given to sloth and uncleanness. I hope you have
worked a reformation among them, as I exhorted you in my last, and set
their hearts upon better things than they can find in junkitting and
caterwauling with the fellows of the country.

As for Win Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect metamurphysis, and is
become a new creeter from the ammunition of Humphry Clinker, our new
footman, a pious young man, who has laboured exceedingly, that she may
bring forth fruits of repentance. I make no doubt but he will take the
same pains with that pert hussey Mary Jones, and all of you; and that
he may have power given to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into
your most inward parts, is the fervent prayer of

Your friend in the spirit, TAB. BRAMBLE Septr. 18.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

Lismahago is more paradoxical than ever.--The late gulp he had of his
native air, seems to have blown fresh spirit into all his polemical
faculties. I congratulated him the other day on the present flourishing
state of his country, observing that the Scots were now in a fair way
to wipe off the national reproach of poverty, and expressing my
satisfaction at the happy effects of the union, so conspicuous in
the improvement of their agriculture, commerce, manufactures, and
manners--The lieutenant, screwing up his features into a look of dissent
and disgust, commented on my remarks to this effect--'Those who reproach
a nation for its poverty, when it is not owing to the profligacy or vice
of the people, deserve no answer. The Lacedaemonians were poorer than
the Scots, when they took the lead among all the free states of Greece,
and were esteemed above them all for their valour and their virtue. The
most respectable heroes of ancient Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus,
and Regulus, were poorer than the poorest freeholder in Scotland; and
there are at this day individuals in North-Britain, one of whom can
produce more gold and silver than the whole republic of Rome could raise
at those times when her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre; and
poverty was so far from being a reproach, that it added fresh laurels
to her fame, because it indicated a noble contempt of wealth, which was
proof against all the arts of corruption--If poverty be a subject
for reproach, it follows that wealth is the object of esteem and
veneration--In that case, there are Jews and others in Amsterdam and
London, enriched by usury, peculation, and different species of fraud
and extortion, who are more estimable than the most virtuous and
illustrious members of the community. An absurdity which no man in his
senses will offer to maintain.--Riches are certainly no proof of merit:
nay they are often (if not most commonly) acquired by persons of sordid
minds and mean talents: nor do they give any intrinsic worth to the
possessor; but, on the contrary, tend to pervert his understanding, and
render his morals more depraved. But, granting that poverty were really
matter of reproach, it cannot be justly imputed to Scotland. No country
is poor that can supply its inhabitants with the necessaries of life,
and even afford articles for exportation. Scotland is rich in natural
advantages: it produces every species of provision in abundance, vast
herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, with a great number of horses;
prodigious quantities of wool and flax, with plenty of copse wood, and
in some parts large forests of timber. The earth is still more rich
below than above the surface. It yields inexhaustible stores of coal,
free-stone, marble, lead, iron, copper, and silver, with some gold. The
sea abounds with excellent fish, and salt to cure them for exportation;
and there are creeks and harbours round the whole kingdom, for the
convenience and security of navigation. The face of the country displays
a surprising number of cities, towns, villas, and villages, swarming
with people; and there seems to be no want of art, industry, government,
and police: such a kingdom can never be called poor, in any sense of the
word, though there may be many others more powerful and opulent. But the
proper use of those advantages, and the present prosperity of the Scots,
you seem to derive from the union of the two kingdoms!'

I said, I supposed he would not deny that the appearance of the country
was much mended; that the people lived better, had more trade, and a
greater quantity of money circulating since the union, than before.
'I may safely admit these premises (answered the lieutenant), without
subscribing to your inference. The difference you mention, I should
take to be the natural progress of improvement--Since that period, other
nations, such as the Swedes, the Danes, and in particular the French,
have greatly increased in commerce, without any such cause assigned.
Before the union, there was a remarkable spirit of trade among the
Scots, as appeared in the case of their Darien company, in which they
had embarked no less than four hundred thousand pounds sterling; and in
the flourishing state of the maritime towns in Fife, and on the eastern
coast, enriched by their trade with France, which failed in consequence
of the union. The only solid commercial advantage reaped from that
measure, was the privilege of trading to the English plantations; yet,
excepting Glasgow and Dumfries, I don't know any other Scotch towns
concerned in that traffick. In other respects, I conceive the Scots were
losers by the union.--They lost the independency of their state, the
greatest prop of national spirit; they lost their parliament, and their
courts of justice were subjected to the revision and supremacy of an
English tribunal.'

'Softly, captain (cried I), you cannot be said to have lost your own
parliament, while you are represented in that of Great-Britain.' 'True
(said he, with a sarcastic grin), in debates of national competition,
the sixteen peers and forty-five commoners of Scotland, must make a
formidable figure in the scale, against the whole English legislature.'
'Be that as it may (I observed) while I had the honour to sit in the
lower house, the Scotch members had always the majority on their side.'
'I understand you, Sir (said he), they generally side with the majority;
so much the worse for their constituents. But even this evil is not the
worst they have sustained by the union. Their trade has been saddled
with grievous impositions, and every article of living severely taxed,
to pay the interest of enormous debts, contracted by the English, in
support of measures and connections in which the Scots had no interest
nor concern.' I begged he would at least allow, that by the union the
Scots were admitted to all the privileges and immunities of English
subjects; by which means multitudes of them were provided for in the
army and navy, and got fortunes in different parts of England, and its
dominions. 'All these (said he) become English subjects to all intents
and purposes, and are in a great measure lost to their mother-country.
The spirit of rambling and adventure has been always peculiar to the
natives of Scotland. If they had not met with encouragement in England,
they would have served and settled, as formerly, in other countries,
such as Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Germany, France, Piedmont, and
Italy, in all which nations their descendants continue to flourish even
at this day.'

By this time my patience began to fail and I exclaimed, 'For God's
sake, what has England got by this union which, you say, has been so
productive of misfortune to the Scots.' 'Great and manifold are the
advantages which England derives from the union (said Lismahago, in
a solemn tone). First and foremost, the settlement of the protestant
succession, a point which the English ministry drove with such
eagerness, that no stone was left unturned, to cajole and bribe a few
leading men, to cram the union down the throats of the Scottish nation,
who were surprisingly averse to the expedient. They gained by it a
considerable addition of territory, extending their dominion to the sea
on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up all back-doors against
the enterprizes of their enemies. They got an accession of above a
million of useful subjects, constituting a never-failing nursery of
seamen, soldiers, labourers, and mechanics; a most valuable acquisition
to a trading country, exposed to foreign wars, and obliged to maintain
a number of settlements in all the four quarters of the globe. In the
course of seven years, during the last war, Scotland furnished the
English army and navy with seventy thousand men, over and above those
who migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them at home in the
civil departments of life. This was a very considerable and seasonable
supply to a nation, whose people had been for many years decreasing in
number, and whose lands and manufactures were actually suffering for
want of hands. I need not remind you of the hackneyed maxim, that, to a
nation in such circumstances, a supply of industrious people is a
supply of wealth; nor repeat an observation, which is now received as
an eternal truth, even among the English themselves, that the Scots who
settle in South-Britain are remarkably sober, orderly, and industrious.'

I allowed the truth of this remark, adding, that by their industry,
oeconomy, and circumspection, many of them in England, as well as in her
colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which they returned to their own
country, and this was so much lost to South-Britain.--'Give me leave,
sir (said he), to assure you, that in your fact you are mistaken, and
in your deduction erroneous. Not one in two hundred that leave Scotland
ever returns to settle in his own country; and the few that do
return, carry thither nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of
South-Britain; for none of their treasure stagnates in Scotland--There
is a continual circulation, like that of the blood in the human body,
and England is the heart, to which all the streams which it distributes
are refunded and returned: nay, in consequence of that luxury which our
connexion with England hath greatly encouraged, if not introduced,
all the produce of our lands, and all the profits of our trade, are
engrossed by the natives of South-Britain; for you will find that the
exchange between the two kingdoms is always against Scotland; and
that she retains neither gold nor silver sufficient for her own
circulation.--The Scots, not content with their own manufactures and
produce, which would very well answer all necessary occasions, seem to
vie with each other in purchasing superfluities from England; such as
broad-cloth, velvets, stuffs, silks, lace, furs, jewels, furniture of
all sorts, sugar, rum, tea, chocolate and coffee; in a word, not only
every mode of the most extravagant luxury, but even many articles of
convenience, which they might find as good, and much cheaper in their
own country. For all these particulars, I conceive, England may touch
about one million sterling a-year.--I don't pretend to make an exact
calculation; perhaps, it may be something less, and perhaps, a great
deal more. The annual revenue arising from all the private estates of
Scotland cannot fall short of a million sterling; and, I should imagine,
their trade will amount to as much more.--I know the linen manufacture
alone returns near half a million, exclusive of the home-consumption
of that article.--If, therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a
million annually to England, I insist upon it, that country is
more valuable to her in the way of commerce, than any colony in her
possession, over and above the other advantages which I have specified:
therefore, they are no friends, either to England or to truth, who
affect to depreciate the northern part of the united kingdom.'

I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find myself schooled in
so many particulars.--Though I did not receive all his assertions
as gospel, I was not prepared to refute them; and I cannot help now
acquiescing in his remarks so far as to think, that the contempt for
Scotland, which prevails too much on this side the Tweed, is founded on
prejudice and error.--After some recollection, 'Well, captain (said I),
you have argued stoutly for the importance of your own country: for my
part, I have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of North-Britain,
that I shall be glad to see the day, when your peasants can afford to
give all their oats to their cattle, hogs, and poultry, and indulge
themselves with good wheaten loaves, instead of such poor, unpalatable,
and inflammatory diet.' Here again I brought my self into a premunire
with the disputative Caledonian. He said he hoped he should never see
the common people lifted out of that sphere for which they were intended
by nature and the course of things; that they might have some reason to
complain of their bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with saw
dust and fish-bones; but that oatmeal was, he apprehended, as nourishing
and salutary as wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it at
least as savoury.--He affirmed, that a mouse, which, in the article of
self-preservation, might be supposed to act from infallible instinct,
would always prefer oats to wheat, as appeared from experience; for, in
a place where there was a parcel of each, that animal has never begun
to feed upon the latter till all the oats were consumed: for their
nutritive quality, he appealed to the hale, robust constitutions of
the people who lived chiefly upon oatmeal; and, instead of being
inflammatory, he asserted, that it was a cooling sub-acid, balsamic and
mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory distempers, recourse
was had to water-gruel, and flummery made of oatmeal.

'At least (said I), give me leave to wish them such a degree of commerce
as may enable them to follow their own inclinations.'--'Heaven forbid!
(cried this philosopher). Woe be to that nation, where the multitude is
at liberty to follow their own inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly
a blessing, while restrained within its proper channels; but a glut
of wealth brings along with it a glut of evils: it brings false taste,
false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality, contempt of order,
engendering a spirit of licentiousness, insolence, and faction, that
keeps the community in continual ferment, and in time destroys all the
distinctions of civil society; so that universal anarchy and uproar must
ensue. Will any sensible man affirm, that the national advantages of
opulence are to be sought on these terms?' 'No, sure; but I am one of
those who think, that, by proper regulations, commerce may produce every
national benefit, without the allay of such concomitant evils.'

So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago, whom I describe the
more circumstantially, as I firmly believe he will set up his rest in
Monmouthshire. Yesterday, while I was alone with him he asked, in some
confusion, if I should have any objection to the success of a gentleman
and a soldier, provided he should be so fortunate as to engage my
sister's affection. I answered without hesitation, that my sister was
old enough to judge for herself; and that I should be very far from
disapproving any resolution she might take in his favour.--His eyes
sparkled at this declaration. He declared, he should think himself the
happiest man on earth to be connected with my family; and that he should
never be weary of giving me proofs of his gratitude and attachment. I
suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; in which case, we shall have
a wedding at Brambleton-hall, and you shall give away the bride.--It is
the least thing you can do, by way of atonement for your former cruelty
to that poor love-sick maiden, who has been so long a thorn in the side
of


Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 20.

We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much relish either the company
or the accommodations, and had no occasion for the water, we stayed but
two nights in the place.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Adventures begin to thicken as we advance to the southward. Lismahago
has now professed himself the admirer of our aunt, and carries on his
addresses under the sanction of her brother's approbation; so that we
shall certainly have a wedding by Christmas. I should be glad you was
present at the nuptials, to help me throw the stocking, and perform
other ceremonies peculiar to that occasion.--I am sure it will be
productive of some diversion; and, truly, it would be worth your while
to come across the country on purpose to see two such original figures
in bed together, with their laced night caps; he, the emblem of good
cheer, and she, the picture of good nature. All this agreeable prospect
was clouded, and had well nigh vanished entirely, in consequence of
a late misunderstanding between the future brothers-in-law, which,
however, is now happily removed.

A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit a relation, met with lord
Oxmington at his house, who asked us to dine with him, next day, and we
accepted the invitation.--Accordingly, leaving our women under the
care of captain Lismahago, at the inn where we had lodged the preceding
night, in a little town, about a mile from his lordship's dwelling, we
went at the hour appointed, and had a fashionable meal served up with
much ostentation to a company of about a dozen persons, none of whom
he had ever seen before.--His lordship is much more remarkable for his
pride and caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; and,
indeed, it appeared, that he considered his guests merely as objects to
shine upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own magnificence--There
was much state, but no courtesy; and a great deal of compliment without
any conversation.--Before the desert was removed, our noble entertainer
proposed three general toasts; then calling for a glass of wine, and
bowing all round, wished us a good afternoon. This was the signal for
the company to break up, and they obeyed it immediately, all except our
'squire who was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission--He
changed countenance, bit his lip in silence, but still kept his seat,
so that his lordship found himself obliged to give us another hint, by
saying, he should be glad to see us another time. 'There is no time like
the present (cried Mr Bramble); your lordship has not yet drank a
bumper to the best in Christendom.' 'I'll drink no more bumpers to-day
(answered our landlord); and I am sorry to see you have drank too
many.--Order the gentleman's carriage to the gate.'--So saying, he rose
and retired abruptly; our 'squire starting up at the same time, laying
his hand upon his sword, and eyeing him with a most ferocious aspect.
The master having vanished in this manner, our uncle bad one of the
servants to see what was to pay; and the fellow answering, 'This is no
inn,' 'I cry you mercy (cried the other), I perceive it is not; if it
were, the landlord would be more civil. There's a guinea, however; take
it, and tell your lord, that I shall not leave the country till I
have had the opportunity to thank him in person for his politeness and
hospitality.'

We then walked down stairs through a double range of lacqueys, and
getting into the chaise, proceeded homewards. Perceiving the 'squire
much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment, observing,
that as lord Oxmington was well known to have his brain very ill
timbered, a sensible man should rather laugh, than be angry at his
ridiculous want of breeding.--Mr Bramble took umbrage at my presuming to
be wiser than he upon this occasion; and told me, that as he had always
thought for himself in every occurrence in life, he would still use the
same privilege, with my good leave.

When we returned to our inn, he closeted Lismahago; and having explained
his grievance, desired that gentleman to go and demand satisfaction of
lord Oxmington in his name.--The lieutenant charged himself with this
commission, and immediately set out a horseback for his lordship's
house, attended, at his own request, by my man Archy Macalpine, who had
been used to military service; and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted
upon an ass, this couple might have passed for the knight of La Mancha
and his 'squire Panza. It was not till after some demur that Lismahago
obtained a private audience, at which he formally defied his lordship to
single combat, in the name of Mr Bramble, and desired him to appoint
the time and place. Lord Oxmington was so confounded at this unexpected
message, that he could not, for some time, make any articulate reply;
but stood staring at the lieutenant with manifest marks of perturbation.
At length, ringing a bell with great vehemence, he exclaimed, 'What!
a commoner send a challenge to a peer of the realm!--Privilege!
privilege!--Here's a person brings me a challenge from the Welshman that
dined at my table--An impudent fellow.--My wine is not yet out of his
head.'

The whole house was immediately in commotion.--Macalpine made a
soldierly retreat with two horses; but the captain was suddenly
surrounded and disarmed by the footmen, whom a French valet de chambre
headed in this exploit; his sword was passed through a close-stool, and
his person through the horse-pond. In this plight he returned to
the inn, half mad with his disgrace. So violent was the rage of his
indignation, that he mistook its object.--He wanted to quarrel with Mr
Bramble; he said, he had been dishonoured on his account, and he looked
for reparation at his hands.--My uncle's back was up in a moment; and he
desired him to explain his pretensions.--'Either compel lord Oxmington
to give me satisfaction (cried he), or give it me in your own person.'
'The latter part of the alternative is the most easy and expeditious
(replied the 'squire, starting up): if you are disposed for a walk, I'll
attend you this moment.'

Here they were interrupted by Mrs Tabby, who had overheard all that
passed.--She now burst into the room, and running betwixt them, in great
agitation, 'Is this your regard for me (said she to the lieutenant), to
seek the life of my brother?' Lismahago, who seemed to grow cool as my
uncle grew hot, assured her he had a very great respect for Mr Bramble,
but he had still more for his own honour, which had suffered pollution;
but if that could be once purified, he should have no further cause of
dissatisfaction. The 'squire said, he should have thought it incumbent
upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's honour; but, as he had now carved
for himself, he might swallow and digest it as well as he could--In a
word, what betwixt the mediation of Mrs Tabitha, the recollection of
the captain, who perceived he had gone too far, and the remonstrances
of your humble servant, who joined them at this juncture, those two
originals were perfectly reconciled; and then we proceeded to deliberate
upon the means of taking vengeance for the insults they had received
from the petulant peer; for, until that aim should be accomplished,
Mr Bramble swore, with great emphasis, that he would not leave the inn
where we now lodged, even if he should pass his Christmas on the spot.

In consequence of our deliberations, we next day, in the forenoon,
proceeded in a body to his lordship's house, all of us, with our
servants, including the coachman, mounted a-horseback, with our pistols
loaded and ready primed.--Thus prepared for action, we paraded solemnly
and slowly before his lordship's gate, which we passed three times in
such a manner, that he could not but see us, and suspect the cause
of our appearance.--After dinner we returned, and performed the same
cavalcade, which was again repeated the morning following; but we had no
occasion to persist in these manoeuvres. About noon, we were visited by
the gentleman, at whose house we had first seen lord Oxmington.--He now
came to make apologies in the name of his lordship, who declared he had
no intention to give offence to my uncle, in practising what had been
always the custom of his house; and that as for the indignities which
had been put upon the officer, they were offered without his Lordship's
knowledge, at the instigation of his valet de chambre.--'If that be the
case (said my uncle, in a peremptory tone), I shall be contented
with lord Oxmington's personal excuses; and I hope my friend will be
satisfied with his lordship's turning that insolent rascal out of his
service.'--'Sir (cried Lismahago), I must insist upon taking personal
vengeance for the personal injuries I have sustained.'

After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this manner.--His
lordship, meeting us at our friend's house, declared he was sorry for
what had happened; and that he had no intention to give umbrage.--The
valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant upon his knees, when
Lismahago, to the astonishment of all present, gave him a violent kick
on the face, which laid him on his back, exclaiming in a furious tone,
'Oui je te pardonne, gens foutre.'

Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure, which
threatened abundance of vexation to our family; for the 'squire is one
of those who will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather than leave
what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish upon their honour
and reputation. His lordship had no sooner pronounced his apology, with
a very bad grace, than he went away in some disorder, and, I dare say,
he will never invite another Welchman to his table.

We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement, in order to
prosecute our journey; but we follow no determinate course. We make
small deviations, to see the remarkable towns, villas, and curiosities
on each side of our route; so that we advance by slow steps towards the
borders of Monmouthshire: but in the midst of these irregular motions,
there is no abberration nor eccentricity in that affection with which I
am, dear Wat,


Yours always, J. MELFORD Sept. 28.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

At what time of life may a man think himself exempted from the necessity
of sacrificing his repose to the punctilios of a contemptible world? I
have been engaged in a ridiculous adventure, which I shall recount at
meeting; and this, I hope, will not be much longer delayed, as we have
now performed almost all our visits, and seen every thing that I think
has any right to retard us in our journey homewards--A few days ago,
understanding by accident, that my old friend Baynard was in the
country, I would not pass so near his habitation without paying him a
visit, though our correspondence had been interrupted for a long course
of years.

I felt my self very sensibly affected by the idea of our past intimacy,
as we approached the place where we had spent so many happy days
together; but when we arrived at the house, I could not recognize
any one of those objects, which had been so deeply impressed upon my
remembrance--The tall oaks that shaded the avenue, had been cut down,
and the iron gates at the end of it removed, together with the high wall
that surrounded the court yard. The house itself, which was formerly a
convent of Cistercian monks, had a venerable appearance: and along the
front that looked into the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded
me many an agreeable walk, when I was disposed to be contemplative. Now
the old front is covered with a screen of modern architecture; so that
all without is Grecian, and all within Gothic. As for the garden, which
was well stocked with the best fruit which England could produce,
there is not now the least vestage remaining of trees, walls, or
hedges--Nothing appears but a naked circus of loose sand, with a dry
bason and a leaden triton in the middle.

You must know, that Baynard, at his father's death, had a clear estate
of fifteen hundred pounds a-year, and was in other respects extremely
well qualified to make a respectable figure in the commonwealth;
but, what with some excesses of youth, and the expence of a contested
election, he in a few years found himself encumbered with a debt of ten
thousand pounds, which he resolved to discharge by means of a prudent
marriage. He accordingly married a miss Thomson, whose fortune amounted
to double the sum that he owed--She was the daughter of a citizen, who
had failed in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who died in the
East-Indies--Her own parents being dead, she lived with a maiden aunt,
who had superintended her education; and, in all appearance, was well
enough qualified for the usual purposes of the married state--Her
virtues, however, stood rather upon a negative, than a positive
foundation--She was neither proud, insolent, nor capricious, nor given
to scandal, nor addicted to gaming, nor inclined to gallantry. She could
read, and write, and dance, and sing, and play upon the harpsichord,
and smatter French, and take a hand at whist and ombre; but even these
accomplishments she possessed by halves--She excelled in nothing.
Her conversation was flat, her stile mean, and her expression
embarrassed--In a word, her character was totally insipid. Her person
was not disagreeable; but there was nothing graceful in her address, nor
engaging in her manners; and she was so ill qualified to do the honours
of the house, that when she sat at the head of the table, one was always
looking for the mistress of the family in some other place.

Baynard had flattered himself, that it would be no difficult matter
to mould such a subject after his own fashion, and that she would
chearfully enter into his views, which were wholly turned to domestic
happiness. He proposed to reside always in the country, of which he was
fond to a degree of enthusiasm; to cultivate his estate, which was very
improvable; to enjoy the exercise of rural diversions; to maintain an
intimacy of correspondence with some friends that were settled in
his neighbourhood; to keep a comfortable house, without suffering his
expence to exceed the limits of his income; and to find pleasure and
employ merit for his wife in the management and avocations of her own
family--This, however, was a visionary scheme, which he never was able
to realize. His wife was as ignorant as a new-born babe of everything
that related to the conduct of a family; and she had no idea of a
country-life. Her understanding did not reach so far as to comprehend
the first principles of discretion; and, indeed, if her capacity had
been better than it was, her natural indolence would not have permitted
her to abandon a certain routine, to which she had been habituated. She
had not taste enough to relish any rational enjoyment; but her ruling
passion was vanity, not that species which arises from self-conceit
of superior accomplishments, but that which is of a bastard and idiot
nature, excited by shew and ostentation, which implies not even the
least consciousness of any personal merit.

The nuptial peal of noise and nonsense being rung out in all the usual
changes, Mr Baynard thought it high time to make her acquainted with
the particulars of the plan which he had projected--He told her that his
fortune, though sufficient to afford all the comforts of life, was not
ample enough to command all the superfluities of pomp and pageantry,
which, indeed, were equally absurd and intolerable--He therefore hoped
she would have no objection to their leaving London in the spring, when
he would take the opportunity to dismiss some unnecessary domestics,
whom he had hired for the occasion of their marriage--She heard him in
silence, and after some pause, 'So (said she) I am to be buried in the
country!' He was so confounded at this reply, that he could not speak
for some minutes: at length he told her, he was much mortified to find
he had proposed anything that was disagreeable to her ideas--'I am sure
(added he) I meant nothing more than to lay down a comfortable plan of
living within the bounds of our fortune, which is but moderate.' 'Sir
(said she), you are the best judge of your own affairs--My fortune,
I know, does not exceed twenty thousand pounds--Yet, even with that
pittance, I might have had a husband who would not have begrudged me a
house in London'--'Good God! my dear (cried poor Baynard, in the
utmost agitation), you don't think me so sordid--I only hinted what I
thought--But, I don't pretend to impose--' 'Yes, sir (resumed the lady),
it is your prerogative to command, and my duty to obey' So saying, she
burst into tears and retired to her chamber, where she was joined by her
aunt--He endeavoured to recollect himself, and act with vigour of mind
on this occasion; but was betrayed by the tenderness of his nature,
which was the greatest defect of his constitution. He found the aunt
in tears, and the niece in a fit, which held her the best part of eight
hours, at the expiration of which, she began to talk incoherently about
death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all this time, and now
pressed her hand to his lips, in a transport of grief and penitence
for the offence he had given--From thence forward, he carefully avoided
mentioning the country; and they continued to be sucked deeper and
deeper into the vortex of extravagance and dissipation, leading what
is called a fashionable life in town--About the latter end of July,
however, Mrs Baynard, in order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience,
desired of her own accord, that they might pay a visit to his country
house, as there was no company left in London. He would have excused
himself from this excursion which was no part of the oeconomical plan he
had proposed; but she insisted upon making this sacrifice to his taste
and prejudices, and away they went with such an equipage as astonished
the whole country. All that remained of the season was engrossed by
receiving and returning visits in the neighbourhood; and, in
this intercourse it was discovered that sir John Chickwell had a
house-steward and one footman in livery more than the complement of
Mr Baynard's household. This remark was made by the aunt at table, and
assented to by the husband, who observed that sir John Chickwell might
very well afford to keep more servants than were found in the family
of a man who had not half his fortune. Mrs Baynard ate no supper that
evening; but was seized with a violent fit, which completed her triumph
over the spirit of her consort. The two supernumerary servants were
added--The family plate was sold for old silver, and a new service
procured; fashionable furniture was provided, and the whole house turned
topsy turvy.

At their return to London in the beginning of winter, he, with a heavy
heart, communicated these particulars to me in confidence. Before his
marriage, he had introduced me to the lady as his particular friend;
and I now offered in that character, to lay before her the necessity of
reforming her oeconomy, if she had any regard to the interest of her own
family, or complaisance for the inclinations of her husband--But Baynard
declined my offer, on the supposition that his wife's nerves were
too delicate to bear expostulation; and that it would only serve to
overwhelm her with such distress as would make himself miserable.

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved a termagant, he would
have known how to deal with her; but, either by accident or instinct,
she fastened upon the weak side of his soul, and held it so fast, that
he has been in subjection ever since--I afterwards advised him to carry
her abroad to France or Italy, where he might gratify her vanity for
half the expence it cost him in England: and this advice he followed
accordingly. She was agreeably flattered with the idea of seeing and
knowing foreign parts, and foreign fashions; of being presented to
sovereigns, and living familiarly with princes. She forthwith seized the
hint which I had thrown out on purpose, and even pressed Mr Baynard to
hasten his departure; so that in a few weeks they crossed the sea to
France, with a moderate train, still including the aunt; who was
her bosom counsellor, and abetted her in all her oppositions to her
husband's will--Since that period, I have had little or no opportunity
to renew our former correspondence--All that I knew of his transactions,
amounted to no more than that after an absence of two years, they
returned so little improved in oeconomy, that they launched out into
new oceans of extravagance, which at length obliged him to mortgage his
estate--By this time she had bore him three children, of which the last
only survives, a puny boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined in
his education by the indulgence of his mother.

As for Baynard, neither his own good sense, nor the dread of indigence,
nor the consideration of his children, has been of force sufficient to
stimulate him into the resolution of breaking at once the shameful spell
by which he seems enchanted--With a taste capable of the most refined
enjoyment, a heart glowing with all the warmth of friendship and
humanity, and a disposition strongly turned to the more rational
pleasures of a retired and country life, he is hurried about in a
perpetual tumult, amidst a mob of beings pleased with rattles, baubles,
and gewgaws, so void of sense and distinction, that even the most acute
philosopher would find it a very hard task to discover for what wise
purpose of providence they were created--Friendship is not to be found;
nor can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed within the rotation
of absurdity, to which he is doomed for life. He has long resigned
all views of improving his fortune by management and attention to
the exercise of husbandry, in which he delighted; and as to domestic
happiness, not the least glimpse of hope remains to amuse his
imagination. Thus blasted in all his prospects, he could not fail to
be overwhelmed with melancholy and chagrin, which have preyed upon his
health and spirits in such a manner, that he is now threatened with a
consumption.

I have given you a sketch of the man, whom the other day I went to
visit--At the gate we found a great number of powdered lacquies, but
no civility--After we had sat a considerable time in the coach, we were
told, that Mr Baynard had rode out, and that his lady was dressing; but
we were introduced to a parlour, so very fine and delicate, that in all
appearance it was designed to be seen only, not inhabited. The chairs
and couches were carved, gilt, and covered with rich damask, so smooth
and slick, that they looked as if they had never been sat upon. There
was no carpet upon the floor, but the boards were rubbed and waxed in
such a manner, that we could not walk, but were obliged to slide
along them; and as for the stove, it was too bright and polished to be
polluted with sea-coal, or stained by the smoke of any gross material
fire--When we had remained above half an hour sacrificing to the
inhospitable powers in the temple of cold reception, my friend Baynard
arrived, and understanding we were in the house, made his appearance, so
meagre, yellow, and dejected, that I really should not have known him,
had I met with him in any other place. Running up to me, with great
eagerness, he strained me in his embrace, and his heart was so full,
that for some minutes he could not speak. Having saluted us all round,
he perceived our uncomfortable situation, and conducting us into another
apartment, which had fire in the chimney, called for chocolate--Then,
withdrawing, he returned with a compliment from his wife, and, in the
mean time, presented his son Harry, a shambling, blear-eyed boy, in the
habit of a hussar; very rude, forward, and impertinent. His father would
have sent him to a boarding-school, but his mamma and aunt would not
hear of his lying out of the house; so that there was a clergyman
engaged as his tutor in the family.

As it was but just turned of twelve, and the whole house was in
commotion to prepare a formal entertainment, I foresaw it would be
late before we dined, and proposed a walk to Mr Baynard, that we might
converse together freely. In the course of this perambulation, when I
expressed some surprize that he had returned so soon from Italy, he
gave me to understand, that his going abroad had not at all answered the
purpose, for which he left England; that although the expence of living
was not so great in Italy as at home, respect being had to the same rank
of life in both countries, it had been found necessary for him to lift
himself above his usual stile, that he might be on some footing with
the counts, marquises, and cavaliers, with whom he kept company--He was
obliged to hire a great number of servants, to take off a great variety
of rich cloaths, and to keep a sumptuous table for the fashionable
scorocconi of the country; who, without a consideration of this kind,
would not have payed any attention to an untitled foreigner, let his
family or fortune be ever so respectable--Besides, Mrs Baynard was
continually surrounded by a train of expensive loungers, under the
denominations of language-masters, musicians, painters, and ciceroni;
and had actually fallen into the disease of buying pictures and antiques
upon her own judgment, which was far from being infallible--At length
she met with an affront, which gave her disgust to Italy, and drove her
back to England with some precipitation. By means of frequenting the
dutchess of B[edford]'s conversazione, while her grace was at Rome, Mrs
Baynard became acquainted with all the fashionable people of that city,
and was admitted to their assemblies without scruple--Thus favoured, she
conceived too great an idea of her own importance, and when the dutchess
left Rome, resolved to have a conversazione that should leave the
Romans no room to regret her grace's departure. She provided hands for a
musical entertainment, and sent biglietti of invitation to every person
of distinction; but not one Roman of the female sex appeared at her
assembly--She was that night seized with a violent fit, and kept her
bed three days, at the expiration of which she declared that the air of
Italy would be the ruin of her constitution. In order to prevent this
catastrophe, she was speedily removed to Geneva, from whence they
returned to England by the way of Lyons and Paris. By the time they
arrived at Calais, she had purchased such a quantity of silks, stuffs,
and laces, that it was necessary to hire a vessel to smuggle them over,
and this vessel was taken by a custom-house cutter; so that they lost
the whole cargo, which had cost them above eight hundred pounds.

It now appears, that her travels had produced no effect upon her, but
that of making her more expensive and fantastic than ever: She affected
to lead the fashion, not only in point of female dress, but in every
article of taste and connoisseurship. She made a drawing of the new
facade to the house in the country; she pulled up the trees, and pulled
down the walls of the garden, so as to let in the easterly wind, which
Mr Baynard's ancestors had been at great pains to exclude. To shew her
taste in laying out ground, she seized into her own hand a farm of two
hundred acres, about a mile from the house, which she parcelled out into
walks and shrubberies, having a great bason in the middle, into which
she poured a whole stream that turned two mills, and afforded the best
trout in the country. The bottom of the bason, however, was so ill
secured, that it would not hold the water which strained through the
earth, and made a bog of the whole plantation: in a word, the ground
which formerly payed him one hundred and fifty pounds a year, now cost
him two hundred pounds a year to keep it in tolerable order, over and
above the first expence of trees, shrubs, flowers, turf, and gravel.
There was not an inch of garden ground left about the house, nor a tree
that produced fruit of any kind; nor did he raise a truss of hay, or a
bushel of oats for his horses, nor had he a single cow to afford milk
for his tea; far less did he ever dream of feeding his own mutton,
pigs, and poultry: every article of housekeeping, even the most
inconsiderable, was brought from the next market town, at the distance
of five miles, and thither they sent a courier every morning to fetch
hot rolls for breakfast. In short, Baynard fairly owned that he spent
double his income, and that in a few years he should be obliged to sell
his estate for the payment of his creditors. He said that his wife had
such delicate nerves, and such imbecility of spirit, that she could
neither bear remonstrance, be it ever so gentle, nor practise any scheme
of retrenchment, even if she perceived the necessity of such a measure.
He had therefore ceased struggling against the stream, and endeavoured
to reconcile himself to ruin, by reflecting that his child at least
would inherit his mother's fortune, which was secured to him by the
contract of marriage.

The detail which he gave me of his affairs, filled me at once with grief
and indignation. I inveighed bitterly against the indiscretion of his
wife, and reproached him with his unmanly acquiescence under the absurd
tyranny which she exerted. I exhorted him to recollect his resolution,
and make one effectual effort to disengage himself from a thraldom,
equally shameful and pernicious. I offered him all the assistance in my
power. I undertook to regulate his affairs, and even to bring about a
reformation in his family, if he would only authorise me to execute the
plan I should form for his advantage. I was so affected by the subject,
that I could not help mingling tears with my remonstrances, and Baynard
was so penetrated with these marks of my affection, that he lost all
power of utterance. He pressed me to his breast with great emotion, and
wept in silence. At length he exclaimed, 'Friendship is undoubtedly the
most precious balm of life! Your words, dear Bramble, have in a great
measure recalled me from an abyss of despondence, in which I have
been long overwhelmed. I will, upon honour, make you acquainted with
a distinct state of my affairs, and, as far as I am able to go, will
follow the course you prescribe. But there are certain lengths which my
nature--The truth is, there are tender connexions, of which a batchelor
has no idea--Shall I own my weakness? I cannot bear the thoughts of
making that woman uneasy'--'And yet (cried I), she has seen you unhappy
for a series of years--unhappy from her misconduct, without ever shewing
the least inclination to alleviate your distress'--'Nevertheless (said
he) I am persuaded she loves me with the most warm affection; but these
are incongruities in the composition of the human mind which I hold to
be inexplicable.'

I was shocked at his infatuation, and changed the subject, after we had
agreed to maintain a close correspondence for the future. He then gave
me to understand, that he had two neighbours, who, like himself, were
driven by their wives at full speed, in the high road to bankruptcy and
ruin. All the three husbands were of dispositions very different from
each other, and, according to this variation, their consorts were
admirably suited to the purpose of keeping them all three in subjection.
The views of the ladies were exactly the same. They vied in grandeur,
that is, in ostentation, with the wife of Sir Charles Chickwell, who had
four times their fortune; and she again piqued herself upon making an
equal figure with a neighbouring peeress, whose revenue trebled her
own. Here then was the fable of the frog and the ox, realized in four
different instances within the same county: one large fortune, and
three moderate estates, in a fair way of being burst by the inflation of
female vanity; and in three of these instances, three different forms of
female tyranny were exercised. Mr Baynard was subjugated by practising
upon the tenderness of his nature. Mr Milksan, being of a timorous
disposition, truckled to the insolence of a termagant. Mr Sowerby, who
was of a temper neither to be moved by fits, nor driven by menaces,
had the fortune to be fitted with a helpmate, who assailed him with
the weapons of irony and satire; sometimes sneering in the way of
compliment; sometimes throwing out sarcastic comparisons, implying
reproaches upon his want of taste, spirit, and generosity: by which
means she stimulated his passions from one act of extravagance to
another, just as the circumstances of her vanity required.

All these three ladies have at this time the same number of horses,
carriages, and servants in and out of livery; the same variety of dress;
the same quantity of plate and china; the like ornaments in furniture:
and in their entertainments they endeavour to exceed one another in the
variety, delicacy, and expence of their dishes. I believe it will be
found upon enquiry, that nineteen out of twenty, who are ruined by
extravagance, fall a sacrifice to the ridiculous pride and vanity of
silly women, whose parts are held in contempt by the very men whom they
pillage and enslave. Thank heaven, Dick, that among all the follies
and weaknesses of human nature, I have not yet fallen into that of
matrimony.

After Baynard and I had discussed all these matters at leisure, we
returned towards the house, and met Jery with our two women, who had
come forth to take the air, as the lady of the mansion had not yet made
her appearance. In short, Mrs Baynard did not produce herself, till
about a quarter of an hour before dinner was upon the table. Then her
husband brought her into the parlour, accompanied by her aunt and son,
and she received us with a coldness of reserve sufficient to freeze the
very soul of hospitality. Though she knew I had been the intimate friend
of her husband, and had often seen me with him in London, she shewed no
marks of recognition or regard, when I addressed myself to her in the
most friendly terms of salutation. She did not even express the common
compliment of, I am glad to see you; or, I hope you have enjoyed your
health since we had the pleasure of seeing you; or some such words of
course: nor did she once open her mouth in the way of welcome to my
sister and my niece: but sat in silence like a statue, with an aspect of
insensibility. Her aunt, the model upon which she had been formed, was
indeed the very essence of insipid formality but the boy was very pert
and impudent, and prated without ceasing.

At dinner, the lady maintained the same ungracious indifference, never
speaking but in whispers to her aunt; and as to the repast, it was made
up of a parcel of kickshaws, contrived by a French cook, without one
substantial article adapted to the satisfaction of an English appetite.
The pottage was little better than bread soaked in dishwashings,
lukewarm. The ragouts looked as if they had been once eaten and half
digested: the fricassees were involved in a nasty yellow poultice: and
the rotis were scorched and stinking, for the honour of the fumet. The
desert consisted of faded fruit and iced froth, a good emblem of our
landlady's character; the table-beer was sour, the water foul, and the
wine vapid; but there was a parade of plate and china, and a powdered
lacquey stood behind every chair, except those of the master and
mistress of the house, who were served by two valets dressed like
gentlemen. We dined in a large old Gothic parlour, which was formerly
the hall. It was now paved with marble, and, notwithstanding the fire
which had been kindled about an hour, struck me with such a chill
sensation, that when I entered it the teeth chattered in my jaws--In
short, every thing was cold, comfortless, and disgusting, except the
looks of my friend Baynard, which declared the warmth of his affection
and humanity.

After dinner we withdrew into another apartment, where the boy began to
be impertinently troublesome to my niece Liddy. He wanted a playfellow,
forsooth; and would have romped with her, had she encouraged his
advances--He was even so impudent as to snatch a kiss, at which she
changed countenance, and seemed uneasy; and though his father checked
him for the rudeness of his behaviour, he became so outrageous as to
thrust his hand in her bosom: an insult to which she did not tamely
submit, though one of the mildest creatures upon earth. Her eyes
sparkling with resentment, she started up, and lent him such a box in
the ear, as sent him staggering to the other side of the room.

'Miss Melford (cried his father), you have treated him with the utmost
propriety--I am only sorry that the impertinence of any child of mine
should have occasioned this exertion of your spirit, which I cannot but
applaud and admire.' His wife was so far from assenting to the candour
of his apology, that she rose from the table, and, taking her son by the
hand, 'Come, child (said she), your father cannot abide you.' So
saying, she retired with this hopeful youth, and was followed by her
gouvernante: but neither the one nor the other deigned to take the least
notice of the company.

Baynard was exceedingly disconcerted; but I perceived his uneasiness was
tinctured with resentment, and derived a good omen from this discovery.
I ordered the horses to be put to the carriage, and, though he made
some efforts to detain us all night, I insisted upon leaving the house
immediately; but, before I went away, I took an opportunity of speaking
to him again in private. I said every thing I could recollect, to
animate his endeavours in shaking off those shameful trammels. I made
no scruple to declare, that his wife was unworthy of that tender
complaisance which he had shewn for her foibles: that she was dead to
all the genuine sentiments of conjugal affection; insensible of her
own honour and interest, and seemingly destitute of common sense and
reflection. I conjured him to remember what he owed to his father's
house, to his own reputation, and to his family, including even this
unreasonable woman herself, who was driving on blindly to her own
destruction. I advised him to form a plan for retrenching superfluous
expence, and try to convince the aunt of the necessity for such
a reformation, that she might gradually prepare her niece for its
execution; and I exhorted him to turn that disagreeable piece of
formality out of the house, if he should find her averse to his
proposal.

Here he interrupted me with a sigh, observing that such a step would
undoubtedly be fatal to Mrs Baynard--'I shall lose all patience (cried
I), to hear you talk so weakly--Mrs Baynard's fits will never hurt her
constitution. I believe in my conscience they are all affected: I am
sure she has no feeling for your distresses; and, when you are ruined,
she will appear to have no feeling for her own.' Finally, I took his
word and honour that he would make an effort, such as I had advised;
that he would form a plan of oeconomy, and, if he found it impracticable
without my assistance, he would come to Bath in the winter, where I
promised to give him the meeting, and contribute all in my power to the
retrieval of his affairs--With this mutual engagement we parted; and I
shall think myself supremely happy, if, by my means, a worthy man, whom
I love and esteem, can be saved from misery, disgrace, and despair.

I have only one friend more to visit in this part of the country, but he
is of a complexion very different from that of Baynard. You have heard
me mention Sir Thomas Bullford, whom I knew in Italy. He is now become
a country gentleman; but, being disabled by the gout from enjoying any
amusement abroad, he entertains himself within doors, by keeping open
house for all corners, and playing upon the oddities and humours of his
company: but he himself is generally the greatest original at his table.
He is very good-humoured, talks much, and laughs without ceasing. I am
told that all the use he makes of his understanding at present, is to
excite mirth, by exhibiting his guests in ludicrous attitudes. I know
not how far we may furnish him with entertainment of this kind, but I am
resolved to beat up his quarters, partly with a view to laugh with
the knight himself, and partly to pay my respects to his lady, a
good-natured sensible woman, with whom he lives upon very easy terms,
although she has not had the good fortune to bring him an heir to his
estate.

And now, dear Dick, I must tell you for your comfort, that you are the
only man upon earth to whom I would presume to send such a longwinded
epistle, which I could not find in my heart to curtail, because the
subject interested the warmest passions of my heart; neither will I make
any other apology to a correspondent who has been so long accustomed to
the impertinence of

MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 30.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I believe there is something mischievous in my disposition, for nothing
diverts me so much as to see certain characters tormented with false
terrors.--We last night lodged at the house of Sir Thomas Bullford, an
old friend of my uncle, a jolly fellow, of moderate intellects, who, in
spite of the gout, which hath lamed him, is resolved to be merry to the
last; and mirth he has a particular knack in extracting from his guests,
let their humour be ever so caustic or refractory.--Besides our company,
there was in the house a fat-headed justice of the peace, called
Frogmore, and a country practitioner in surgery, who seemed to be our
landlord's chief companion and confidant.--We found the knight sitting
on a couch, with his crutches by his side, and his feet supported on
cushions; but he received us with a hearty welcome, and seemed greatly
rejoiced at our arrival.--After tea, we were entertained with a sonata
on the harpsichord by lady Bullford, who sung and played to admiration;
but Sir Thomas seemed to be a little asinine in the article of ears,
though he affected to be in raptures, and begged his wife to favour us
with an arietta of her own composing.--This arietta, however, she no
sooner began to perform, than he and the justice fell asleep; but the
moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and exclaimed,
'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your
Pargolesi and your Corelli?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in
one cheek, and leered with one eye at the doctor and me, who sat on his
left hand. He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he could
command at all times extempore.--Notwithstanding his disorder, he did
not do penance at supper, nor did he ever refuse his glass when the
toast went round, but rather encouraged a quick circulation, both by
precept and example.

I soon perceived the doctor had made himself very necessary to the
baronet.--He was the whetstone of his wit, the butt of his satire, and
his operator in certain experiments of humour, which were occasionally
tried upon strangers.--Justice Frogmore was an excellent subject for
this species of philosophy; sleek and corpulent, solemn, and shallow,
he had studied Burn with uncommon application, but he studied nothing
so much as the art of living (that is, eating) well--This fat buck had
often afforded good sport to our landlord; and he was frequently started
with tolerable success, in the course of this evening; but the baronet's
appetite for ridicule seemed to be chiefly excited by the appearance,
address, and conversation of Lismahago, whom he attempted in all
different modes of exposition; but he put me in mind of a contest that I
once saw betwixt a young hound and an old hedge-hog--The dog turned him
over and over, and bounced and barked, and mumbled; but as often as
he attempted to bite, he felt a prickle in his jaws, and recoiled in
manifest confusion;--The captain, when left to himself, will not fail to
turn his ludicrous side to the company, but if any man attempts to force
him into that attitude, he becomes stubborn as a mule, and unmanageable
as an elephant unbroke.

Divers tolerable jokes were cracked upon the justice, who eat a most
unconscionable supper, and, among other things, a large plate of broiled
mushrooms, which he had no sooner swallowed than the doctor observed,
with great gravity, that they were of the kind called champignons, which
in some constitutions has a poisonous effect.--Mr Frogmore startled at
this remark, asked, in some confusion, why he had not been so kind as to
give him that notice sooner.--He answered, that he took it for granted,
by his eating them so heartily, that he was used to the dish; but as he
seemed to be under some apprehension, he prescribed a bumper of plague
water, which the justice drank off immediately, and retired to rest, not
without marks of terror and disquiet.

At midnight we were shewn to our different chambers, and in half an
hour, I was fast asleep in bed; but about three o'clock in the morning I
was waked with a dismal cry of Fire! and starting up, ran to the window
in my shirt.--The night was dark and stormy; and a number of people
half-dressed ran backwards and forwards thro' the court-yard, with links
and lanthorns, seemingly in the utmost hurry and trepidation.--Slipping
on my cloaths in a twinkling, I ran down stairs, and, upon enquiry,
found the fire was confined to a back-stair, which led to a detached
apartment where Lismahago lay.--By this time, the lieutenant was alarmed
by bawling at his window, which was in the second story, but he could
not find his cloaths in the dark, and his room-door was locked on the
outside.--The servants called to him, that the house had been robbed;
that, without all doubt, the villains had taken away his cloaths,
fastened the door, and set the house on fire, for the stair-case was in
flames.--In this dilemma the poor lieutenant ran about the room naked
like a squirrel in a cage, popping out his bead at the window between
whiles, and imploring assistance.--At length, the knight in person
was brought out in his chair, attended by my uncle and all the family,
including our aunt Tabitha, who screamed, and cried, and tore her hair,
as if she had been distracted--Sir Thomas had already ordered his people
to bring a long ladder which was applied to the captain's, window, and
now he exhorted him earnestly to descend.--There was no need of much
rhetoric to persuade Lismahago, who forthwith made his exit by the
window, roaring all the time to the people below to hold fast the
ladder.

Notwithstanding the gravity of the occasion, it was impossible to behold
this scene without being seized with an inclination to laugh. The rueful
aspect of the lieutenant in his shirt, with a quilted night-cap fastened
under his chin, and his long lank limbs and posteriors exposed to the
wind, made a very picturesque appearance, when illumined by the links
and torches which the servants held up to light him in his descent.--All
the company stood round the ladder, except the knight, who sat in his
chair, exclaiming from time to time, 'Lord, have mercy upon us!--save
the gentleman's life!--mind your footing, dear captain! softly!--stand
fast!--clasp the ladder with both hands!--there!--well done, my dear
boy!--O bravo!--an old soldier for ever!--bring a blanket bring a
warm blanket to comfort his poor carcase--warm the bed in the green
room--give me your hand, dear captain--I'm rejoiced to see thee safe
and sound with all my heart.' Lismahago was received at the foot of the
ladder by his inamorata, who snatching a blanket from one of the maids,
wrapped it about his body; two men-servants took him under the arms,
and a female conducted him to the green room, still accompanied by Mrs
Tabitha, who saw him fairly put to bed.--During this whole transaction
he spoke not a syllable, but looked exceeding grim, sometimes at one,
sometimes at another of the spectators, who now adjourned in a body to
the parlour where we had supped, every one surveying another with marks
of astonishment and curiosity.

The knight being seated in an easy chair, seized my uncle by the hand,
and bursting into a long and loud laugh, 'Matt (cried he), crown me with
oak, or ivy, or laurel, or parsely, or what you will, and acknowledge
this to be a coup de maitre in the way of waggery--ha, ha, ha!--Such a
camisciata, scagliata, beffata! O, che roba! O, what a subject!--O, what
caricatura!--O, for a Rosa, a Rembrandt, a Schalken!--Zooks, I'll give a
hundred guineas to have it painted!--what a fine descent from the cross,
or ascent to the gallows! what lights and shadows!--what a groupe below!
what expression above!--what an aspect!--did you mind the aspect? ha,
ha, ha!--and the limbs, and the muscles every toe denoted terror! ha,
ha, ha!--then the blanket! O, what costume! St Andrew! St Lazarus! St
Barrabas!--ha, ha, ha!' 'After all then (cried Mr Bramble very gravely),
this was no more than a false alarm.--We have been frightened out of our
beds, and almost out of our senses, for the joke's sake.' 'Ay, and such
a joke! (cried our landlord) such a farce! such a denouement! such a
catastrophe!'

'Have a little patience (replied our 'squire); we are not yet come to
the catastrophe; and pray God it may not turn out a tragedy instead of a
farce.--The captain is one of those saturnine subjects, who have no
idea of humour.--He never laughs in his own person; nor can he bear that
other people should laugh at his expence. Besides, if the subject
had been properly chosen, the joke was too severe in all conscience.'
''Sdeath! (cried the knight) I could not have bated him an ace had
he been my own father; and as for the subject, such another does not
present itself once in half a century.' Here Mrs Tabitha interposing,
and bridling up, declared, she did not see that Mr Lismahago was a
fitter subject for ridicule than the knight himself; and that she was
very much afraid, he would very soon find he had mistaken his man.--The
baronet was a good deal disconcerted by his intimation, saying, that he
must be a Goth and a barbarian, if he did not enter into the spirit of
such a happy and humourous contrivance.--He begged, however, that Mr
Bramble and his sister would bring him to reason; and this request was
reinforced by lady Bullford, who did not fail to read the baronet a
lecture upon his indiscretion, which lecture he received with submission
on one side of his face, and a leer upon the other.

We now went to bed for the second time; and before I got up, my uncle
had visited Lismahago in the green room, and used such arguments with
him, that when we met in the parlour he seemed to be quite appeased.
He received the knight's apology with good grace, and even professed
himself pleased at finding he had contributed to the diversion of the
company.--Sir Thomas shook him by the hand, laughing heartily; and
then desired a pinch of snuff, in token of perfect reconciliation--The
lieutenant, putting his hand in his waistcoat pocket, pulled out,
instead of his own Scotch mull, a very fine gold snuff-box, which he no
sooner perceived than he said, 'Here is a small mistake.' 'No mistake
at all (cried the baronet): a fair exchange is no robbery.--Oblige me so
far, captain, as to let me keep your mull as a memorial.' 'Sir (said the
lieutenant), the mull is much at your service; but this machine I can by
no means retain.--It looks like compounding a sort of felony in the code
of honour. Besides, I don't know but there may be another joke in this
conveyance; and I don't find myself disposed to be brought upon the
stage again.--I won't presume to make free with your pockets, but I beg
you will put it up again with your own hand.' So saying, with a certain
austerity of aspect, he presented the snuffbox to the knight, who
received it in some confusion, and restored the mull, which he would by
no means keep except on the terms of exchange.

This transaction was like to give a grave cast to the conversation,
when my uncle took notice that Mr Justice Frogmore had not made his
appearance either at the night-alarm, or now at the general rendezvous.
The baronet hearing Frogmore mentioned, 'Odso! (cried he) I had forgot
the justice.--Pr'ythee, doctor, go and bring him out of his kennel.'
Then laughing till his sides were well shaken, he said he would shew the
captain, that he was not the only person of the drama exhibited for the
entertainment of the company. As to the night-scene, it could not affect
the justice, who had been purposely lodged in the farther end of the
house, remote from the noise, and lulled with a dose of opium into the
bargain. In a few minutes, Mr Justice was led into the parlour in his
nightcap and loose morning-gown, rolling his head from side to side, and
groaning piteously all the way.--'Jesu! neighbour Frogmore (exclaimed
the baronet), what is the matter?--you look as if you was not a man
for this world.--Set him down softly on the couch--poor gentlemen!--Lord
have mercy upon us!--What makes him so pale, and yellow, and bloated?'
'Oh, Sir Thomas! (cried the justice) I doubt 'tis all over with me--
Those mushrooms I eat at your table have done my business--ah! oh!
hey!' 'Now the Lord forbid! (said the other)--what! man, have a good
heart--How does thy stomach feel?--hall?'

To this interrogation he made no reply; but throwing aside his
nightgown, discovered that his waist-coat would not meet upon his belly
by five good inches at least. 'Heaven protect us all! (cried Sir Thomas)
what a melancholy spectacle!--never did I see a man so suddenly swelled,
but when he was either just dead, or just dying.--Doctor, can'st thou
do nothing for this poor object?' 'I don't think the case is quite
desperate (said the surgeon), but I would advise Mr Frogmore to settle
his affairs with all expedition; the parson may come and pray by him,
while I prepare a glyster and an emetic draught.' The justice, rolling
his languid eyes, ejaculated with great fervency, 'Lord, have mercy upon
us! Christ, have mercy upon us!'--Then he begged the surgeon, in the
name of God, to dispatch--'As for my worldly affairs (said he), they
are all settled but one mortgage, which must be left to my heirs--but
my poor soul! my poor soul! what will become of my poor soul? miserable
sinner that I am!' 'Nay, pr'ythee, my dear boy, compose thyself (resumed
the knight); consider the mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st
not have any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience, or the devil's
in't.' 'Name not the devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I have
more sins to answer for than the world dreams of.--Ah! friend, I have
been sly--sly damn'd sly!--Send for the parson without loss of time, and
put me to bed, for I am posting to eternity.'--He was accordingly raised
from the couch, and supported by two servants, who led him back to his
room; but before he quitted the parlour, he intreated the good company
to assist him with their prayers.--He added, 'Take warning by me, who
am suddenly cut off in my prime, like a flower of the field; and God
forgive you, Sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous trash to be eaten
at your table.'

He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than the baronet abandoned
himself to a violent fit of laughing, in which he was joined by the
greatest part of the company; but we could hardly prevent the good lady
from going to undeceive the patient, by discovering, that while he slept
his waistcoat had been straitened by the contrivance of the surgeon;
and that the disorder in his stomach and bowels was occasioned by some
antimonial wine, which he had taken over night, under the denomination
of plague-water. She seemed to think that his apprehension might put an
end to his life: the knight swore he was no such chicken, but a
tough old rogue, that would live long enough to plague all his
neighbours.--Upon enquiry, we found his character did not intitle him to
much compassion or respect, and therefore we let our landlord's humour
take its course.--A glyster was actually administered by an old woman
of the family, who had been Sir Thomas's nurse, and the patient took
a draught made with oxymel of squills to forward the operation of the
antimonial wine, which had been retarded by the opiate of the preceding
night. He was visited by the vicar, who read prayers, and began to take
an account of the state of his soul, when those medicines produced their
effect; so that the parson was obliged to hold his nose while he poured
forth spiritual consolation from his mouth. The same expedient was used
by the knight and me, who, with the doctor, entered the chamber at this
juncture, and found Frogmore enthroned on an easing-chair, under the
pressure of a double evacuation. The short intervals betwixt every heave
he employed in crying for mercy, confessing his sins, or asking the
vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered, in a solemn
snuffling tone, that heightened the ridicule of the scene. The emetic
having done its office, the doctor interfered, and ordered the patient
to be put in bed again. When he examined the egesta, and felt his pulse,
he declared that much of the virus was discharged, and, giving him a
composing draught, assured him he had good hopes of his recovery.--This
welcome hint he received with the tears of joy in his eyes, protesting,
that if he should recover, he would always think himself indebted for
his life to the great skill and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he
squeezed with great fervour; and thus he was left to his repose.

We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be witnesses of his
resuscitation; but my uncle insisted upon our departing before noon,
that we might reach this town before it should be dark.--In the
mean-time, lady Bullford conducted us into the garden to see a fishpond
just finished, which Mr Bramble censured as being too near the parlour,
where the knight now sat by himself, dozing in an elbow-chair after the
fatigues of his morning atchievement.--In this situation he reclined,
with his feet wrapped in flannel, and supported in a line with his body,
when the door flying open with a violent shock, lieutenant Lismahago
rushed into the room with horror in his looks, exclaiming, 'A mad dog!
a mad dog!' and throwing up the window sash, leaped into the garden--Sir
Thomas, waked by this tremendous exclamation, started up, and forgetting
his gout, followed the lieutenant's example by a kind of instinctive
impulse. He not only bolted thro' the window like an arrow from a bow,
but ran up to his middle in the pond before he gave the least sign of
recollection. Then the captain began to bawl, 'Lord have mercy upon
us!--pray, take care of the gentleman!--for God's sake, mind your
footing, my dear boy!--get warm blankets--comfort his poor carcase--warm
the bed in the green room.'

Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phaenomenon, and the rest of
the company gazed in silent astonishment, while the servants hastened
to assist their master, who suffered himself to be carried back into the
parlour without speaking a word.--Being instantly accommodated with dry
clothes and flannels, comforted with a cordial, and replaced in statu
quo, one of the maids was ordered to chafe his lower extremities, an
operation in consequence of which his senses seemed to return and his
good humour to revive.--As we had followed him into the room, he looked
at every individual in his turn, with a certain ludicrous expression in
his countenance, but fixed his eyes in particular upon Lismahago, who
presented him with a pinch of snuff, and when he took it in silence,
'Sir Thomas Bullford (said he), I am much obliged to you for all your
favours, and some of them I have endeavoured to repay in your own coin.'
'Give me thy hand (cried the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot
and lot; and even left a balance in my hands, for which, in presence of
this company, I promise to be accountable.'--So saying, he laughed
very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation which had been
exacted at his own expence; but lady Bullford looked very grave; and in
all probability thought the lieutenant had carried his resentment too
far, considering that her husband was valetudinary--but, according
to the proverb, he that will play at bowls must expect to meet with
rubbers. I have seen a tame bear, very diverting when properly managed,
become a very dangerous wild beast when teized for the entertainment of
the spectators.--As for Lismahago, he seemed to think the fright and the
cold bath would have a good effect upon his patient's constitution: but
the doctor hinted some apprehension that the gouty matter might, by such
a sudden shock, be repelled from the extremities and thrown upon some of
the more vital parts of the machine.--I should be very sorry to see this
prognostic verified upon our facetious landlord, who told Mrs Tabitha at
parting, that he hoped she would remember him in the distribution of
the bride's favours, as he had taken so much pains to put the captain's
parts and mettle to the proof.--After all, I am afraid our squire
will appear to be the greatest sufferer by the baronet's wit; for his
constitution is by no means calculated for night-alarms. He has yawned
and shivered all day, and gone to bed without supper; so that, as we
have got into good quarters, I imagine we shall make a halt to-morrow;
in which case, you will have at least one day's respite from the
persecution of

J. MELFORD Oct. 3.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Miss Liddy is so good as to unclose me in a kiver as fur as Gloster,
and the carrier will bring it to hand--God send us all safe to
Monmouthshire, for I'm quite jaded with rambling--'Tis a true saying,
live and learn--0 woman, what chuckling and changing have I seen!--Well,
there's nothing sartain in this world--Who would have thought that
mistriss, after all the pains taken for the good of her prusias sole,
would go for to throw away her poor body? that she would cast the
heys of infection upon such a carrying-crow as Lashmihago! as old
as Mathewsullin, as dry as a red herring, and as poor as a starved
veezel--0, Molly, hadst thou seen him come down the ladder, in a shurt
so scanty, that it could not kiver his nakedness!--The young
'squire called him Dunquickset; but he looked for all the world like
Cradoc-ap-Morgan, the ould tinker, that suffered at Abergany for
steeling of kettle--Then he's a profane scuffle, and, as Mr Clinker
says, no better than an impfiddle, continually playing upon the pyebill
and the new-burth--I doubt he has as little manners as money; for he
can't say a civil word, much more make me a present of a pair of gloves
for goodwill; but he looks as if he wanted to be very forewood and
familiar O! that ever a gentlewoman of years and discretion should tare
her air, and cry and disporridge herself for such a nubjack! as the song
goes

I vow she would fain have a burd That bids such a price for an owl.

but, for sartain, he must have dealt with some Scotch musician to bring
her to this pass--As for me, I put my trust in the Lord; and I have got
a slice of witch elm sowed in the gathers of my under petticoat; and
Mr Clinker assures me, that by the new light of grease, I may deify the
devil and all his works--But I nose what I nose--If mistress should take
up with Lashmyhago, this is no sarvice for me--Thank God, there's no
want of places; and if it wan't for wan thing, I would--but, no matter
Madam Baynar's woman has twenty good pounds a-year and parquisites; and
dresses like a parson of distinkson--I dined with her and the valley
de shambles, with bags and golden jackets; but there was nothing
kimfittable to eat, being as how they lived upon board, and having
nothing but a piss of could cuddling tart and some blamangey, I was
tuck with the cullick, and a murcey it was that mistress had her viol of
assings in the cox.

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this match will go forewood;
for things are come to a creesus; and I have seen with my own bays, such
smuggling--But I scorn for to exclose the secrets of the family; and
if it wance comes to marrying, who nose but the frolick may go round--I
believes as how, Miss Liddy would have no reversion if her swan would
appear; and you would be surprised, Molly, to receive a bride's fever
from your humble sarvant--but this is all suppository, dear girl; and I
have sullenly promised to Mr Clinker, that neither man, woman, nor child
shall no that arrow said a civil thing to me in the way of infection.
I hope to drink your health at Brambleton-hall, in a horn of October,
before the month be out--Pray let my bed be turned once a-day, and the
windore opened, while the weather is dry; and burn a few billets with
some brush in the footman's garret, and see their mattrash be dry as a
bone: for both our gentlemen have got a sad could by lying in damp shits
at sir Tummas Ballfart's. No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and
the rest of our fellow-sarvents, being,

Dear Mary Jones, Always yours, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 4.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

This method of writing to you from time to time, without any hopes of an
answer, affords me, I own, some ease and satisfaction in the 'midst of
my disquiet, as it in some degree lightens the burthen of affliction:
but it is at best a very imperfect enjoyment of friendship, because it
admits of no return of confidence and good counsel--I would give the
whole world to have your company for a single day--I am heartily
tired of this itinerant way of life. I am quite dizzy with a perpetual
succession of objects--Besides it is impossible to travel such a
length of way, without being exposed to inconveniencies, dangers, and
disagreeable accidents, which prove very grievous to a poor creature of
weak nerves like me, and make me pay very dear for the gratification of
my curiosity.

Nature never intended me for the busy world--I long for repose and
solitude, where I can enjoy that disinterested friendship which is not
to be found among crouds, and indulge those pleasing reveries that shun
the hurry and tumult of fashionable society--Unexperienced as I am in
the commerce of life, I have seen enough to give me a disgust to the
generality of those who carry it on--There is such malice, treachery,
and dissimulation, even among professed friends and intimate companions,
as cannot fail to strike a virtuous mind with horror; and when Vice
quits the stage for a moment, her place is immediately occupied by
Folly, which is often too serious to excite any thing but compassion.
Perhaps I ought to be silent on the foibles of my poor aunt; but with
you, my dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her weaknesses are
such as cannot be concealed. Since the first moment we arrived at Bath,
she has been employed constantly in spreading nets for the other sex;
and, at length, she has caught a superannuated lieutenant, who is in a
fair way to make her change her name--My uncle and my brother seem to
have no objection to this extraordinary match, which, I make no doubt,
will afford abundance of matter for conversation and mirth; for my part,
I am too sensible of my own weaknesses, to be diverted with those of
other people--At present, I have something at heart that employs my
whole attention, and keeps my mind in the utmost terror and suspence.

Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my brother at the parlour
window of an inn, where we had lodged, a person passed a horseback, whom
(gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered to be Wilson! He wore a white
riding-coat, with the cape buttoned up to his chin; looking remarkably
pale, and passed at a round trot, without seeming to observe us--Indeed,
he could not see us; for there was a blind that concealed us from the
view. You may guess how I was affected at this apparition. The light
forsook my eyes; and I was seized with such a palpitation and trembling,
that I could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and strove to compose
myself, that my brother might not perceive my agitation; but it was
impossible to escape his prying eyes--He had observed the object that
alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew him at the first glance--He now looked
at me with a stern countenance; then he ran out into the street, to see
what road the unfortunate horseman had taken--He afterwards dispatched
his man for further intelligence, and seemed to meditate some violent
design. My uncle, being out of order, we remained another night at the
inn; and all day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable spy upon
my conduct--He watched my very looks with such eagerness of attention,
as if he would have penetrated into the utmost recesses of my
heart--This may be owing to his regard for my honour, if it is not the
effect of his own pride; but he is so hot, and violent, and unrelenting,
that the sight of him alone throws me into a flutter; and really it
will not be in my power to afford him any share of my affection, if he
persists in persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he has formed some
scheme of vengeance, which will make me completely wretched! I am afraid
he suspects some collusion from this appearance of Wilson.--Good God!
did he really appear? or was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to
apprise me of his death.

O Letty, what shall I do?--where shall I turn for advice and
consolation? shall I implore the protection of my uncle, who has been
always kind and compassionate.--This must be my last resource.--I dread
the thoughts of making him uneasy; and would rather suffer a thousand
deaths than live the cause of dissension in the family.--I cannot
conceive the meaning of Wilson's coming hither:--perhaps, it was in
quest of us, in order to disclose his real name and situation:--but
wherefore pass without staying to make the least enquiry?--My dear
Willis, I am lost in conjecture. I have not closed an eye since I saw
him.--All night long have I been tossed about from one imagination to
another. The reflection finds no resting place.--I have prayed, and
sighed, and wept plentifully.--If this terrible suspence continues much
longer, I shall have another fit of illness, and then the whole family
will be in confusion--If it was consistent with the wise purposes
of Providence, would I were in my grave--But it is my duty to be
resigned.--My dearest Letty, excuse my weakness--excuse these blots--my
tears fall so fast that I cannot keep the paper dry--yet I ought
to consider that I have as yet no cause to despair but I am such a
faint-hearted timorous creature!

Thank God, my uncle is much better than he was yesterday. He is resolved
to pursue our journey strait to Wales.--I hope we shall take Gloucester
in our way--that hope chears my poor heart I shall once more embrace my
best beloved Willis, and pour all my griefs into her friendly bosom.--0
heaven! is it possible that such happiness is reserved for

The dejected and forlorn LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WATKIN,

I yesterday met with an incident which I believe you will own to be very
surprising--As I stood with Liddy at the window of the inn where we
had lodged, who should pass by but Wilson a-horse back!--I could not be
mistaken in the person, for I had a full view of him as he advanced; I
plainly perceived by my sister's confusion that she recognized him at
the same time. I was equally astonished and incensed at his appearance,
which I could not but interpret into an insult, or something worse. I
ran out at the gate, and, seeing him turn the corner of the street, I
dispatched my servant to observe his motions, but the fellow was too
late to bring me that satisfaction. He told me, however, that there was
an inn, called the Red Lion, at that end of the town, where he supposed
the horseman had alighted, but that he would not enquire without further
orders. I sent him back immediately to know what strangers were in the
house, and he returned with a report that there was one Mr Wilson lately
arrived. In consequence of this information I charged him with a note
directed to that gentleman, desiring him to meet me in half an hour in
a certain field at the town's end, with a case of pistols, in order
to decide the difference which could not be determined at our last
rencounter: but I did not think proper to subscribe the billet. My man
assured me he had delivered it into his own hand; and, that having read
it, he declared he would wait upon the gentleman at the place and time
appointed.

M'Alpine being an old soldier, and luckily sober at the time, I
entrusted him with my secret. I ordered him to be within call, and,
having given him a letter to be delivered to my uncle in case of
accident, I repaired to the rendezvous, which was an inclosed field at
a little distance from the highway. I found my antagonist had already
taken his ground, wrapped in a dark horseman's coat, with a laced hat
flapped over his eyes; but what was my astonishment, when, throwing off
this wrapper, he appeared to be a person whom I had never seen before!
He had one pistol stuck in a leather belt, and another in his hand ready
for action, and, advancing a few steps, called to know if I was ready--I
answered, 'No,' and desired a parley; upon which he turned the muzzle
of his piece towards the earth; then replaced it in his belt, and met me
half way--When I assured him he was not the man I expected to meet, he
said it might be so: that he had received a slip of paper directed to Mr
Wilson, requesting him to come hither; and that as there was no other in
the place of that name, he naturally concluded the note was intended
for him, and him only--I then gave him to understand, that I had been
injured by a person who assumed that name, which person I had actually
seen within the hour, passing through the street on horseback; that
hearing there was a Mr Wilson at the Red Lion, I took it for granted he
was the man, and in that belief had writ the billet; and I expressed my
surprize, that he, who was a stranger to me and my concerns, should give
me such a rendezvous, without taking the trouble to demand a previous
explanation. He replied, that there was no other of his name in the
whole country; that no such horseman had alighted at the Red Lion since
nine o'clock, when he arrived--that having had the honour to serve his
majesty, he thought he could not decently decline any invitation of
this kind, from what quarter soever it might come, and that if any
explanation was necessary, it did not belong to him to demand it, but
to the gentleman who summoned him into the field. Vexed as I was at this
adventure, I could not help admiring the coolness of this officer, whose
open countenance prepossessed me in his favour. He seemed to be turned
of forty; wore his own short black hair, which curled naturally about
his ears, and was very plain in his apparel--When I begged pardon for
the trouble I had given him, he received my apology with great good
humour.--He told me that he lived about ten miles off, at a small
farm-house, which would afford me tolerable lodging, if I would come
and take diversion of hunting with him for a few weeks; in which case we
might, perhaps, find out the man who had given me offence--I thanked him
very sincerely for his courteous offer, which, I told him, I was not at
liberty to accept at present, on account of my being engaged in a
family party; and so we parted, with mutual professions of good will and
esteem.

Now tell me, dear knight, what am I to make of this singular adventure?
Am I to suppose that the horseman I saw was really a thing of flesh
and blood, or a bubble that vanished into air?--or must I imagine Liddy
knows more of the matter than she chuses to disclose?--If I thought
her capable of carrying on any clandestine correspondence with such a
fellow, I should at once discard all tenderness, and forget that she was
connected with me by the ties of blood--But how is it possible that
a girl of her simplicity and inexperience, should maintain such an
intercourse, surrounded, as she is, with so many eyes, destitute of all
opportunity, and shifting quarters every day of her life!--Besides, she
has solemnly promised. No--I can't think the girl so base--so insensible
to the honour of her family.--What disturbs me chiefly, is the
impression which these occurrences seem to make upon her spirits--These
are the symptoms from which I conclude that the rascal has still a hold
on her affection, surely I have a right to call him a rascal, and to
conclude that his designs are infamous. But it shall be my fault if he
does not one day repent his presumption--I confess I cannot think, much
less write on this subject, with any degree of temper or patience; I
shall therefore conclude with telling you, that we hope to be in Wales
by the latter end of the month: but before that period you will probably
hear again from

your affectionate J. MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

When I wrote you by last post, I did not imagine I should be tempted to
trouble you again so soon: but I now sit down with a heart so full that
it cannot contain itself; though I am under such agitation of spirits,
that you are to expect neither method nor connexion in this address--We
have been this day within a hair's breadth of losing honest Matthew
Bramble, in consequence of a cursed accident, which I will endeavour
to explain.--In crossing the country to get into the post road, it was
necessary to ford a river, and we that were a-horseback passed without
any danger or difficulty; but a great quantity of rain having fallen
last night and this morning, there was such an accumulation of water,
that a mill-head gave way, just as the coach was passing under it, and
the flood rushed down with such impetuosity, as first floated, and then
fairly overturned the carriage in the middle of the stream--Lismahago
and I, and the two servants, alighting instantaneously, ran into the
river to give all the assistance in our power.--Our aunt, Mrs Tabitha,
who had the good fortune to be uppermost, was already half way out of
the coach window, when her lover approaching, disengaged her entirely;
but, whether his foot slipt, or the burthen was too great, they fell
over head and ears in each others' arms. He endeavoured more than once
to get up, and even to disentangle himself from her embrace, but she
hung about his neck like a mill-stone (no bad emblem of matrimony), and
if my man had not proved a stanch auxiliary, those two lovers would in
all probability have gone hand in hand to the shades below--For my part,
I was too much engaged to take any cognizance of their distress.--I
snatched out my sister by the hair of the head, and, dragging her to
the bank, recollected that my uncle had, not yet appeared--Rushing again
into the stream, I met Clinker hauling ashore Mrs Jenkins, who looked
like a mermaid with her hair dishevelled about her ears; but, when I
asked if his master was safe, he forthwith shook her from him, and
she must have gone to pot, if a miller had not seasonably come to her
relief.--As for Humphry, he flew like lightning, to the coach, that was
by this time filled with water, and, diving into it, brought up the poor
'squire, to all appearance, deprived of life--It is not in my power to
describe what I felt at this melancholy spectacle--it was such an agony
as baffles all description! The faithful Clinker, taking him up in his
arms, as if he had been an infant of six months, carried him ashore,
howling most piteously all the way, and I followed him in a transport of
grief and consternation--When he was laid upon the grass and turned from
side to side, a great quantity of water ran out at his mouth, then he
opened his eyes, and fetched a deep sigh. Clinker perceiving these signs
of life, immediately tied up his arm with a garter, and, pulling out a
horse-fleam, let him blood in the farrier stile.--At first a few drops
only issued from the orifice, but the limb being chafed, in a little
time the blood began to flow in a continued stream, and he uttered some
incoherent words, which were the most welcome sounds that ever saluted
my ear. There was a country inn hard by, the landlord of which had by
this time come with his people to give their assistance.--Thither my
uncle being carried, was undressed and put to bed, wrapped in warm
blankets; but having been moved too soon, he fainted away, and once more
lay without sense or motion, notwithstanding all the efforts of Clinker
and the landlord, who bathed his temples with Hungary water, and held a
smelling-bottle to his nose. As I had heard of the efficacy of salt in
such cases, I ordered all that was in the house to be laid under his
head and body; and whether this application had the desired effect,
or nature of herself prevailed, he, in less than a quarter of an hour,
began to breathe regularly, and soon retrieved his recollection, to the
unspeakable joy of all the by-standers. As for Clinker, his brain
seemed to be affected.--He laughed, and wept, and danced about in such
a distracted manner, that the landlord very judiciously conveyed him out
of the room. My uncle, seeing me dropping wet, comprehended the whole
of what had happened, and asked if all the company was safe?--Being
answered in the affirmative, he insisted upon my putting on dry clothes;
and, having swallowed a little warm wine, desired he might be left to
his repose. Before I went to shift myself, I inquired about the rest
of the family--I found Mrs Tabitha still delirious from her fright,
discharging very copiously the water she had swallowed. She was
supported by the captain, distilling drops from his uncurled periwig, so
lank and so dank, that he looked like Father Thames without his sedges,
embracing Isis, while she cascaded in his urn. Mrs Jenkins was present
also, in a loose bed gown, without either cap or handkerchief; but she
seemed to be as little compos mentis as her mistress, and acted so many
cross purposes in the course of her attendance, that, between the two,
Lismahago had occasion for all his philosophy. As for Liddy, I thought
the poor girl would have actually lost her senses. The good woman of the
house had shifted her linen, and put her into bed; but she was seized
with the idea that her uncle had perished, and in this persuasion made a
dismal out-cry; nor did she pay the least regard to what I said, when
I solemnly assured her he was safe. Mr Bramble hearing the noise, and
being informed of her apprehension, desired she might be brought into
his chamber; and she no sooner received this intimation, than she ran
thither half naked, with the wildest expression of eagerness in her
countenance--Seeing the 'squire sitting up in the bed, she sprung
forwards and throwing her arms about his neck, exclaimed in a most
pathetic tone, 'Are you--Are you indeed my uncle--My dear uncle!--My
best friend! My father!--Are you really living? or is it an illusion of
my poor brain!' Honest Matthew was so much affected, that he could not
help shedding tears, while he kissed her forehead, saying, 'My dear
Liddy, I hope I shall live long enough to shew how sensible I am of your
affection--But your spirits are fluttered, child--You want rest--Go
to bed and compose yourself'--'Well, I will (she replied) but still
methinks this cannot be real--The coach was full of water--My uncle
was under us all--Gracious God!--You was under water--How did you get
out;--tell me that? or I shall think this is all a deception'--'In what
manner I was brought out, I know as little as you do, my dear (said
the 'squire); and, truly, that is a circumstance of which I want to be
informed.' I would have given him a detail of the whole adventure, but
he would not hear me until I should change my clothes; so that I had
only time to tell him, that he owed his life to the courage and fidelity
of Clinker: and having given him this hint, I conducted my sister to her
own chamber.

This accident happened about three o'clock in the afternoon, and in
little more than an hour the hurricane was all over; but as the carriage
was found to be so much damaged, that it could not proceed without
considerable repairs, a blacksmith and wheelwright were immediately sent
for to the next market-town, and we congratulated ourselves upon being
housed at an inn, which, though remote from the post-road, afforded
exceeding good lodging. The women being pretty well composed, and the
men all a-foot, my uncle sent for his servant, and, in the presence of
Lismahago and me, accosted him in these words--'So, Clinker, I find you
are resolved I shan't die by water--As you have fished me up from the
bottom at your own risque, you are at least entitled to all the money
that was in my pocket, and there it is'--So saying, he presented him
with a purse containing thirty guineas, and a ring nearly of the same
value--'God forbid! (cried Clinker), your honour shall excuse me--I am
a poor fellow, but I have a heart O! if your honour did but know how
I rejoice to see--Blessed be his holy name, that made me the humble
instrument--But as for the lucre of gain, I renounce it--I have done no
more than my duty--No more than I would have done for the most worthless
of my fellow-creatures--No more than I would have done for captain
Lismahago, or Archy Macalpine, or any sinner upon earth--But for your
worship, I would go through fire as well as water'--'I do believe it,
Humphry (said the 'squire); but as you think it was your duty to save my
life at the hazard of your own, I think it is mine to express the sense
I have of your extraordinary fidelity and attachment--I insist upon your
receiving this small token of my gratitude; but don't imagine that I
look upon this as an adequate recompence for the service you have done
me--I have determined to settle thirty pounds a-year upon you for life;
and I desire these gentlemen will bear witness to this my intention, of
which I have a memorandum in my pocketbook.' 'Lord make me thankful for
all these mercies! (cried Clinker, sobbing), I have been a poor bankrupt
from the beginning--your honour's goodness found me, when I was--naked
when I was--sick and forlorn--I understand your honour's looks--I would
not give offence--but my heart is very full--and if your worship won't
give me leave to speak,--I must vent it in prayers to heaven for my
benefactor.' When he quitted the room, Lismahago said, he should have
a much better opinion of his honesty, if he did not whine and cant so
abominably; but that he had always observed those weeping and praying
fellows were hypocrites at bottom. Mr Bramble made no reply to this
sarcastic remark, proceeding from the lieutenant's resentment of Clinker
having, in pure simplicity of heart, ranked him with M'Alpine and the
sinners of the earth--The landlord being called to receive some orders
about the beds, told the 'squire that his house was very much at his
service, but he was sure he should not have the honour to lodge him and
his company. He gave us to understand that his master who lived hard
by, would not suffer us to be at a public house, when there was
accommodation for us at his own; and that, if he had not dined abroad in
the neighbourhood he would have undoubtedly come to offer his services
at our first arrival. He then launched out in praise of that gentleman,
whom he had served as butler, representing him as a perfect miracle of
goodness and generosity. He said he was a person of great learning, and
allowed to be the best farmer in the country:--that he had a lady who
was as much beloved as himself, and an only son, a very hopeful young
gentleman, just recovered from a dangerous fever, which had like to have
proved fatal to the whole family; for, if the son had died, he was sure
the parents would not have survived their loss--He had not yet
finished the encomium of Mr Dennison, when this gentleman arrived in a
post-chaise, and his appearance seemed to justify all that had been said
in his favour. He is pretty well advanced in years, but hale, robust,
and florid, with an ingenuous countenance, expressive of good sense and
humanity. Having condoled with us on the accident which had happened,
he said he was come to conduct us to his habitation, where we should be
less incommoded than at such a paultry inn, and expressed his hope that
the ladies would not be the worse for going thither in his carriage, as
the distance was not above a quarter of a mile. My uncle having made a
proper return to this courteous exhibition, eyed him attentively, and
then asked if he had not been at Oxford, a commoner of Queen's college?
When Mr Dennison answered, 'Yes,' with some marks of surprise--'Look
at me then (said our squire) and let us see if you can recollect
the features of an old friend, whom you have not seen these forty
years.'--The gentleman, taking him by the hand, and gazing at him
earnestly,--'I protest (cried he), I do think I recall the idea
of Matthew Loyd of Glamorganshire, who was student of Jesus.' 'Well
remembered, my dear friend, Charles Dennison (exclaimed my uncle,
pressing him to his breast), I am that very identical Matthew Loyd of
Glamorgan.' Clinker, who had just entered the room with some coals for
the fire, no sooner heard these words, than throwing down the scuttle
on the toes of Lismahago, he began to caper as if he was mad,
crying--'Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan!--O Providence!--Matthew Loyd
of Glamorgan!'--Then, clasping my uncle's knees, he went on in this
manner--'Your worship must forgive me--Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan!--O
Lord, Sir! I can't contain myself!--I shall lose my senses'--'Nay,
thou hast lost them already, I believe (said the 'squire, peevishly),
prithee, Clinker, be quiet--What is the matter?'--Humphry, fumbling in
his bosom, pulled out an old wooden snuff-box, which he presented in
great trepidation to his master, who, opening it immediately, perceived
a small cornelian seal, and two scraps of paper--At sight of these
articles he started, and changed colour, and casting his eye upon the
inscriptions--'Ha!--how!--what! where (cried he) is the person here
named?' Clinker, knocking his own breast, could hardly pronounce
these words--'Here--here--here is Matthew Loyd, as the certificate
sheweth--Humphry Clinker was the name of the farrier that took me
'prentice'--'And who gave you these tokens?' said my uncle hastily--'My
poor mother on her death-bed'--replied the other--'And who was your
mother?' 'Dorothy Twyford, an please your honour, heretofore bar-keeper
at the Angel at Chippenham.'--'And why were not these tokens produced
before?' 'My mother told me she had wrote to Glamorganshire, at the
time of my birth, but had no answer; and that afterwards, when she
made enquiry, there was no such person in that county.' 'And so in
consequence of my changing my name and going abroad at that very time,
thy poor mother and thou have been left to want and misery--I am really
shocked at the consequence of my own folly.'--Then, laying his hand
on Clinker's head, he added, 'Stand forth, Matthew Loyd--You see,
gentlemen, how the sins of my youth rise up in judgment against me--Here
is my direction written with my own hand, and a seal which I left at
the woman's request; and this is a certificate of the child's baptism,
signed by the curate of the parish.' The company were not a little
surprised at this discovery, upon which Mr Dennison facetiously
congratulated both the father and the son: for my part, I shook my
new-found cousin heartily by the hand, and Lismahago complimented him
with the tears in his eyes, for he had been hopping about the room,
swearing in broad Scotch, and bellowing with the pain occasioned by the
fall of the coalscuttle upon his foot. He had even vowed to drive the
saul out of the body of that mad rascal: but, perceiving the unexpected
turn which things had taken, he wished him joy of his good fortune,
observing that it went very near his heart, as he was like to be a great
toe out of pocket by the discovery--Mr Dennison now desired to know
for what reason my uncle had changed the name by which he knew him at
Oxford, and our 'squire satisfied him, by answering to this effect--'I
took my mother's name, which was Loyd, as heir to her lands in
Glamorganshire; but when I came of age, I sold that property, in order
to clear my paternal estate, and resumed my real name; so that I am now
Matthew Bramble of Brambleton-hall in Monmouthshire, at your service;
and this is my nephew, Jeremy Melford of Belfield, in the county of
Glamorgan.' At that instant the ladies entering the room, he presented
Mrs Tabitha as his sister, and Liddy as his niece. The old gentleman
saluted them very cordially, and seemed struck with the appearance of my
sister, whom he could not help surveying with a mixture of complacency
and surprize--'Sister (said my uncle), there is a poor relation that
recommends himself to your good graces--The quondam Humphry Clinker is
metamorphosed into Matthew Loyd; and claims the honour of being your
carnal kinsman--in short, the rogue proves to be a crab of my own
planting in the days of hot blood and unrestrained libertinism.' Clinker
had by this time dropt upon one knee, by the side of Mrs Tabitha,
who, eyeing him askance, and flirting her fan with marks of agitation,
thought proper, after some conflict, to hold out her hand for him to
kiss, saying, with a demure aspect, 'Brother, you have been very wicked:
but I hope you'll live to see the folly of your ways--I am very sorry to
say the young man, whom you have this day acknowledged, has more
grace and religion, by the gift of God, than you with all your profane
learning, and repeated opportunity--I do think he has got the trick of
the eye, and the tip of the nose of my uncle Loyd of Flluydwellyn; and
as for the long chin, it is the very moral of the governor's--Brother,
as you have changed his name pray change his dress also; that livery
doth not become any person that hath got our blood in his veins.'--Liddy
seemed much pleased with this acquisition to the family.--She took him
by the hand, declaring she should always be proud to own her connexion
with a virtuous young man, who had given so many proofs of his gratitude
and affection to her uncle.--Mrs. Winifred Jenkins, extremely fluttered
between her surprize at this discovery, and the apprehension of losing
her sweet-heart, exclaimed in a giggling tone,--'I wish you joy Mr
Clinker--Floyd--I would say--hi, hi, hi!--you'll be so proud you won't
look at your poor fellow servants, oh, oh, oh!' Honest Clinker owned
he was overjoyed at his good fortune, which was greater than he
deserved--'But wherefore should I be proud? (said he) a poor object
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, nursed in a parish
workhouse, and bred in a smithy. Whenever I seem proud, Mrs Jenkins, I
beg of you to put me in mind of the condition I was in, when I first saw
you between Chippenham and Marlborough.'

When this momentous affair was discussed to the satisfaction of all
parties concerned, the weather being dry, the ladies declined the
carriage; so that we walked all together to Mr Dennison's house, where
we found the tea ready prepared by his lady, an amiable matron, who
received us with all the benevolence of hospitality. The house is old
fashioned and irregular, but lodgeable and commodious. To the south it
has the river in front, at the distance of a hundred paces; and on the
north, there is a rising ground covered with an agreeable plantation;
the greens and walks are kept in the nicest order, and all is rural and
romantic. I have not yet seen the young gentleman, who is on a visit to
a friend in the neighbourhood, from whose house he is not expected 'till
to-morrow.

In the mean time, as there is a man going to the next market town with
letters for the post, I take this opportunity to send you the history of
this day, which has been remarkably full of adventures; and you will
own I give you them like a beef-steak at Dolly's, hot and hot, without
ceremony and parade, just as they come from the recollection of

Yours, J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

Since the last trouble I gave you, I have met with a variety of
incidents, some of them of a singular nature, which I reserve as a fund
for conversation; but there are others so interesting, that they will
not keep in petto till meeting.

Know then, it was a thousand pounds to a sixpence, that you should now
be executing my will, instead of perusing my letter! Two days ago, our
coach was overturned in the midst of a rapid river, where my life was
saved with the utmost difficulty, by the courage, activity, and
presence of mind of my servant Humphry Clinker--But this is not the
most surprising circumstance of the adventure--The said Humphry Clinker
proves to be Matthew Loyd, natural son of one Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan,
if you know any such person--You see, Doctor, that notwithstanding all
your philosophy, it is not without some reason that the Welchmen ascribe
such energy to the force of blood--But we shall discuss this point on
some future occasion.

This is not the only discovery which I made in consequence of our
disaster--We happened to be wrecked upon a friendly shore--The lord
of the manor is no other than Charles Dennison, our fellow-rake at
Oxford--We are now happily housed with that gentleman, who has really
attained to that pitch of rural felicity, at which I have been aspiring
these twenty years in vain. He is blessed with a consort, whose
disposition is suited to his own in all respects; tender, generous, and
benevolent--She, moreover, possesses an uncommon share of understanding,
fortitude, and discretion, and is admirably qualified to be his
companion, confidant, counsellor, and coadjutrix. These excellent
persons have an only son, about nineteen years of age, just such a
youth as they could have wished that Heaven would bestow to fill up the
measure of their enjoyment--In a word, they know no other allay to
their happiness, but their apprehension and anxiety about the life and
concerns of this beloved object.

Our old friend, who had the misfortune to be a second brother, was bred
to the law, and even called to the bar; but he did not find himself
qualified to shine in that province, and had very little inclination for
his profession--He disobliged his father, by marrying for love, without
any consideration of fortune; so that he had little or nothing to
depend upon for some years but his practice, which afforded him a bare
subsistence; and the prospect of an increasing family, began to give
him disturbance and disquiet. In the mean time, his father dying, was
succeeded by his elder brother, a fox-hunter and a sot, who neglected
his affairs, insulted and oppressed his servants, and in a few years had
well nigh ruined the estate, when he was happily carried off by a fever,
the immediate consequence of a debauch. Charles, with the approbation of
his wife, immediately determined to quit business, and retire into the
country, although this resolution was strenuously and zealously opposed
by every individual, whom he consulted on the subject. Those who had
tried the experiment, assured him that he could not pretend to breathe
in the country for less than the double of what his estate produced;
that, in order to be upon the footing of a gentleman, he would be
obliged to keep horses, hounds, carriages, with a suitable number of
servants, and maintain an elegant table for the entertainment of his
neighbours; that farming was a mystery, known only to those who had been
bred up to it from the cradle, the success of it depending not only
upon skill and industry, but also upon such attention and oeconomy as
no gentleman could be supposed to give or practise; accordingly, every
attempt made by gentlemen miscarried, and not a few had been ruined by
their prosecution of agriculture--Nay, they affirmed that he would find
it cheaper to buy hay and oats for his cattle, and to go to market
for poultry, eggs, kitchen herbs, and roots, and every the most
inconsiderable article of house-keeping, than to have those articles
produced on his own ground.

These objections did not deter Mr Dennison, because they were chiefly
founded on the supposition, that he would be obliged to lead a life of
extravagance and dissipation, which he and his consort equally detested,
despised, and determined to avoid--The objects he had in view, were
health of body, peace of mind, and the private satisfaction of domestic
quiet, unallayed by actual want, and uninterrupted by the fears of
indigence--He was very moderate in his estimate of the necessaries, and
even of the comforts of life--He required nothing but wholesome air,
pure water, agreeable exercise, plain diet, convenient lodging, and
decent apparel. He reflected, that if a peasant without education, or
any great share of natural sagacity, could maintain a large family, and
even become opulent upon a farm, for which he payed an annual rent of
two or three hundred pounds to the landlord, surely he himself might
hope for some success from his industry, having no rent to pay, but,
on the contrary, three or four hundred pounds a year to receive. He
considered, that the earth was an indulgent mother, that yielded her
fruits to all her children without distinction. He had studied the
theory of agriculture with a degree of eagerness and delight; and he
could not conceive there was any mystery in the practice, but what he
should be able to disclose by dint of care and application. With respect
to houshold expence, he entered into a minute detail and investigation,
by which he perceived the assertions of his friends were altogether
erroneous--He found he should save sixty pounds a year in the
single article of house-rent, and as much more in pocket-money and
contingencies; that even butcher's-meat was twenty per cent cheaper in
the country than in London; but that poultry, and almost every other
circumstance of house-keeping, might be had for less than one-half of
what they cost in town; besides, a considerable saving on the side of
dress, in being delivered from the oppressive imposition of ridiculous
modes, invented by ignorance, and adopted by folly.

As to the danger of vying with the rich in pomp and equipage, it never
gave him the least disturbance. He was now turned of forty, and, having
lived half that time in the busy scenes of life, was well skilled in the
science of mankind. There cannot be in nature a more contemptible figure
than that of a man, who, with five hundred a year, presumes to rival
in expence a neighbour who possesses five times that income--His
ostentation, far from concealing, serves only to discover his indigence,
and render his vanity the more shocking; for it attracts the eyes of
censure, and excites the spirit of inquiry. There is not a family in the
county nor a servant in his own house, nor a farmer in the parish, but
what knows the utmost farthing that his lands produce, and all
these behold him with scorn or compassion. I am surprised that these
reflections do not occur to persons in this unhappy dilemma, and produce
a salutary effect; but the truth is, of all the passions incident
to human nature, vanity is that which most effectually perverts the
faculties of the understanding; nay, it sometimes becomes so incredibly
depraved, as to aspire at infamy, and find pleasure in bearing the
stigmas of reproach.

I have now given you a sketch of the character and situation of Mr
Dennison, when he came down to take possession of this estate; but as
the messenger, who carries the letters to the next town, is just setting
off, I shall reserve what further I have to say on this subject, till
the next post, when you shall certainly hear from


Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 8.




To Dr LEWIS.

Once more, dear doctor, I resume the pen for your amusement. It was
on the morning after our arrival that, walking out with my friend, Mr
Dennison, I could not help breaking forth into the warmest expressions
of applause at the beauty of the scene, which is really inchanting; and
I signified, in particular, how much I was pleased with the disposition
of some detached groves, that afforded at once shelter and ornament to
his habitation.

'When I took possession of these lands, about two and twenty years ago
(said he), there was not a tree standing within a mile of the house,
except those of an old neglected orchard, which produced nothing
but leaves and moss.--It was in the gloomy month of November, when I
arrived, and found the house in such a condition, that it might have
been justly stiled the tower of desolation.--The court-yard was covered
with nettles and docks, and the garden exhibited such a rank plantation
of weeds as I had never seen before;--the window-shutters were falling
in pieces,--the sashes broken;--and owls and jack-daws had taken
possession of the chimnies.--The prospect within was still more
dreary--All was dark, and damp, and dirty beyond description;--the rain
penetrated in several parts of the roof;--in some apartments the very
floors had given way;--the hangings were parted from the walls, and
shaking in mouldy remnants; the glasses were dropping out of their
frames;--the family-pictures were covered with dust and all the chairs
and tables worm-eaten and crazy.--There was not a bed in the house that
could be used, except one old-fashioned machine, with a high gilt tester
and fringed curtains of yellow mohair, which had been, for aught I know,
two centuries in the family.--In short, there was no furniture but the
utensils of the kitchen; and the cellar afforded nothing but a few empty
butts and barrels, that stunk so abominably, that I would not suffer
any body to enter it until I had flashed a considerable quantity of
gunpowder to qualify the foul air within.

'An old cottager and his wife, who were hired to lie in the house, had
left it with precipitation, alledging, among other causes of retreat,
that they could not sleep for frightful noises, and that my poor
brother certainly walked after his death.--In a word, the house appeared
uninhabitable; the barn, stable, and outhouses were in ruins; all the
fences broken down, and the fields lying waste.

'The farmer who kept the key never dreamed I had any intention to live
upon the spot--He rented a farm of sixty pounds, and his lease was just
expiring.--He had formed a scheme of being appointed bailiff to the
estate, and of converting the house and the adjacent grounds to his own
use.--A hint of his intention I received from the curate at my first
arrival; I therefore did not pay much regard to what he said by way of
discouraging me from coming to settle in the country; but I was a little
startled when he gave me warning that he should quit the farm at the
expiration of his lease, unless I could abate considerably in the rent.

'At this period I accidentally became acquainted with a person, whose
friendship laid the foundation of all my prosperity. In the next
market-town I chanced to dine at an inn with a Mr Wilson, who was lately
come to settle in the neighbourhood.--He had been lieutenant of a man of
war, but quitted the sea in some disgust, and married the only daughter
of farmer Bland, who lives in this parish, and has acquired a good
fortune in the way of husbandry.--Wilson is one of the best natured
men I ever knew; brave, frank, obliging, and ingenuous--He liked my
conversation, I was charmed with his liberal manner; and acquaintance
immediately commenced, and this was soon improved into a friendship
without reserve.--There are characters which, like similar particles of
matter, strongly attract each other.--He forthwith introduced me to his
father-in-law, farmer Bland, who was well acquainted with every acre
of my estate, of consequence well qualified to advise me on this
occasion.--Finding I was inclined to embrace a country life, and even
to amuse myself with the occupation of farming, he approved of my
design--He gave me to understand that all my farms were underlett; that
the estate was capable of great improvement; that there was plenty of
chalk in the neighbourhood; and that my own ground produced excellent
marle for manure.--With respect to the farm, which was like to fall into
my hands, he said he would willingly take it at the present rent; but
at the same time owned, that if I would expend two hundred pounds in
enclosure, it would be worth more than double the sum.

'Thus encouraged, I began the execution of my scheme without further
delay, and plunged into a sea of expence, though I had no fund in
reserve, and the whole produce of the estate did not exceed three
hundred pounds a year--In one week, my house was made weather-tight, and
thoroughly cleansed from top to bottom; then it was well ventilated by
throwing all the doors and windows open, and making blazing fires of
wood in every chimney from the kitchen to the garrets. The floors were
repaired, the sashes new glazed, and out of the old furniture of the
whole house, I made shift to fit up a parlour and three chambers in
a plain yet decent manner.--The court-yard was cleared of weeds and
rubbish, and my friend Wilson charged himself with the dressing of
the garden; bricklayers were set at work upon the barn and stable; and
labourers engaged to restore the fences, and begin the work of
hedging and ditching, under the direction of farmer Bland, at whose
recommendation I hired a careful hind to lie in the house, and keep
constant fires in the apartments.

'Having taken these measures, I returned to London, where I forthwith
sold off my household-furniture, and, in three weeks from my first
visit, brought my wife hither to keep her Christmas.--Considering the
gloomy season of the year, the dreariness of the place, and the decayed
aspect of our habitation, I was afraid that her resolution would sink
under the sudden transition from a town life to such a melancholy state
of rustication; but I was agreeably disappointed.--She found the reality
less uncomfortable than the picture I had drawn.--By this time indeed,
things were mended in appearance--The out-houses had risen out of their
ruins; the pigeon-house was rebuilt, and replenished by Wilson, who also
put my garden in decent order, and provided a good stock of poultry,
which made an agreeable figure in my yard; and the house, on the whole,
looked like the habitation of human creatures.--Farmer Bland spared me a
milch cow for my family, and an ordinary saddle-horse for my servant to
go to market at the next town.--I hired a country lad for a footman, the
hind's daughter was my house-maid, and my wife had brought a cook-maid
from London.

'Such was my family when I began house-keeping in this place, with three
hundred pounds in my pocket, raised from the sale of my superfluous
furniture.--I knew we should find occupation enough through the day to
employ our time; but I dreaded the long winter evenings; yet, for those
too we found a remedy: The curate, who was a single man, soon became so
naturalized to the family, that he generally lay in the house; and his
company was equally agreeable and useful. He was a modest man, a good
scholar, and perfectly well qualified to instruct me in such country
matters as I wanted to know.--Mr Wilson brought his wife to see us, and
she became so fond of Mrs Dennison, that she said she was never so happy
as when she enjoyed the benefit of her conversation.--She was then a
fine buxom country lass, exceedingly docile, and as good-natured as her
husband Jack Wilson; so that a friendship ensued among the women, which
hath continued to this day.

'As for Jack, he hath been my constant companion, counsellor, and
commissary.--I would not for a hundred pounds you should leave my house
without seeing him.--Jack is an universal genius--his talents are really
astonishing:--He is an excellent carpenter, joiner, and turner, and
a cunning artist in iron and brass.--He not only superintended my
oeconomy, but also presided over my pastimes--He taught me to brew
beer, to make cyder, perry, mead, usquebaugh, and plague-water; to cook
several outlandish delicacies, such as ollas, pepper-pots, pillaws,
corys, chabobs, and stufatas.--He understands all manner of games from
chess down to chuck-farthing, sings a good song, plays upon the violin,
and dances a hornpipe with surprising agility.--He and I walked, and
rode, and hunted, and fished together, without minding the vicissitudes
of the weather; and I am persuaded, that in a raw, moist climate, like
this of England, continual exercise is as necessary as food to the
preservation of the individual.--In the course of two and twenty
years, there has not been one hour's interruption or abatement in the
friendship subsisting between Wilson's family and mine; and, what is
a rare instance of good fortune, that friendship is continued to our
children.--His son and mine are nearly of the same age and the same
disposition; they have been bred up together at the same school and
college, and love each other with the warmest affection.

'By Wilson's means, I likewise formed an acquaintance with a sensible
physician, who lives in the next market-town; and his sister, an
agreeable old maiden, passed the Christmas holidays at our house. Mean
while I began my farming with great eagerness, and that very winter
planted these groves that please you so much.--As for the neighbouring
gentry, I had no trouble from that quarter during my first campaign;
they were all gone to town before I settled in the country; and by the
summer I had taken measures to defend myself from their attacks.--When a
gay equipage came to my gates, I was never at home; those who visited
me in a modest way, I received; and according to the remarks I made on
their characters and conversation, either rejected their advances, or
returned their civility--I was in general despised among the fashionable
company, as a low fellow, both in breeding and circumstances;
nevertheless, I found a few individuals of moderate fortune, who gladly
adopted my stile of living; and many others would have acceded to our
society, had they not been prevented by the pride, envy, and ambition of
their wives and daughters.--Those, in times of luxury and dissipation,
are the rocks upon which all the small estates in the country are
wrecked.

'I reserved in my own hands, some acres of ground adjacent to the house,
for making experiments in agriculture, according to the directions of
Lyle, Tull, Hart, Duhamel, and others who have written on this subject;
and qualified their theory with the practical observations of farmer
Bland, who was my great master in the art of husbandry.--In short, I
became enamoured of a country life; and my success greatly exceeded my
expectation--I drained bogs, burned heath, grubbed up furze and fern;
I planted copse and willows where nothing else would grow; I gradually
inclosed all my farms, and made such improvements that my estate now
yields me clear twelve hundred pounds a year--All this time my wife
and I have enjoyed uninterrupted health, and a regular flow of spirits,
except on a very few occasions, when our cheerfulness was invaded by
such accidents as are inseparable from the condition of life. I lost
two children in their infancy, by the small-pox, so that I have one son
only, in whom all our hopes are centered.--He went yesterday to visit
a friend, with whom he has stayed all night, but he will be here to
dinner.--I shall this day have the pleasure of presenting him to you
and your family; and I flatter myself you will find him not altogether
unworthy of our affection.

'The truth is, either I am blinded by the partiality of a parent, or
he is a boy of very amiable character; and yet his conduct has given us
unspeakable disquiet.--You must know, we had projected a match between
him and a gentleman's daughter in the next county, who will in all
probability be heiress of a considerable fortune; but, it seems, he had
a personal disgust to the alliance. He was then at Cambridge, and tried
to gain time on various pretences; but being pressed in letters by his
mother and me to give a definitive answer, he fairly gave his tutor the
slip, and disappeared about eight months ago.--Before he took this rash
step, he wrote me a letter, explaining his objections to the match,
and declaring, that he would keep himself concealed until he should
understand that his parents would dispense with his contracting an
engagement that must make him miserable for life, and he prescribed
the form of advertising in a certain newspaper, by which he might be
apprized of our sentiments on this subject.

'You may easily conceive how much we were alarmed and afflicted by this
elopement, which he had made without dropping the least hint to his
companion Charles Wilson, who belonged to the same college.--We resolved
to punish him with the appearance of neglect, in hopes that he would
return of his own accord; but he maintained his purpose till the young
lady chose a partner for herself; then he produced himself, and made his
peace by the mediation of Wilson.--Suppose we should unite our families
by joining him with your niece, who is one of the most lovely creatures
I ever beheld.--My wife is already as fond of her as if she were her own
child, and I have a presentiment that my son will be captivated by her
at first sight.' 'Nothing could be more agreeable to all our family
(said I) than such an alliance; but, my dear friend, candour obliges
me to tell you, that I am afraid Liddy's heart is not wholly
disengaged--there is a cursed obstacle'--'You mean the young stroller
at Gloucester (said he)--You are surprised that I should know this
circumstance; but you will be more surprised when I tell you that
stroller is no other than my son George Dennison--That was the character
he assumed in his eclipse.' 'I am, indeed, astonished and overjoyed
(cried I), and shall be happy beyond expression to see your proposal
take effect.'

He then gave me to understand that the young gentleman, at his emerging
from concealment, had disclosed his passion for Miss Melford, the niece
of Mr Bramble, of Monmouthshire. Though Mr Dennison little dreamed that
this was his old friend Matthew Loyd, he nevertheless furnished his son
with proper credentials, and he had been at Bath, London, and many other
places in quest of us, to make himself and his pretensions known.

The bad success of his enquiry had such an effect upon his spirits, that
immediately at his return he was seized with a dangerous fever, which
overwhelmed his parents with terror and affliction; but he was now
happily recovered, though still weak and disconsolate. My nephew joining
us in our walk, I informed him of these circumstances, with which he
was wonderfully pleased. He declared he would promote the match to the
utmost of his power, and that he longed to embrace young Mr Dennison as
his friend and brother.--Mean while, the father went to desire his wife
to communicate this discovery gradually to Liddy, that her delicate
nerves might not suffer too sudden a shock; and I imparted the
particulars to my sister Tabby, who expressed some surprize, not
altogether unmixed, I believe, with an emotion of envy; for, though
she could have no objection to an alliance at once so honourable and
advantageous, she hesitated in giving her consent on pretence of
the youth and inexperience of the parties: at length, however, she
acquiesced, in consequence of having consulted with captain Lismahago.

Mr Dennison took care to be in the way when his son arrived at the gate,
and, without giving him time or opportunity to make any enquiry about
the strangers, brought him up stairs to be presented to Mr Loyd and his
family--The first person he saw when he entered the room, was Liddy,
who, notwithstanding all her preparation, stood trembling in the utmost
confusion--At sight of this object he was fixed motionless to the floor,
and, gazing at her with the utmost eagerness of astonishment, exclaimed,
'Sacred heaven! what is this!--ha! wherefore--' Here his speech failing,
he stood straining his eyes, in the most emphatic silence 'George (said
his father), this is my friend Mr Loyd.' Roused at this intimation, he
turned and received my salute, when I said, 'Young gentleman, if you had
trusted me with your secret at our last meeting, we should have parted
upon better terms.' Before he could make any answer, Jery came round
and stood before him with open arms.--At first, he started and changed
colour; but after a short pause, he rushed into his embrace, and they
hugged one another as if they had been intimate friends from their
infancy: then he payed his respects to Mrs Tabitha, and advancing to
Liddy, 'Is it possible, (cried he), that my senses do not play me false!
that I see Miss Melford under my father's roof--that I am permitted
to speak to her without giving offence--and that her relations have
honoured me with their countenance and protection.' Liddy blushed,
and trembled, and faltered--'To be sure, sir (said she), it is a very
surprising circumstance--a great--a providential--I really know not what
I say--but I beg you will think I have said what's agreeable.'

Mrs Dennison interposing said, 'Compose yourselves, my dear
children.--Your mutual happiness shall be our peculiar care.' The son
going up to his mother, kissed one hand; my niece bathed the other with
her tears; and the good old lady pressed them both in their turns to
her breast.--The lovers were too much affected to get rid of their
embarrassment for one day; but the scene was much enlivened by the
arrival of Jack Wilson, who brought, as usual, some game of his own
killing--His honest countenance was a good letter of recommendation. I
received him like a dear friend after a long separation; and I could
not help wondering to see him shake Jery by the hand as an old
acquaintance--They had, indeed, been acquainted some days, in
consequence of a diverting incident, which I shall explain at meeting.
That same night a consultation was held upon the concerns of the lovers,
when the match was formally agreed to, and all the marriage articles
were settled without the least dispute.--My nephew and I promised to
make Liddy's fortune five thousand pounds. Mr Dennison declared, he
would make over one half of his estate immediately to his son, and
that his daughter-in-law should be secured in a jointure of four
hundred--Tabby proposed, that, considering their youth, they should
undergo one year at least, of probation before the indissoluble knot
should be tied; but the young gentleman being very impatient and
importunate, and the scheme implying that the young couple should live
in the house, under the wings of his parents, we resolved to make them
happy without further delay.

As the law requires that the parties should be some weeks resident
in the parish, we shall stay here till the ceremony is performed.--Mr
Lismahago requests that he may take the benefit of the same occasion; so
that next Sunday the banns will be published for all four together.--I
doubt I shall not be able to pass my Christmas with you at
Brambleton-hall.--Indeed, I am so agreeably situated in this place, that
I have no desire to shift my quarters; and I foresee, that when the day
of separation comes, there will be abundance of sorrow on all sides.--In
the mean time, we must make the most of those blessings which Heaven
bestows.--Considering how you are tethered by your profession, I cannot
hope to see you so far from home; yet the distance does not exceed a
summer-day's journey, and Charles Dennison, who desires to be remembered
to you, would be rejoiced to see his old compotator; but as I am now
stationary, I expect regular answers to the epistles of

Yours invariably, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 11.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Every day is now big with incident and discovery--Young Mr Dennison
proves to be no other than that identical person whom I have execrated
so long, under the name of Wilson--He had eloped from college at
Cambridge, to avoid a match that he detested, and acted in different
parts of the country as a stroller, until the lady in question made
choice of a husband for herself; then he returned to his father, and
disclosed his passion for Liddy, which met with the approbation of his
parents, though the father little imagined that Mr Bramble was his old
companion Matthew Loyd. The young gentleman, being impowered to make
honourable proposals to my uncle and me, had been in search of us all
over England, without effect; and he it was whom I had seen pass on
horseback by the window of the inn, where I stood with my sister, but
he little dreamed that we were in the house--As for the real Mr Wilson,
whom I called forth to combat, by mistake, he is the neighbour and
intimate friend of old Mr Dennison, and this connexion had suggested to
the son the idea of taking that name while he remained in obscurity.

You may easily conceive what pleasure I must have felt on discovering
that the honour of our family was in no danger from the conduct of a
sister whom I love with uncommon affection; that, instead of debasing
her sentiments and views to a wretched stroller, she had really
captivated the heart of a gentleman, her equal in rank and superior in
fortune; and that, as his parents approved of his attachment, I was on
the eve of acquiring a brother-in-law so worthy of my friendship and
esteem. George Dennison is, without all question, one of the most
accomplished young fellows in England. His person is at once elegant
and manly, and his understanding highly cultivated. Tho' his spirit
is lofty, his heart is kind; and his manner so engaging, as to command
veneration and love, even from malice and indifference. When I weigh
my own character with his, I am ashamed to find myself so light in the
balance; but the comparison excites no envy--I propose him as a model
for imitation--I have endeavoured to recommend myself to his friendship,
and hope I have already found a place in his affection. I am, however,
mortified to reflect what flagrant injustice we every day commit, and
what absurd judgment we form, in viewing objects through the falsifying
mediums of prejudice and passion. Had you asked me a few days ago, the
picture of Wilson the player, I should have drawn a portrait very unlike
the real person and character of George Dennison. Without all doubt, the
greatest advantage acquired in travelling and perusing mankind in the
original, is that of dispelling those shameful clouds that darken the
faculties of the mind, preventing it from judging with candour and
precision.

The real Wilson is a great original, and the best tempered,
companionable man I ever knew--I question if ever he was angry or
low-spirited in his life. He makes no pretensions to letters; but he is
an adept in every thing else that can be either useful or entertaining.
Among other qualifications, he is a complete sportsman, and counted the
best shot in the county. He and Dennison, and Lismahago and I, attended
by Clinker, went a-shooting yesterday, and made a great havock among the
partridges--To-morrow we shall take the field against the woodcocks and
snipes. In the evening we dance and sing, or play at commerce, loo, and
quadrille.

Mr Dennison is an elegant poet, and has written some detached pieces on
the subject of his passion for Liddy, which must be very flattering
to the vanity of a young woman--Perhaps he is one of the greatest
theatrical geniuses that ever appeared. He sometimes entertains us with
reciting favourite speeches from our best plays. We are resolved to
convert the great hall into a theatre, and get up the Beaux Stratagem
without delay--I think I shall make no contemptible figure in the
character of Scrub; and Lismahago will be very great in Captain Gibbet.
Wilson undertakes to entertain the country people with Harlequin
Skeleton, for which he has got a jacket ready painted with his own hand.

Our society is really enchanting. Even the severity of Lismahago
relaxes, and the vinegar of Mrs Tabby is remarkably dulcified, ever
since it was agreed that she should take precedency of her niece in
being first noosed: for, you must know, the day is fixed for Liddy's
marriage; and the banns for both couples have been already once
published in the parish church. The Captain earnestly begged that
one trouble might serve for all, and Tabitha assented with a vile
affectation of reluctance. Her inamorato, who came hither very slenderly
equipt, has sent for his baggage to London, which, in all probability,
will not arrive in time for the wedding; but it is of no great
consequence, as every thing is to be transacted with the utmost
privacy--Meanwhile, directions are given for making out the contracts
of marriage, which are very favourable for both females; Liddy will be
secured in a good jointure; and her aunt will remain mistress of her own
fortune, except one half of the interest, which her husband shall have
a right to enjoy for his natural life: I think this is as little in
conscience as can be done for a man who yokes with such a partner for
life.

These expectants seem to be so happy, that if Mr Dennison had an
agreeable daughter, I believe I should be for making the third couple
in this country dance. The humour seems to be infectious; for Clinker,
alias Loyd, has a month's mind to play the fool, in the same fashion,
with Mrs Winifred Jenkins. He has even sounded me on the subject; but I
have given him no encouragement to prosecute this scheme--I told him
I thought he might do better, as there was no engagement nor promise
subsisting; that I did not know what designs my uncle might have formed
for his advantage; but I was of opinion, that he should not, at present,
run the risque of disobliging him by any premature application of this
nature--Honest Humphry protested he would suffer death sooner than do or
say any thing that should give offence to the 'squire: but he owned he
had a kindness for the young woman, and had reason to think she
looked upon him with a favourable eye; that he considered this mutual
manifestation of good will, as an engagement understood, which ought to
be binding to the conscience of an honest man; and he hoped the 'squire
and I would be of the same opinion, when we should be at leisure to
bestow any thought about the matter--I believe he is in the right; and
we shall find time to take his case into consideration--You see we are
fixed for some weeks at least, and as you have had a long respite, I
hope you will begin immediately to discharge the arrears due to

Your affectionate, J. MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR, DEAR LETTY,

Never did I sit down to write in such agitation as I now feel--In
the course of a few days, we have met with a number of incidents so
wonderful and interesting, that all my ideas are thrown into confusion
and perplexity--You must not expect either method or coherence in what
I am going to relate--my dearest Willis. Since my last, the aspect of
affairs is totally changed!--and so changed! but I would fain give you
a regular detail--In passing a river about eight days ago, our coach was
overturned, and some of us narrowly escaped with life--My uncle had well
nigh perished. O Heaven, I cannot reflect upon that circumstance without
horror--I should have lost my best friend, my father and protector, but
for the resolution and activity of his servant Humphry Clinker, whom
Providence really seems to have placed near him for the necessity of
this occasion.--I would not be thought superstitious; but surely he
acted from a stronger impulse than common fidelity. Was it not the
voice of nature that loudly called upon him to save the life of his
own father? for, 0 Letty, it was discovered that Humphry Clinker was my
uncle's natural son.

Almost at the same instant, a gentleman, who came to offer us his
assistance, and invite us to his house, turned out to be a very old
friend of Mr Bramble.--His name is Mr Dennison, one of the worthiest men
living; and his lady is a perfect saint upon earth. They have an only
son--who do you think is this only son?--O Letty!--O gracious heaven!
how my heart palpitates, when I tell you that this only son of Mr
Dennison's, is that very identical youth who, under the name of Wilson,
has made such ravage in my heart!--Yes, my dear friend! Wilson and I are
now lodged in the same house, and converse together freely--His father
approves of his sentiments in my favour; his mother loves me with all
the tenderness of a parent; my uncle, my aunt and my brother, no longer
oppose my inclinations--On the contrary, they have agreed to make us
happy without delay; and in three weeks or a month, if no unforeseen
accident intervenes, your friend Lydia Melford, will have changed her
name and condition--I say, if no accident intervenes, because such a
torrent of success makes me tremble!--I wish there may not be something
treacherous in this sudden reconciliation of fortune--I have no merit--I
have no title to such felicity. Far from enjoying the prospect that
lies before me, my mind is harrassed with a continued tumult, made up of
hopes and wishes, doubts and apprehensions--I can neither eat nor sleep,
and my spirits are in perpetual flutter.--I more than ever feel that
vacancy in my heart, which your presence alone can fill.--The mind, in
every disquiet, seeks to repose itself on the bosom of a friend; and
this is such a trial as I really know not how to support without your
company and counsel--I must, therefore, dear Letty, put your friendship
to the test--I must beg you will come and do the last offices of
maidenhood to your companion Lydia Melford.

This letter goes inclosed in one to our worthy governess, from Mrs
Dennison, entreating her to interpose with your mamma, that you may be
allowed to favour us with your company on this occasion; and I flatter
myself that no material objection can be made to our request. The
distance from hence to Gloucester, does not exceed one hundred miles,
and the roads are good.--Mr Clinker, alias Loyd, shall be sent over to
attend your motions--If you step into the post-chaise, with your maid
Betty Barker, at seven in the morning, you will arrive by four in the
afternoon at the half-way house, where there is good accommodation.
There you shall be met by my brother and myself, who will next day
conduct you to this place, where, I am sure, you will find yourself
perfectly at your case in the midst of an agreeable society.--Dear
Letty, I will take no refusal--if you have any friendship--any
humanity--you will come.--I desire that immediate application may be
made to your mamma; and that the moment her permission is obtained, you
will apprise

Your ever faithful, LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs JERMYN, at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Though I was not so fortunate as to be favoured with an answer to the
letter with which I troubled you in the spring, I still flatter myself
that you retain some regard for me and my concerns. I am sure the care
and tenderness with which I was treated, under your roof and tuition,
demand the warmest returns of gratitude and affection on my part, and
these sentiments, I hope, I shall cherish to my dying day--At present,
I think it my duty to make you acquainted with the happy issue of that
indiscretion by which I incurred your displeasure.--Ah! madam, the
slighted Wilson is metamorphosed into George Dennison, only son and heir
of a gentleman, whose character is second to none in England, as you may
understand upon inquiry. My guardian, my brother and I, are now in his
house; and an immediate union of the two families is to take place in
the persons of the young gentleman and your poor Lydia Melford.--You
will easily conceive how embarrassing this situation must be to a young
inexperienced creature like me, of weak nerves and strong apprehensions;
and how much the presence of a friend and confidant would encourage and
support me on this occasion. You know, that of all the young ladies,
Miss Willis was she that possessed the greatest share of my confidence
and affection; and, therefore, I fervently wish to have the happiness of
her company at this interesting crisis.

Mrs Dennison, who is the object of universal love and esteem, has, at
my request, written to you on this subject, and I now beg leave to
reinforce her sollicitations.--My dear Mrs Jermyn! my ever honoured
governess! let me conjure you by that fondness which once distinguished
your favourite Lydia! by that benevolence of heart, which disposes you
to promote the happiness of your fellow-creatures in general! lend
a favourable ear to my petition, and use your influence with Letty's
mamma, that my most earnest desire may be gratified. Should I be
indulged in this particular, I will engage to return her safe, and even
to accompany her to Gloucester, where, if you will give me leave, I will
present to you, under another name,

Dear Madam, Your most affectionate Humble servant, And penitent, LYDIA
MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

O MARY JONES! MARY JONES!

I have met with so many axidents, suprisals, and terrifications, that
I am in a pafeck fantigo, and I believe I shall never be my own self
again. Last week I was dragged out of a river like a drowned rat, and
lost a bran-new night-cap, with a sulfer stayhook, that cost me a good
half-a-crown, and an odd shoe of green gallow monkey; besides wetting my
cloaths and taring my smuck, and an ugly gash made in the back part of
my thy, by the stump of a tree--To be sure Mr Clinker tuck me out of the
cox; but he left me on my back in the water, to go to the 'squire; and I
mought have had a watry grave, if a millar had not brought me to the dry
land--But, O! what choppings and changes girl--The player man that came
after Miss Liddy, and frightened me with a beard at Bristol Well, is now
matthew-murphy'd into a fine young gentleman, son and hare of 'squire
Dollison--We are all together in the same house, and all parties have
agreed to the match, and in a fortnite the surrymony will be performed.

But this is not the only wedding we are to have--Mistriss is resolved
to have the same frolick, in the naam of God! Last Sunday in the parish
crutch, if my own ars may be trusted, the clerk called the banes of
marridge betwixt Opaniah Lashmeheygo, and Tapitha Brample, spinster; he
mought as well have called her inkle-weaver, for she never spun and hank
of yarn in her life--Young 'squire Dollison and Miss Liddy make the
second kipple; and there might have been a turd, but times are changed
with Mr Clinker--O Molly! what do'st think? Mr Clinker is found to be a
pye-blow of our own 'squire, and his rite naam is Mr Matthew Loyd (thof
God he nose how that can be); and he is now out of livery, and wares
ruffles--but I new him when he was out at elbows, and had not a rag to
kiver his pistereroes; so he need not hold his head so high--He is for
sartin very umble and compleasant, and purtests as how he has the same
regard as before; but that he is no longer his own master, and cannot
portend to marry without the 'squire's consent--He says he must wait
with patience, and trust to Providence, and such nonsense--But if so be
as how his regard be the same, why stand shilly shally? Why not strike
while the iron is hot, and speak to the 'squire without loss of time?
What subjection can the 'squire make to our coming together--Thof my
father wan't a gentleman, my mother was an honest woman--I didn't come
on the wrong side of the blanket, girl--My parents were marred according
to the right of holy mother crutch, in the face of men and angles--Mark
that, Mary Jones.

Mr Clinker (Loyd I would say) had best look to his tackle. There be
other chaps in the market, as the saying is--What would he say if I
should except the soot and sarvice of the young squire's valley? Mr
Machappy is a gentleman born, and has been abroad in the wars--He has a
world of buck larning, and speaks French, and Ditch, and Scotch, and all
manner of outlandish lingos; to be sure he's a little the worse for the
ware, and is much given to drink; but then he's good-tempered in his
liquor, and a prudent woman mought wind him about her finger--But I have
no thoughts of him, I'll assure you--I scorn for to do, or to say, or
to think any thing that mought give unbreech to Mr Loyd, without furder
occasion--But then I have such vapours, Molly I sit and cry by myself,
and take ass of etida, and smill to burnt fathers, and kindal-snuffs;
and I pray constantly for grease, that I may have a glimpse of the
new-light, to shew me the way through this wretched veil of tares. And
yet, I want for nothing in this family of love, where every sole is so
kind and so courteous, that wan would think they are so many saints in
haven. Dear Molly, I recommend myself to your prayers, being, with my
sarvice to Saul,

your ever loving, and discounselled friend, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 14.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

You cannot imagine what pleasure I have in seeing your hand-writing,
after such a long cessation on your side of our correspondence--Yet,
Heaven knows, I have often seen your hand-writing with disgust--I mean,
when it appeared in abbreviations of apothecary's Latin--I like your
hint of making interest for the reversion of the collector's place, for
Mr Lismahago, who is much pleased with the scheme, and presents you
with his compliments and best thanks for thinking so kindly of his
concerns--The man seems to mend, upon further acquaintance. That harsh
reserve, which formed a disagreeable husk about his character, begins to
peel off in the course of our communication--I have great hopes that
he and Tabby will be as happily paired as any two draught animals in
the kingdom; and I make no doubt but that he will prove a valuable
acquisition to our little society, in the article of conversation, by
the fire-side in winter.

Your objection to my passing this season of the year at such a distance
from home, would have more weight if I did not find myself perfectly at
my ease where I am; and my health so much improved, that I am disposed
to bid defiance to gout and rheumatism--I begin to think I have put
myself on the superannuated list too soon, and absurdly sought
for health in the retreats of laziness--I am persuaded that all
valetudinarians are too sedentary, too regular, and too cautious--We
should sometimes increase the motion of the machine, to unclog the
wheels of life; and now and then take a plunge amidst the waves of
excess, in order to caseharden the constitution. I have even found a
change of company as necessary as a change of air, to promote a vigorous
circulation of the spirits, which is the very essence and criterion of
good health.

Since my last, I have been performing the duties of friendship, that
required a great deal of exercise, from which I hope to derive some
benefit--Understanding, by the greatest accident in the world, that
Mr Baynard's wife was dangerously ill of a pleuritic fever, I borrowed
Dennison's post-chaise, and went across the country to his habitation,
attended only by Loyd (quondam Clinker) on horseback.--As the distance
is not above thirty miles, I arrived about four in the afternoon, and
meeting the physician at the door, was informed that his patient had
just expired.--I was instantly seized with a violent emotion, but it
was not grief.--The family being in confusion, I ran up stairs into
the chamber, where, indeed, they were all assembled.--The aunt stood
wringing her hands in a kind of stupefaction of sorrow, but my friend
acted all the extravagancies of affliction--He held the body in his
arms, and poured forth such a lamentation, that one would have thought
he had lost the most amiable consort and valuable companion upon earth.

Affection may certainly exist independent of esteem; nay, the same
object may be lovely in one respect, and detestable in another--The mind
has a surprising faculty of accommodating, and even attaching itself,
in such a manner, by dint of use, to things that are in their own nature
disagreeable, and even pernicious, that it cannot bear to be delivered
from them without reluctance and regret. Baynard was so absorbed in his
delirium, that he did not perceive me when I entered, and desired one of
the women to conduct the aunt into her own chamber.--At the same time I
begged the tutor to withdraw the boy, who stood gaping in a corner,
very little affected with the distress of the scene.--These steps being
taken, I waited till the first violence of my friend's transport was
abated, then disengaged him gently from the melancholy object, and led
him by the hand into another apartment; though he struggled so hard,
that I was obliged to have recourse to the assistance of his valet de
chambre--In a few minutes, however, he recollected himself, and folding
me in his arms, 'This (cried he), is a friendly office, indeed!--I know
not how you came hither; but, I think, Heaven sent you to prevent my
going distracted--O Matthew! I have lost my dear Harriet!--my poor,
gentle, tender creature, that loved me with such warmth and purity of
affection--my constant companion of twenty years! She's gone--she's gone
for ever!--Heaven and earth! where is she?--Death shall not part us!'

So saying, he started up, and could hardly be with-held from returning
to the scene we had quitted--You will perceive it would have been very
absurd for me to argue with a man that talked so madly.--On all such
occasions, the first torrent of passion must be allowed to subside
gradually.--I endeavoured to beguile his attention by starting little
hints and insinuating other objects of discourse imperceptibly; and
being exceedingly pleased in my own mind at this event, I exerted
myself with such an extraordinary flow of spirits as was attended with
success.--In a few hours, he was calm enough to hear reason, and even to
own that Heaven could not have interposed more effectually to rescue
him from disgrace and ruin.--That he might not, however, relapse into
weaknesses for want of company, I passed the night in his chamber, in a
little tent bed brought thither on purpose; and well it was I took
this precaution, for he started up in bed several times, and would have
played the fool, if I had not been present.

Next day he was in a condition to talk of business, and vested me with
full authority over his household, which I began to exercise without
loss of time, tho' not before he knew and approved of the scheme I
had projected for his advantage.--He would have quitted the house
immediately; but this retreat I opposed.--Far from encouraging a
temporary disgust, which might degenerate into an habitual aversion,
I resolved, if possible, to attach him more than ever to his Houshold
Gods.--I gave directions for the funeral to be as private as was
consistant with decency; I wrote to London, that an inventory and
estimate might be made of the furniture and effects in his town-house,
and gave notice to the landlord, that Mr Baynard should quit the
premises at Lady-day; I set a person at work to take account of every
thing in the country-house, including horses, carriages, and harness; I
settled the young gentleman at a boarding-school, kept by a clergyman in
the neighbourhood, and thither he went without reluctance, as soon as
he knew that he was to be troubled no more with his tutor, whom we
dismissed. The aunt continued very sullen, and never appeared at
table, though Mr Baynard payed his respects to her every day in her
own chamber; there also she held conferences with the waiting-women and
other servants of the family: but, the moment her niece was interred,
she went away in a post-chaise prepared for that purpose: she did not
leave the house, however, without giving Mr Baynard to understand, that
the wardrobe of her niece was the perquisite of her woman; accordingly
that worthless drab received all the clothes, laces, and linen of her
deceased mistress, to the value of five hundred pounds, at a moderate
computation.

The next step I took was to disband that legion of supernumerary
domestics, who had preyed so long upon the vitals of my friend:, a
parcel of idle drones, so intolerably insolent, that they even treated
their own master with the most contemptuous neglect. They had been
generally hired by his wife, according to the recommendation of her
woman, and these were the only patrons to whom they payed the least
deference. I had therefore uncommon satisfaction in clearing the house
of these vermin. The woman of the deceased, and a chambermaid, a valet
de chambre, a butler, a French cook, a master gardener, two footmen and
a coachman, I payed off, and turned out of the house immediately, paying
to each a month's wages in lieu of warning. Those whom I retained,
consisted of the female cook, who had been assistant to the Frenchman,
a house maid, an old lacquey, a postilion, and under-gardener. Thus I
removed at once a huge mountain of expence and care from the shoulders
of my friend, who could hardly believe the evidence of his own senses,
when he found himself so suddenly and so effectually relieved. His
heart, however, was still subject to vibrations of tenderness,
which returned at certain intervals, extorting sighs, and tears, and
exclamations of grief and impatience: but these fits grew every day
less violent and less frequent, 'till at length his reason obtained a
complete victory over the infirmities of his nature.

Upon an accurate enquiry into the state of his affairs, I find his debts
amount to twenty thousand pounds, for eighteen thousand pounds of which
sum his estate is mortgaged; and as he pays five per cent. interest, and
some of his farms are unoccupied, he does not receive above two hundred
pounds a year clear from his lands, over and above the interest of
his wife's fortune, which produced eight hundred pounds annually. For
lightening this heavy burthen, I devised the following expedient. His
wife's jewels, together with his superfluous plate and furniture in both
houses, his horses and carriages, which are already advertised to be
sold by auction, will, according to the estimate, produce two thousand
five hundred pounds in ready money, with which the debt will be
immediately reduced to eighteen thousand pounds--I have undertaken to
find him ten thousand pounds at four per cent. by which means he will
save one hundred a-year in the article of interest, and perhaps we shall
be able to borrow the other eight thousand on the same terms. According
to his own scheme of a country life, he says he can live comfortably for
three hundred pounds a-year; but, as he has a son to educate, we will
allow him five hundred; then there will be an accumulating fund of seven
hundred a-year, principal and interest, to pay off the incumbrance;
and, I think, we may modestly add three hundred, on the presumption
of new-leasing and improving the vacant farms: so that, in a couple of
years, I suppose there will be above a thousand a-year appropriated to
liquidate a debt of sixteen thousand.

We forthwith began to class and set apart the articles designed for
sale, under the direction of an upholder from London; and, that nobody
in the house might be idle, commenced our reformation without doors,
as well as within. With Baynard's good leave, I ordered the gardener to
turn the rivulet into its old channel, to refresh the fainting Naiads,
who had so long languished among mouldring roots, withered leaves, and
dry pebbles--The shrubbery is condemned to extirpation; and the
pleasure ground will be restored to its original use of corn-field and
pasture--Orders are given for rebuilding the walls of the garden at the
back of the house, and for planting clumps of firs, intermingled with
beech and chestnut, at the east end, which is now quite exposed to the
surly blasts that come from that quarter. All these works being actually
begun, and the house and auction left to the care and management of a
reputable attorney, I brought Baynard along with me in the chaise, and
made him acquainted with Dennison, whose goodness of heart would not
fail to engage his esteem and affection.--He is indeed charmed with our
society in general, and declares that he never saw the theory of true
pleasure reduced to practice before. I really believe it would not be an
easy task to find such a number of individuals assembled under one roof,
more happy than we are at present.

I must tell you, however, in confidence, I suspect Tabby of
tergiversation.--I have been so long accustomed to that original, that
I know all the caprices of her heart, and can often perceive her designs
while they are yet in embrio--She attached herself to Lismahago for no
other reason but that she despaired of making a more agreeable conquest.
At present, if I am not much mistaken in my observation, she would
gladly convert the widowhood of Baynard to her own advantage.--Since
he arrived, she has behaved very coldly to the captain, and strove to
fasten on the other's heart, with the hooks of overstrained civility.
These must be the instinctive efforts of her constitution, rather than
the effects of any deliberate design; for matters are carried to such a
length with the lieutenant, that she could not retract with any regard
to conscience or reputation. Besides, she will meet with nothing but
indifference or aversion on the side of Baynard, who has too much sense
to think of such a partner at any time, and too much delicacy to admit a
thought of any such connexion at the present juncture--Meanwhile, I have
prevailed upon her to let him have four thousand pounds at four per cent
towards paying off his mortage. Young Dennison has agreed that
Liddy's fortune shall be appropriated to the same purpose, on the same
terms.--His father will sell out three thousand pounds stock for his
accommodation.--Farmer Bland has, at the desire of Wilson, undertaken
for two thousand; and I must make an effort to advance what further will
be required to take my friend out of the hands of the Philistines. He
is so pleased with the improvements made on his estate, which is all
cultivated like a garden, that he has entered himself as a pupil in
farming to Mr Dennison, and resolved to attach himself wholly to the
practice of husbandry.

Every thing is now prepared for our double wedding. The
marriage-articles for both couples are drawn and executed; and the
ceremony only waits until the parties shall have been resident in the
parish the term prescribed by law. Young Dennison betrays some symptoms
of impatience; but, Lismahago bears this necessary delay with the temper
of a philosopher.--You must know, the captain does not stand altogether
on the foundation of personal merit. Besides his half-pay, amounting to
two and forty pounds a year, this indefatigable oeconomist has amassed
eight hundred pounds, which he has secured in the funds. This sum arises
partly from his pay's running up while he remained among the Indians;
partly from what he received as a consideration for the difference
between his full appointment and the half-pay, to which he is now
restricted; and partly from the profits of a little traffick he drove in
peltry, during his sachemship among the Miamis.

Liddy's fears and perplexities have been much assuaged by the company
of one Miss Willis, who had been her intimate companion at the
boarding-school. Her parents had been earnestly sollicited to allow her
making this friendly visit on such an extraordinary occasion; and two
days ago she arrived with her mother, who did not chuse that she should
come without a proper gouvernante. The young lady is very sprightly,
handsome, and agreeable, and the mother a mighty good sort of a woman;
so that their coming adds considerably to our enjoyment. But we shall
have a third couple yoked in the matrimonial chain. Mr Clinker Loyd has
made humble remonstrance through the canal of my nephew, setting forth
the sincere love and affection mutually subsisting between him and Mrs
Winifred Jenkins, and praying my consent to their coming together for
life. I would have wished that Mr Clinker had kept out of this scrape;
but as the nymph's happiness is at stake, and she has already some
fits in the way of despondence, I, in order to prevent any tragical
catastrophe, have given him leave to play the fool, in imitation of
his betters; and I suppose we shall in time have a whole litter of his
progeny at Brambleton-hall. The fellow is stout and lusty, very sober
and conscientious; and the wench seems to be as great an enthusiast in
love as in religion.

I wish you would think of employing him some other way, that the
parish may not be overstocked--you know he has been bred a farrier,
consequently belongs to the faculty; and as he is very docile, I make
no doubt but, with your good instruction, he may be, in a little time,
qualified to act as a Welch apothecary. Tabby, who never did a favour
with a good grace, has consented, with great reluctance, to this match.
Perhaps it hurts her pride, as she now considers Clinker in the light of
a relation; but, I believe, her objections are of a more selfish nature.
She declares she cannot think of retaining the wife of Matthew Loyd in
the character of a servant; and she foresees, that on such an occasion
the woman will expect some gratification for her past services. As for
Clinker, exclusive of other considerations, he is so trusty, brave,
affectionate, and alert, and I owe him such personal obligations, that
he merits more than all the indulgence that can possibly be shewn him,
by

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 26.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

The fatal knots are now tied. The comedy is near a close; and the
curtain is ready to drop: but, the latter scenes of this act I shall
recapitulate in order--About a fortnight ago, my uncle made an excursion
across the country, and brought hither a particular friend, one Mr
Baynard, who has just lost his wife, and was for some time disconsolate,
though by all accounts he had much more cause for joy than for sorrow at
this event.--His countenance, however, clears up apace; and he appears
to be a person of rare accomplishments.--But, we have received another
still more agreeable reinforcement to our company, by the arrival
of Miss Willis from Gloucester. She was Liddy's bosom friend at the
boarding-school, and being earnestly sollicited to assist at the
nuptials, her mother was so obliging as to grant my sister's request,
and even to come with her in person. Liddy, accompanied by George
Dennison and me, gave them the meeting halfway, and next day conducted
them hither in safety. Miss Willis is a charming girl, and, in point of
disposition, an agreeable contrast to my sister, who is rather too grave
and sentimental for my turn of mind. The other is gay, frank, a little
giddy, and always good-humoured. She has, moreover, a genteel fortune,
is well born, and remarkably handsome. Ah Phillips! if these qualities
were permanent--if her humour would never change, nor her beauties
decay, what efforts would I not make--But these are idle reflections--my
destiny must one day be fulfilled.

At present we pass the time as agreeably as we can.--We have got up
several farces, which afforded unspeakable entertainment by the effects
they produced among the country people, who are admitted to all our
exhibitions.--Two nights ago, Jack Wilson acquired great applause in
Harlequin Skeleton, and Lismahago surprised us all in the character
of Pierot.--His long lank sides, and strong marked features, were all
peculiarly adapted to his part.--He appeared with a ludicrous stare,
from which he had discharged all meaning: he adopted the impressions of
fear and amazement so naturally, that many of the audience were infected
by his looks; but when the skeleton held him in chace his horror
became most divertingly picturesque, and seemed to endow him with such
praeternatural agility as confounded all the spectators. It was a lively
representation of Death in pursuit of Consumption, and had such an
effect upon the commonalty, that some of them shrieked aloud, and others
ran out of the hall in the utmost consternation.

This is not the only instance in which the lieutenant has lately
excited our wonder. His temper, which had been soured and shrivelled
by disappointment and chagrin, is now swelled out, and smoothed like
a raisin in plumb-porridge. From being reserved and punctilious, he is
become easy and obliging. He cracks jokes, laughs and banters, with the
most facetious familiarity; and, in a word, enters into all our schemes
of merriment and pastime--The other day his baggage arrived in the
waggon from London, contained in two large trunks and a long deal box
not unlike a coffin. The trunks were filled with his wardrobe, which
he displayed for the entertainment of the company, and he freely owned,
that it consisted chiefly of the opima spolia taken in battle. What he
selected for his wedding suit, was a tarnished white cloth faced with
blue velvet, embroidered with silver; but, he valued himself most upon a
tye-periwig, in which he had made his first appearance as a lawyer above
thirty years ago. This machine had been in buckle ever since, and now
all the servants in the family were employed to frizz it out for the
occasion, which was yesterday celebrated at the parish church. George
Dennison and his bride were distinguished by nothing extraordinary
in their apparel. His eyes lightened with eagerness and joy, and she
trembled with coyness and confusion. My uncle gave her away, and her
friend Willis supported her during the ceremony.

But my aunt and her paramour took the pas, and formed, indeed, such a
pair of originals, as, I believe all England could not parallel. She was
dressed in the stile of 1739; and the day being cold, put on a
manteel of green velvet laced with gold: but this was taken off by the
bridegroom, who threw over her shoulders a fur cloak of American sables,
valued at fourscore guineas, a present equally agreeable and unexpected.
Thus accoutred, she was led up to the altar by Mr Dennison, who did the
office of her father: Lismahago advanced in the military step with
his French coat reaching no farther than the middle of his thigh, his
campaign wig that surpasses all description, and a languishing leer
upon his countenance, in which there seemed to be something arch and
ironical. The ring, which he put upon her finger, he had concealed
till the moment it was used. He now produced it with an air of
self-complacency. It was a curious antique, set with rose diamonds: he
told us afterwards, it had been in the family two hundred years and was
a present from his grand-mother. These circumstances agreeably flattered
the pride of our aunt Tabitha, which had already found uncommon
gratification in the captain's generosity; for he had, in the morning,
presented my uncle with a fine bear's skin, and a Spanish fowling-piece,
and me with a case of pistols curiously mounted with silver. At the same
time he gave Mrs Jenkins an Indian purse, made of silk grass, containing
twenty crown pieces. You must know, this young lady, with the assistance
of Mr Loyd, formed the third couple who yesterday sacrificed to Hymen.
I wrote to you in my last, that he had recourse to my mediation, which I
employed successfully with my uncle; but Mrs Tabitha held out 'till the
love-sick Jenkins had two fits of the mother; then she relented, and
those two cooing turtles were caged for life--Our aunt made an effort of
generosity in furnishing the bride with her superfluities of clothes and
linen, and her example was followed by my sister; nor did Mr Bramble
and I neglect her on this occasion. It was, indeed, a day of
peace-offering.--Mr Dennison insisted upon Liddy's accepting two bank
notes of one hundred pounds each, as pocket-money; and his lady gave her
a diamond necklace of double that value. There was, besides, a mutual
exchange of tokens among the individuals of the two families thus
happily united.

As George Dennison and his partner were judged improper objects of
mirth, Jack Wilson had resolved to execute some jokes on Lismahago, and
after supper began to ply him with bumpers, when the ladies had retired;
but the captain perceiving his drift, begged for quarter, alledging that
the adventure, in which he had engaged, was a very serious matter; and
that it would be more the part of a good Christian to pray that he
might be strengthened, than to impede his endeavours to finish the
adventure.--He was spared accordingly, and permitted to ascend the
nuptial couch with all his senses about him.--There he and his consort
sat in state, like Saturn and Cybele, while the benediction posset was
drank; and a cake being broken over the head of Mrs Tabitha Lismahago,
the fragments were distributed among the bystanders, according to the
custom of the antient Britons, on the supposition that every person who
eat of this hallowed cake, should that night have a vision of the man or
woman whom Heaven designed should be his or her wedded mate.

The weight of Wilson's waggery fell upon honest Humphry and his spouse,
who were bedded in an upper room, with the usual ceremony of throwing
the stocking.--This being performed, and the company withdrawn, a sort
of catterwauling ensued, when Jack found means to introduce a real cat
shod with walnut-shells, which galloping along the boards, made such a
dreadful noise as effectually discomposed our lovers.--Winifred screamed
aloud, and shrunk under the bed-cloaths--Mr Loyd, believing that
Satan was come to buffet him in propria persona, laid aside all carnal
thoughts, and began to pray aloud with great fervency.--At length, the
poor animal, being more afraid than either, leaped into the bed, and
meauled with the most piteous exclamation.--Loyd, thus informed of the
nature of the annoyance, rose and set the door wide open, so that this
troublesome visitant retreated with great expedition; then securing
himself, by means of a double bolt, from a second intrusion, he was left
to enjoy his good fortune without further disturbance.

If one may judge from the looks of the parties, they are all very well
satisfied with what has passed--George Dennison and his wife are
too delicate to exhibit any strong marked signs of their mutual
satisfaction, but their eyes are sufficiently expressive--Mrs Tabitha
Lismahago is rather fulsome in signifying her approbation of the
captain's love; while his deportment is the very pink of gallantry.--He
sighs, and ogles, and languishes at this amiable object; he kisses her
hand, mutters ejaculations of rapture, and sings tender airs; and, no
doubt, laughs internally at her folly in believing him sincere.--In
order to shew how little his vigour was impaired by the fatigues of the
preceding day, he this morning danced a Highland sarabrand over a
naked back-sword, and leaped so high, that I believe he would make no
contemptible figure as a vaulter at Sadler's Wells.--Mr Matthew Loyd,
when asked how he relished his bargain, throws up his eyes, crying,
'For what we have received, Lord make us thankful: amen.'--His helpmate
giggles, and holds her hand before her eyes, affecting to be ashamed
of having been in bed with a man.--Thus all these widgeons enjoy the
novelty of their situation; but, perhaps their notes will be changed,
when they are better acquainted with the nature of the decoy.

As Mrs Willis cannot be persuaded to stay, and Liddy is engaged by
promise to accompany her daughter back to Gloucester, I fancy there will
be a general migration from hence, and that most of us will spend the
Christmas holidays at Bath; in which case, I shall certainly find an
opportunity to beat up your quarters.--By this time, I suppose, you
are sick of alma mater, and even ready to execute that scheme of
peregrination, which was last year concerted between you and

Your affectionate J. MELFORD Nov. 8.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

My niece Liddy is now happily settled for life; and captain Lismahago
has taken Tabby off my hands; so that I have nothing further to do, but
to comfort my friend Baynard, and provide for my son Loyd, who is also
fairly joined to Mrs Winifred Jenkins. You are an excellent genius at
hints.--Dr Arbuthnot was but a type of Dr Lewis in that respect. What
you observe of the vestry-clerk deserves consideration.--I make no
doubt but Matthew Loyd is well enough qualified for the office; but,
at present, you must find room for him in the house.--His incorruptible
honesty and indefatigable care will be serviceable in superintending
the oeconomy of my farm; tho' I don't mean that he shall interfere with
Barns, of whom I have no cause to complain.--I am just returned with
Baynard, from a second trip to his house, where every thing is regulated
to his satisfaction.--He could not, however, review the apartments
without tears and lamentation, so that he is not yet in a condition to
be left alone; therefore I will not part with him till the spring, when
he intends to plunge into the avocations of husbandry, which will at
once employ and amuse his attention.--Charles Dennison has promised to
stay with him a fortnight, to set him fairly afloat in his improvements;
and Jack Wilson will see him from time to time; besides, he has a few
friends in the country, whom his new plan of life will not exclude from
his society.--In less than a year, I make no doubt, but he will find
himself perfectly at ease both in his mind and body, for the one had
dangerously affected the other; and I shall enjoy the exquisite pleasure
of seeing my friend rescued from misery and contempt.

Mrs Willis being determined to return with her daughter, in a few
days, to Gloucester, our plan has undergone some alteration. Jery has
persuaded his brother-in-law to carry his wife to Bath; and I believe
his parents will accompany him thither.--For my part, I have no
intention to take that route.--It must be something very extraordinary
that will induce me to revisit either Bath or London.--My sister and her
husband, Baynard and I, will take leave of them at Gloucester, and make
the best of our way to Brambleton hall, where I desire you will prepare
a good chine and turkey for our Christmas dinner.--You must also employ
your medical skill in defending me from the attacks of the gout, that I
may be in good case to receive the rest of our company, who promise
to visit us in their return from the Bath.--As I have laid in a
considerable stock of health, it is to be hoped you will not have much
trouble with me in the way of physic, but I intend to work you on
the side of exercise.--I have got an excellent fowling-piece from Mr
Lismahago, who is a keen sportsman, and we shall take the heath in
all weathers.--That this scheme of life may be prosecuted the more
effectually, I intend to renounce all sedentary amusements, particularly
that of writing long letters; a resolution, which, had I taken it
sooner, might have saved you the trouble which you have lately taken in
reading the tedious epistles of

MATT. BRAMBLE NOV. 20.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, at Brambleton-hall.

GOOD MRS GWYLLIM,

Heaven, for wise porpuses, hath ordained that I should change my name
and citation in life, so that I am not to be considered any more
as manager of my brother's family; but as I cannot surrender up my
stewardship till I have settled with you and Williams, I desire you will
get your accunts ready for inspection, as we are coming home without
further delay.--My spouse, the captain, being subject to rummaticks, I
beg you will take great care to have the blew chamber, up two pair of
stairs, well warmed for his reception.--Let the sashes be secured, the
crevices stopt, the carpets laid, and the beds well tousled.--Mrs Loyd,
late Jenkins, being married to a relation of the family, cannot remain
in the capacity of a sarvant; therefore, I wish you would cast about for
some creditable body to be with me in her room--If she can spin, and
is mistress of plain-work, so much the better--but she must not expect
extravagant wages--having a family of my own, I must be more occumenical
than ever. No more at present, but rests

Your loving friend, TAB. LISMAHAGO NOV. 20.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

MRS JONES,

Providinch hath bin pleased to make great halteration in the pasture
of our affairs.--We were yesterday three kiple chined, by the grease of
God, in the holy bands of mattermoney, and I now subscrive myself Loyd
at your sarvice.--All the parish allowed that young 'squire Dallison and
his bride was a comely pear for to see.--As for madam Lashtniheygo, you
nose her picklearities--her head, to be sure, was fintastical; and her
spouse had rapt her with a long marokin furze cloak from the land of the
selvidges, thof they say it is of immense bally.--The captain himself
had a huge hassock of air, with three tails, and a tum-tawdry coat,
boddered with sulfur.--Wan said he was a monkey-bank; and the ould
bottler swore he was the born imich of Titidall.--For my part, I says
nothing, being as how the captain has done the handsome thing by me.--Mr
Loyd was dressed in a lite frog, and checket with gould binding; and
thof he don't enter in caparison with great folks of quality, yet he has
got as good blood in his veins as arrow privat 'squire in the county;
and then his pursing is far from contentible.--Your humble sarvant had
on a plain pea-green tabby sack, with my Runnela cap, ruff toupee, and
side curls.--They said, I was the very moral of lady Rickmanstone, but
not so pale--that may well be, for her ladyship is my elder by seven
good years and more.--Now, Mrs Mary, our satiety is to suppurate--Mr
Millfart goes to Bath along with the Dallisons, and the rest of us
push home to Wales, to pass our Chrishmarsh at Brampleton-hall--As our
apartments is to be the yallow pepper, in the thurd story, pray carry my
things thither.--Present my cumpliments to Mrs Gwyllim, and I hope
she and I will live upon dissent terms of civility.--Being, by God's
blessing, removed to a higher spear, you'll excuse my being familiar
with the lower sarvants of the family; but, as I trust you'll behave
respectful, and keep a proper distance, you may always depend upon the
good will and purtection of

Yours, W. LOYD Nov. 20.

FINIS.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Enchanted April
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Enchanted April

Author: Elizabeth Von Arnim

Release date: July 29, 2005 [eBook #16389]
                Most recently updated: June 25, 2023

Language: English

Credits: Manette Rothermel


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENCHANTED APRIL ***




[Illustration]




The Enchanted April

by Elizabeth Von Arnim




Contents

 Chapter 1
 Chapter 2
 Chapter 3
 Chapter 4
 Chapter 5
 Chapter 6
 Chapter 7
 Chapter 8
 Chapter 9
 Chapter 10
 Chapter 11
 Chapter 12
 Chapter 13
 Chapter 14
 Chapter 15
 Chapter 16
 Chapter 17
 Chapter 18
 Chapter 19
 Chapter 20
 Chapter 21
 Chapter 22




Chapter 1


It began in a Woman’s Club in London on a February afternoon—an
uncomfortable club, and a miserable afternoon—when Mrs. Wilkins, who
had come down from Hampstead to shop and had lunched at her club, took
up _The Times_ from the table in the smoking-room, and running her
listless eye down the Agony Column saw this:

  To Those who Appreciate Wistaria and Sunshine. Small mediaeval
    Italian Castle on the shores of the Mediterranean to be Let
    Furnished for the month of April. Necessary servants remain. Z,
    Box 1000, _The Times_.

That was its conception; yet, as in the case of many another, the
conceiver was unaware of it at the moment.

So entirely unaware was Mrs. Wilkins that her April for that year had
then and there been settled for her that she dropped the newspaper with
a gesture that was both irritated and resigned, and went over to the
window and stared drearily out at the dripping street.

Not for her were mediaeval castles, even those that are specially
described as small. Not for her the shores in April of the
Mediterranean, and the wistaria and sunshine. Such delights were only
for the rich. Yet the advertisement had been addressed to persons who
appreciate these things, so that it had been, anyhow, addressed too
to her, for she certainly appreciated them; more than anybody knew;
more than she had ever told. But she was poor. In the whole world she
possessed of her very own only ninety pounds, saved from year to year,
put by carefully pound by pound, out of her dress allowance. She had
scraped this sum together at the suggestion of her husband as a shield
and refuge against a rainy day. Her dress allowance, given her by her
father, was £100 a year, so that Mrs. Wilkins’s clothes were what
her husband, urging her to save, called modest and becoming, and her
acquaintance to each other, when they spoke of her at all, which was
seldom for she was very negligible, called a perfect sight.

Mr. Wilkins, a solicitor, encouraged thrift, except that branch of it
which got into his food. He did not call that thrift, he called it bad
housekeeping. But for the thrift which, like moth, penetrated into Mrs.
Wilkins’s clothes and spoilt them, he had much praise. “You never
know,” he said, “when there will be a rainy day, and you may be very
glad to find you have a nest-egg. Indeed we both may.”

Looking out of the club window into Shaftesbury Avenue—hers was an
economical club, but convenient for Hampstead, where she lived, and for
Shoolbred’s, where she shopped—Mrs. Wilkins, having stood there some
time very drearily, her mind’s eye on the Mediterranean in April, and
the wistaria, and the enviable opportunities of the rich, while her
bodily eye watched the really extremely horrible sooty rain falling
steadily on the hurrying umbrellas and splashing omnibuses, suddenly
wondered whether perhaps this was not the rainy day Mellersh—Mellersh
was Mr. Wilkins—had so often encouraged her to prepare for, and whether
to get out of such a climate and into the small mediaeval castle wasn’t
perhaps what Providence had all along intended her to do with her
savings. Part of her savings, of course; perhaps quite a small part.
The castle, being mediaeval, might also be dilapidated, and
dilapidations were surely cheap. She wouldn’t in the least mind a few
of them, because you didn’t pay for dilapidations which were already
there; on the contrary—by reducing the price you had to pay they really
paid you. But what nonsense to think of it . . .

She turned away from the window with the same gesture of mingled
irritation and resignation with which she had laid down _The Times_,
and crossed the room towards the door with the intention of getting her
mackintosh and umbrella and fighting her way into one of the
overcrowded omnibuses and going to Shoolbred’s on her way home and
buying some soles for Mellersh’s dinner—Mellersh was difficult with
fish and liked only soles, except salmon—when she beheld Mrs.
Arbuthnot, a woman she knew by sight as also living in Hampstead and
belonging to the club, sitting at the table in the middle of the room
on which the newspapers and magazines were kept, absorbed, in her turn,
in the first page of _The Times_.

Mrs. Wilkins had never yet spoken to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who belonged to
one of the various church sets, and who analysed, classified, divided
and registered the poor; whereas she and Mellersh, when they did go
out, went to the parties of impressionist painters, of whom in
Hampstead there were many. Mellersh had a sister who had married one of
them and lived up on the Heath, and because of this alliance Mrs.
Wilkins was drawn into a circle which was highly unnatural to her, and
she had learned to dread pictures. She had to say things about them,
and she didn’t know what to say. She used to murmur, “Marvellous,” and
feel that it was not enough. But nobody minded. Nobody listened. Nobody
took any notice of Mrs. Wilkins. She was the kind of person who is not
noticed at parties. Her clothes, infested by thrift, made her
practically invisible; her face was non-arresting; her conversation was
reluctant; she was shy. And if one’s clothes and face and conversation
are all negligible, thought Mrs. Wilkins, who recognised her
disabilities, what, at parties, is there left of one?

Also she was always with Wilkins, that clean-shaven, fine-looking man,
who gave a party, merely by coming to it, a great air. Wilkins was
very respectable. He was known to be highly thought of by his senior
partners. His sister’s circle admired him. He pronounced adequately
intelligent judgments on art and artists. He was pithy; he was prudent;
he never said a word too much, nor, on the other hand, did he ever
say a word too little. He produced the impression of keeping copies
of everything he said; and he was so obviously reliable that it often
happened that people who met him at these parties became discontented
with their own solicitors, and after a period of restlessness
extricated themselves and went to Wilkins.

Naturally Mrs. Wilkins was blotted out. “She,” said his sister, with
something herself of the judicial, the digested, and the final in her
manner, “should stay at home.” But Wilkins could not leave his wife at
home. He was a family solicitor, and all such have wives and show them.
With his in the week he went to parties, and with his on Sundays he
went to church. Being still fairly young—he was thirty-nine—and
ambitious of old ladies, of whom he had not yet acquired in his
practice a sufficient number, he could not afford to miss church, and
it was there that Mrs. Wilkins became familiar, though never through
words, with Mrs. Arbuthnot.

She saw her marshalling the children of the poor into pews. She would
come in at the head of the procession from the Sunday School exactly
five minutes before the choir, and get her boys and girls neatly fitted
into their allotted seats, and down on their little knees in their
preliminary prayer, and up again on their feet just as, to the swelling
organ, the vestry door opened, and the choir and clergy, big with the
litanies and commandments they were presently to roll out, emerged. She
had a sad face, yet she was evidently efficient. The combination used
to make Mrs. Wilkins wonder, for she had been told by Mellersh, on days
when she had only been able to get plaice, that if one were efficient
one wouldn’t be depressed, and that if one does one’s job well one
becomes automatically bright and brisk.

About Mrs. Arbuthnot there was nothing bright and brisk, though much in
her way with the Sunday School children that was automatic; but when
Mrs. Wilkins, turning from the window, caught sight of her in the club
she was not being automatic at all, but was looking fixedly at one
portion of the first page of _The Times_, holding the paper quite
still, her eyes not moving. She was just staring; and her face, as
usual, was the face of a patient and disappointed Madonna.

Obeying an impulse she wondered at even while obeying it, Mrs. Wilkins,
the shy and the reluctant, instead of proceeding as she had intended to
the cloakroom and from thence to Schoolbred’s in search of Mellersh’s
fish, stopped at the table and sat down exactly opposite Mrs.
Arbuthnot, to whom she had never yet spoken in her life.

It was one of those long, narrow refectory tables, so that they were
quite close to each other.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, however, did not look up. She continued to gaze, with
eyes that seemed to be dreaming, at one spot only of The Times.

Mrs. Wilkins watched her a minute, trying to screw up courage to speak
to her. She wanted to ask her if she had seen the advertisement. She
did not know why she wanted to ask her this, but she wanted to. How
stupid not to be able to speak to her. She looked so kind. She looked
so unhappy. Why couldn’t two unhappy people refresh each other on their
way through this dusty business of life by a little talk—real, natural
talk, about what they felt, what they would have liked, what they still
tried to hope? And she could not help thinking that Mrs. Arbuthnot,
too, was reading that very same advertisement. Her eyes were on the
very part of the paper. Was she, too, picturing what it would be
like—the colour, the fragrance, the light, the soft lapping of the sea
among little hot rocks? Colour, fragrance, light, sea; instead of
Shaftesbury Avenue, and the wet omnibuses, and the fish department at
Shoolbred’s, and the Tube to Hampstead, and dinner, and to-morrow the
same and the day after the same and always the same . . .

Suddenly Mrs. Wilkins found herself leaning across the table. “Are you
reading about the mediaeval castle and the wistaria?” she heard herself
asking.

Naturally Mrs. Arbuthnot was surprised; but she was not half so much
surprised as Mrs. Wilkins was at herself for asking.

Mrs. Arbuthnot had not yet to her knowledge set eyes on the shabby,
lank, loosely-put-together figure sitting opposite her, with its small
freckled face and big grey eyes almost disappearing under a
smashed-down wet-weather hat, and she gazed at her a moment without
answering. She _was_ reading about the mediaeval castle and the
wistaria, or rather had read about it ten minutes before, and since
then had been lost in dreams—of light, of colour, of fragrance, of the
soft lapping of the sea among little hot rocks . . .

“Why do you ask me that?” she said in her grave voice, for her training
of and by the poor had made her grave and patient.

Mrs. Wilkins flushed and looked excessively shy and frightened. “Oh,
only because I saw it too, and I thought perhaps—I thought somehow—”
she stammered.

Whereupon Mrs. Arbuthnot, her mind being used to getting people into
lists and divisions, from habit considered, as she gazed thoughtfully
at Mrs. Wilkins, under what heading, supposing she had to classify her,
she could most properly be put.

“And I know you by sight,” went on Mrs. Wilkins, who, like all the shy,
once she was started plunged on, frightening herself to more and more
speech by the sheer sound of what she had said last in her ears. “Every
Sunday—I see you every Sunday in church—”

“In church?” echoed Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“And this seems such a wonderful thing—this advertisement about the
wistaria—and—”

Mrs. Wilkins, who must have been at least thirty, broke off and
wriggled in her chair with the movement of an awkward and embarrassed
schoolgirl.

“It seems _so_ wonderful,” she went on in a kind of burst, “and—it is
such a miserable day . . .”

And then she sat looking at Mrs. Arbuthnot with the eyes of an
imprisoned dog.

“This poor thing,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose life was spent in
helping and alleviating, “needs advice.”

She accordingly prepared herself patiently to give it.

“If you see me in church,” she said, kindly and attentively, “I suppose
you live in Hampstead too?”

“Oh yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins. And she repeated, her head on its long
thin neck drooping a little as if the recollection of Hampstead bowed
her, “Oh yes.”

“Where?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, who, when advice was needed, naturally
first proceeded to collect the facts.

But Mrs. Wilkins, laying her hand softly and caressingly on the part
of _The Times_ where the advertisement was, as though the mere printed
words of it were precious, only said, “Perhaps that’s why _this_ seems
so wonderful.”

“No—I think _that’s_ wonderful anyhow,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, forgetting
facts and faintly sighing.

“Then you _were_ reading it?”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, her eyes going dreamy again.

“Wouldn’t it be wonderful?” murmured Mrs. Wilkins.

“Wonderful,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot. Her face, which had lit up, faded
into patience again. “Very wonderful,” she said. “But it’s no use
wasting one’s time thinking of such things.”

“Oh, but it _is_,” was Mrs. Wilkins’s quick, surprising reply;
surprising because it was so much unlike the rest of her—the
characterless coat and skirt, the crumpled hat, the undecided wisp of
hair straggling out. “And just the considering of them is worth while
in itself—such a change from Hampstead—and sometimes I believe—I really
do believe—if one considers hard enough one gets things.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot observed her patiently. In what category would she,
supposing she had to, put her?

“Perhaps,” she said, leaning forward a little, “you will tell me your
name. If we are to be friends”—she smiled her grave smile—“as I hope we
are, we had better begin at the beginning.”

“Oh yes—how kind of you. I’m Mrs. Wilkins,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “I don’t
expect,” she added, flushing, as Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing, “that it
conveys anything to you. Sometimes it—it doesn’t seem to convey
anything to me either. But”—she looked round with a movement of seeking
help—“I _am_ Mrs. Wilkins.”

She did not like her name. It was a mean, small name, with a kind of
facetious twist, she thought, about its end like the upward curve of a
pugdog’s tail. There it was, however. There was no doing anything with
it. Wilkins she was and Wilkins she would remain; and though her
husband encouraged her to give it on all occasions as Mrs.
Mellersh-Wilkins she only did that when he was within earshot, for she
thought Mellersh made Wilkins worse, emphasising it in the way
Chatsworth on the gate-posts of a villa emphasises the villa.

When first he suggested she should add Mellersh she had objected for
the above reason, and after a pause—Mellersh was much too prudent to
speak except after a pause, during which presumably he was taking a
careful mental copy of his coming observation—he said, much displeased,
“But I am not a villa,” and looked at her as he looks who hopes, for
perhaps the hundredth time, that he may not have married a fool.

Of course he was not a villa, Mrs. Wilkins assured him; she had never
supposed he was; she had not dreamed of meaning . . . she was only just
thinking . . .

The more she explained the more earnest became Mellersh’s hope,
familiar to him by this time, for he had then been a husband for two
years, that he might not by any chance have married a fool; and they
had a prolonged quarrel, if that can be called a quarrel which is
conducted with dignified silence on one side and earnest apology on the
other, as to whether or no Mrs. Wilkins had intended to suggest that
Mr. Wilkins was a villa.

“I believe,” she had thought when it was at last over—it took a long
while—“that _anybody_ would quarrel about _anything_ when they’ve not
left off being together for a single day for two whole years. What we
both need is a holiday.”

“My husband,” went on Mrs. Wilkins to Mrs. Arbuthnot, trying to throw
some light on herself, “is a solicitor. He—” She cast about for
something she could say elucidatory of Mellersh, and found: “He’s very
handsome.”

“Well,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot kindly, “that must be a great pleasure to
you.”

“Why?” asked Mrs. Wilkins.

“Because,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little taken aback, for constant
intercourse with the poor had accustomed her to have her pronouncements
accepted without question, “because beauty—handsomeness—is a gift like
any other, and if it is properly used—”

She trailed off into silence. Mrs. Wilkins’s great grey eyes were fixed
on her, and it seemed suddenly to Mrs. Arbuthnot that perhaps she was
becoming crystallised into a habit of exposition, and of exposition
after the manner of nursemaids, through having an audience that
couldn’t but agree, that would be afraid, if it wished, to interrupt,
that didn’t know, that was, in fact, at her mercy.

But Mrs. Wilkins was not listening; for just then, absurd as it seemed,
a picture had flashed across her brain, and there were two figures in
it sitting together under a great trailing wistaria that stretched
across the branches of a tree she didn’t know, and it was herself and
Mrs. Arbuthnot—she saw them—she saw them. And behind them, bright in
sunshine, were old grey walls—the mediaeval castle—she saw it—they
were there . . .

She therefore stared at Mrs. Arbuthnot and did not hear a word she
said. And Mrs. Arbuthnot stared too at Mrs. Wilkins, arrested by the
expression on her face, which was swept by the excitement of what she
saw, and was as luminous and tremulous under it as water in sunlight
when it is ruffled by a gust of wind. At this moment, if she had been
at a party, Mrs. Wilkins would have been looked at with interest.

They stared at each other; Mrs. Arbuthnot surprised, inquiringly, Mrs.
Wilkins with the eyes of some one who has had a revelation. Of course.
That was how it could be done. She herself, she by herself, couldn’t
afford it, and wouldn’t be able, even if she could afford it, to go
there all alone; but she and Mrs. Arbuthnot together . . .

She leaned across the table. “Why don’t we try and get it?” she
whispered.

Mrs. Arbuthnot became even more wide-eyed. “Get it?” she repeated.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins, still as though she were afraid of being
overheard. “Not just sit here and say How wonderful, and then go home
to Hampstead without having put out a finger—go home just as usual and
see about the dinner and the fish just as we’ve been doing for years
and years and will go on doing for years and years. In fact,” said Mrs.
Wilkins, flushing to the roots of her hair, for the sound of what she
was saying, of what was coming pouring out, frightened her, and yet she
couldn’t stop, “I see no end to it. There is no end to it. So that
there ought to be a break, there ought to be intervals—in everybody’s
interests. Why, it would really be being unselfish to go away and be
happy for a little, because we would come back so much nicer. You see,
after a bit everybody needs a holiday.”

“But—how do you mean, get it?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Take it,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“Take it?”

“Rent it. Hire it. Have it.”

“But—do you mean you and I?”

“Yes. Between us. Share. Then it would only cost half, and you look
so—you look exactly as if you wanted it just as much as I do—as if you
ought to have a rest—have something happy happen to you.”

“Why, but we don’t know each other.”

“But just think how well we would if we went away together for a month!
And I’ve saved for a rainy day, and I expect so have you, and this _is_
the rainy day—look at it—”

“She is unbalanced,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot; yet she felt strangely
stirred.

“Think of getting away for a whole month—from everything—to heaven—”

“She shouldn’t say things like that,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. “The
vicar—” Yet she felt strangely stirred. It would indeed be wonderful to
have a rest, a cessation.

Habit, however, steadied her again; and years of intercourse with the
poor made her say, with the slight though sympathetic superiority of
the explainer, “But then, you see, heaven isn’t somewhere else. It is
here and now. We are told so.”

She became very earnest, just as she did when trying patiently to help
and enlighten the poor. “Heaven is within us,” she said in her gentle
low voice. “We are told that on the very highest authority. And you
know the lines about the kindred points, don’t you—”

“Oh yes, I know _them_,” interrupted Mrs. Wilkins impatiently.

“The kindred points of heaven and home,” continued Mrs. Arbuthnot, who
was used to finishing her sentences. “Heaven is in our home.”

“It isn’t,” said Mrs. Wilkins, again surprisingly.

Mrs. Arbuthnot was taken aback. Then she said gently, “Oh, but it is.
It is there if we choose, if we make it.”

“I do choose, and I do make it, and it isn’t,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

Then Mrs. Arbuthnot was silent, for she too sometimes had doubts about
homes. She sat and looked uneasily at Mrs. Wilkins, feeling more and
more the urgent need to getting her classified. If she could only
classify Mrs. Wilkins, get her safely under her proper heading, she
felt that she herself would regain her balance, which did seem very
strangely to be slipping all to one side. For neither had she had a
holiday for years, and the advertisement when she saw it had set her
dreaming, and Mrs. Wilkins’s excitement about it was infectious, and
she had the sensation, as she listened to her impetuous, odd talk and
watched her lit-up face, that she was being stirred out of sleep.

Clearly Mrs. Wilkins was unbalanced, but Mrs. Arbuthnot had met the
unbalanced before—indeed she was always meeting them—and they had no
effect on her own stability at all; whereas this one was making her
feel quite wobbly, quite as though to be off and away, away from her
compass points of God, Husband, Home and Duty—she didn’t feel as if
Mrs. Wilkins intended Mr. Wilkins to come too—and just for once be
happy, would be both good and desirable. Which of course it wasn’t;
which certainly of course it wasn’t. She, also, had a nest-egg,
invested gradually in the Post Office Savings Bank, but to suppose that
she would ever forget her duty to the extent of drawing it out and
spending it on herself was surely absurd. Surely she couldn’t, she
wouldn’t ever do such a thing? Surely she wouldn’t, she couldn’t ever
forget her poor, forget misery and sickness as completely as that? No
doubt a trip to Italy would be extraordinarily delightful, but there
were many delightful things one would like to do, and what was strength
given to one for except to help one not to do them?

Steadfast as the points of the compass to Mrs. Arbuthnot were the great
four facts of life: God, Husband, Home, Duty. She had gone to sleep on
these facts years ago, after a period of much misery, her head resting
on them as on a pillow; and she had a great dread of being awakened out
of so simple and untroublesome a condition. Therefore it was that she
searched with earnestness for a heading under which to put Mrs.
Wilkins, and in this way illumine and steady her own mind; and sitting
there looking at her uneasily after her last remark, and feeling
herself becoming more and more unbalanced and infected, she decided
_pro tem_, as the vicar said at meetings, to put her under the heading
Nerves. It was just possible that she ought to go straight into the
category Hysteria, which was often only the antechamber to Lunacy, but
Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned not to hurry people into their final
categories, having on more than one occasion discovered with dismay
that she had made a mistake; and how difficult it had been to get them
out again, and how crushed she had been with the most terrible remorse.

Yes. Nerves. Probably she had no regular work for others, thought Mrs.
Arbuthnot; no work that would take her outside herself. Evidently she
was rudderless—blown about by gusts, by impulses. Nerves was almost
certainly her category, or would be quite soon if no one helped her.
Poor little thing, thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, her own balance returning
hand in hand with her compassion, and unable, because of the table,
to see the length of Mrs. Wilkins’s legs. All she saw was her small,
eager, shy face, and her thin shoulders, and the look of childish
longing in her eyes for something that she was sure was going to make
her happy. No; such things didn’t make people happy, such fleeting
things. Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned in her long life with Frederick—he
was her husband, and she had married him at twenty and was now
thirty-three—where alone true joys are to be found. They are to be
found, she now knew, only in daily, in hourly, living for others;
they are to be found only—hadn’t she over and over again taken her
disappointments and discouragements there, and come away comforted?—at
the feet of God.

Frederick had been the kind of husband whose wife betakes herself early
to the feet of God. From him to them had been a short though painful
step. It seemed short to her in retrospect, but it had really taken the
whole of the first year of their marriage, and every inch of the way
had been a struggle, and every inch of it was stained, she felt at the
time, with her heart’s blood. All that was over now. She had long since
found peace. And Frederick, from her passionately loved bridegroom,
from her worshipped young husband, had become second only to God on
her list of duties and forbearances. There he hung, the second in
importance, a bloodless thing bled white by her prayers. For years she
had been able to be happy only by forgetting happiness. She wanted to
stay like that. She wanted to shut out everything that would remind her
of beautiful things, that might set her off again longing, desiring....

“I’d like so much to be friends,” she said earnestly. “Won’t you come
and see me, or let me come to you sometimes? Whenever you feel as if
you wanted to talk. I’ll give you my address”—she searched in her
handbag—“and then you won’t forget.” And she found a card and held it
out.

Mrs. Wilkins ignored the card.

“It’s so funny,” said Mrs. Wilkins, just as if she had not heard her,
“but I _see_ us both—you and me—this April in the mediaeval castle.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot relapsed into uneasiness. “Do you?” she said, making an
effort to stay balanced under the visionary gaze of the shining grey
eyes. “Do you?”

“Don’t you ever see things in a kind of flash before they happen?”
asked Mrs. Wilkins.

“Never,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

She tried to smile; she tried to smile the sympathetic yet wise
and tolerant smile with which she was accustomed to listen to the
necessarily biassed and incomplete views of the poor. She didn’t
succeed. The smile trembled out.

“Of course,” she said in a low voice, almost as if she were afraid the
vicar and the Savings Bank were listening, “it would be most
beautiful—most beautiful—”

“Even if it were wrong,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “it would only be for a
month.”

“That—” began Mrs. Arbuthnot, quite clear as to the reprehensibleness
of such a point of view; but Mrs. Wilkins stopped her before she could
finish.

“Anyhow,” said Mrs. Wilkins, stopping her, “I’m sure it’s wrong to go
on being good for too long, till one gets miserable. And I can see
you’ve been good for years and years, because you look so unhappy”—Mrs.
Arbuthnot opened her mouth to protest—“and I—I’ve done nothing but
duties, things for other people, ever since I was a girl, and I don’t
believe anybody loves me a bit—a bit—the b-better—and I long—oh, I
long—for something else—something else—”

Was she going to cry? Mrs. Arbuthnot became acutely uncomfortable and
sympathetic. She hoped she wasn’t going to cry. Not there. Not in that
unfriendly room, with strangers coming and going.

But Mrs. Wilkins, after tugging agitatedly at a handkerchief that
wouldn’t come out of her pocket, did succeed at last in merely
apparently blowing her nose with it, and then, blinking her eyes very
quickly once or twice, looked at Mrs. Arbuthnot with a quivering air of
half humble, half frightened apology, and smiled.

“Will you believe,” she whispered, trying to steady her mouth,
evidently dreadfully ashamed of herself, “that I’ve never spoken to any
one before in my life like this? I can’t think, I simply don’t know,
what has come over me.”

“It’s the advertisement,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, nodding gravely.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins, dabbing furtively at her eyes, “and us both
being so—”—she blew her nose again a little—“miserable.”




Chapter 2


Of course Mrs. Arbuthnot was not miserable—how could she be, she asked
herself, when God was taking care of her?—but she let that pass for the
moment unrepudiated, because of her conviction that here was another
fellow-creature in urgent need of her help; and not just boots and
blankets and better sanitary arrangements this time, but the more
delicate help of comprehension, of finding the exact right words.

The exact right words, she presently discovered, after trying various
ones about living for others, and prayer, and the peace to be found in
placing oneself unreservedly in God’s hands—to meet all these words
Mrs. Wilkins had other words, incoherent and yet, for the moment at
least, till one had had more time, difficult to answer—the exact right
words were a suggestion that it would do no harm to answer the
advertisement. Non-committal. Mere inquiry. And what disturbed Mrs.
Arbuthnot about this suggestion was that she did not make it solely to
comfort Mrs. Wilkins; she made it because of her own strange longing
for the mediaeval castle.

This was very disturbing. There she was, accustomed to direct, to lead,
to advise, to support—except Frederick; she long since had learned to
leave Frederick to God—being led herself, being influenced and thrown
off her feet, by just an advertisement, by just an incoherent stranger.
It was indeed disturbing. She failed to understand her sudden longing
for what was, after all, self-indulgence, when for years no such desire
had entered her heart.

“There’s no harm in simply _asking_,” she said in a low voice, as if
the vicar and the Savings Bank and all her waiting and dependent poor
were listening and condemning.

“It isn’t as if it _committed_ us to anything,” said Mrs. Wilkins, also
in a low voice, but her voice shook.

They got up simultaneously—Mrs. Arbuthnot had a sensation of surprise
that Mrs. Wilkins should be so tall—and went to a writing-table, and
Mrs. Arbuthnot wrote to Z, Box 1000, _The Times_, for particulars. She
asked for all particulars, but the only one they really wanted was the
one about the rent. They both felt that it was Mrs. Arbuthnot who ought
to write the letter and do the business part. Not only was she used to
organising and being practical, but she also was older, and certainly
calmer; and she herself had no doubt too that she was wiser. Neither
had Mrs. Wilkins any doubt of this; the very way Mrs. Arbuthnot parted
her hair suggested a great calm that could only proceed from wisdom.

But if she was wiser, older and calmer, Mrs. Arbuthnot’s new friend
nevertheless seemed to her to be the one who impelled. Incoherent, she
yet impelled. She appeared to have, apart from her need of help, an
upsetting kind of character. She had a curious infectiousness. She led
one on. And the way her unsteady mind leaped at conclusions—wrong ones,
of course; witness the one that she, Mrs. Arbuthnot, was miserable—the
way she leaped at conclusions was disconcerting.

Whatever she was, however, and whatever her unsteadiness, Mrs.
Arbuthnot found herself sharing her excitement and her longing; and
when the letter had been posted in the letter-box in the hall and
actually was beyond getting back again, both she and Mrs. Wilkins felt
the same sense of guilt.

“It only shows,” said Mrs. Wilkins in a whisper, as they turned away
from the letter-box, “how immaculately good we’ve been all our lives.
The very first time we do anything our husbands don’t know about we
feel guilty.”

“I’m afraid I can’t say I’ve been immaculately good,” gently protested
Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little uncomfortable at this fresh example of
successful leaping at conclusions, for she had not said a word about
her feeling of guilt.

“Oh, but I’m sure you have—I _see_ you being good—and that’s why you’re
not happy.”

“She shouldn’t say things like that,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. “I must
try and help her not to.”

Aloud she said gravely, “I don’t know why you insist that I’m not
happy. When you know me better I think you’ll find that I am. And I’m
sure you don’t mean really that goodness, if one could attain it, makes
one unhappy.”

“Yes, I do,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “Our sort of goodness does. We have
attained it, and we are unhappy. There are miserable sorts of goodness
and happy sorts—the sort we’ll have at the mediaeval castle, for
instance, is the happy sort.”

“That is, supposing we go there,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot restrainingly.
She felt that Mrs. Wilkins needed holding on to. “After all, we’ve only
written just to ask. Anybody may do that. I think it quite likely we
shall find the conditions impossible, and even if they were not,
probably by to-morrow we shall not want to go.”

“I _see_ us there,” was Mrs. Wilkins’s answer to that.

All this was very unbalancing. Mrs. Arbuthnot, as she presently
splashed through the dripping streets on her way to a meeting she
was to speak at, was in an unusually disturbed condition of mind.
She had, she hoped, shown herself very calm to Mrs. Wilkins, very
practical and sober, concealing her own excitement. But she was really
extraordinarily moved, and she felt happy, and she felt guilty, and
she felt afraid, and she had all the feelings, though this she did
not know, of a woman who has come away from a secret meeting with
her lover. That, indeed, was what she looked like when she arrived
late on her platform; she, the open-browed, looked almost furtive as
her eyes fell on the staring wooden faces waiting to hear her try
and persuade them to contribute to the alleviation of the urgent
needs of the Hampstead poor, each one convinced that they needed
contributions themselves. She looked as though she were hiding
something discreditable but delightful. Certainly her customary clear
expression of candour was not there, and its place was taken by a
kind of suppressed and frightened pleasedness, which would have led a
more worldly-minded audience to the instant conviction of recent and
probably impassioned lovemaking.

Beauty, beauty, beauty . . . the words kept ringing in her ears as she
stood on the platform talking of sad things to the sparsely attended
meeting. She had never been to Italy. Was that really what her nest-egg
was to be spent on after all? Though she couldn’t approve of the way
Mrs. Wilkins was introducing the idea of predestination into her
immediate future, just as if she had no choice, just as if to struggle,
or even to reflect, were useless, it yet influenced her. Mrs. Wilkins’s
eyes had been the eyes of a seer. Some people were like that, Mrs.
Arbuthnot knew; and if Mrs. Wilkins had actually seen her at the
mediaeval castle it did seem probable that struggling would be a waste
of time. Still, to spend her nest-egg on self-indulgence— The origin of
this egg had been corrupt, but she had at least supposed its end was to
be creditable. Was she to deflect it from its intended destination,
which alone had appeared to justify her keeping it, and spend it on
giving herself pleasure?

Mrs. Arbuthnot spoke on and on, so much practised in the kind of speech
that she could have said it all in her sleep, and at the end of the
meeting, her eyes dazzled by her secret visions, she hardly noticed
that nobody was moved in any way whatever, least of all in the way of
contributions.

But the vicar noticed. The vicar was disappointed. Usually his good
friend and supporter Mrs. Arbuthnot succeeded better than this. And,
what was even more unusual, she appeared, he observed, not even to
mind.

“I can’t imagine,” he said to her as they parted, speaking irritably,
for he was irritated both by the audience and by her, “what these
people are coming to. _Nothing_ seems to move them.”

“Perhaps they need a holiday,” suggested Mrs. Arbuthnot; an
unsatisfactory, a queer reply, the vicar thought.

“In February?” he called after her sarcastically.

“Oh no—not till April,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot over her shoulder.

“Very odd,” thought the vicar. “Very odd indeed.” And he went home and
was not perhaps quite christian to his wife.

That night in her prayers Mrs. Arbuthnot asked for guidance. She felt
she ought really to ask, straight out and roundly, that the mediaeval
castle should already have been taken by some one else and the whole
thing thus be settled, but her courage failed her. Suppose her prayer
were to be answered? No; she couldn’t ask it; she couldn’t risk it. And
after all—she almost pointed this out to God—if she spent her present
nest-egg on a holiday she could quite soon accumulate another.
Frederick pressed money on her; and it would only mean, while she
rolled up a second egg, that for a time her contributions to the parish
charities would be less. And then it could be the next nest-egg whose
original corruption would be purged away by the use to which it was
finally put.

For Mrs. Arbuthnot, who had no money of her own, was obliged to live
on the proceeds of Frederick’s activities, and her very nest-egg was
the fruit, posthumously ripened, of ancient sin. The way Frederick made
his living was one of the standing distresses of her life. He wrote
immensely popular memoirs, regularly, every year, of the mistresses of
kings. There were in history numerous kings who had had mistresses,
and there were still more numerous mistresses who had had kings; so
that he had been able to publish a book of memoirs during each year of
his married life, and even so there were great further piles of these
ladies waiting to be dealt with. Mrs. Arbuthnot was helpless. Whether
she liked it or not, she was obliged to live on the proceeds. He gave
her a dreadful sofa once, after the success of his Du Barri memoir,
with swollen cushions and soft, receptive lap, and it seemed to her
a miserable thing that there, in her very home, should flaunt this
re-incarnation of a dead old French sinner.

Simply good, convinced that morality is the basis of happiness, the
fact that she and Frederick should draw their sustenance from guilt,
however much purged by the passage of centuries, was one of the secret
reasons of her sadness. The more the memoired lady had forgotten
herself, the more his book about her was read and the more free-handed
he was to his wife; and all that he gave her was spent, after adding
slightly to her nest-egg—for she did hope and believe that some day
people would cease to want to read of wickedness, and then Frederick
would need supporting—on helping the poor. The parish flourished
because, to take a handful at random, of the ill-behaviour of the
ladies Du Barri, Montespan, Pompadour, Ninon de l’Enclos, and even of
learned Maintenon. The poor were the filter through which the money
was passed, to come out, Mrs. Arbuthnot hoped, purified. She could do
no more. She had tried in days gone by to think the situation out, to
discover the exact right course for her to take, but had found it, as
she had found Frederick, too difficult, and had left it, as she had
left Frederick, to God. Nothing of this money was spent on her house
or dress; those remained, except for the great soft sofa, austere. It
was the poor who profited. Their very boots were stout with sins. But
how difficult it had been. Mrs. Arbuthnot, groping for guidance, prayed
about it to exhaustion. Ought she perhaps to refuse to touch the money,
to avoid it as she would have avoided the sins which were its source?
But then what about the parish’s boots? She asked the vicar what he
thought, and, through much delicate language, evasive and cautious, it
did finally appear that he was for the boots.

At least she had persuaded Frederick, when first he began his terrible
successful career—he only began it after their marriage; when she
married him he had been a blameless official attached to the library of
the British Museum—to publish the memoirs under another name, so that
she was not publicly branded. Hampstead read the books with glee, and
had no idea that their writer lived in its midst. Frederick was almost
unknown, even by sight, in Hampstead. He never went to any of its
gatherings. Whatever it was he did in the way of recreation was done in
London, but he never spoke of what he did or whom he saw; he might have
been perfectly friendless for any mention he ever made of friends to
his wife. Only the vicar knew where the money for the parish came from,
and he regarded it, he told Mrs. Arbuthnot, as a matter of honour not
to mention it.

And at least her little house was not haunted by the loose-lived
ladies, for Frederick did his work away from home. He had two rooms
near the British Museum, which was the scene of his exhumations, and
there he went every morning, and he came back long after his wife was
asleep. Sometimes he did not come back at all. Sometimes she did not
see him for several days together. Then he would suddenly appear at
breakfast, having let himself in with his latchkey the night before,
very jovial and good-natured and free-handed and glad if she would
allow him to give her something—a well-fed man, contented with the
world; a jolly, full-blooded, satisfied man. And she was always gentle,
and anxious that his coffee should be as he liked it.

He seemed very happy. Life, she often thought, however much one
tabulated was yet a mystery. There were always some people it was
impossible to place. Frederick was one of them. He didn’t seem to bear
the remotest resemblance to the original Frederick. He didn’t seem to
have the least need of any of the things he used to say were so
important and beautiful—love, home, complete communion of thoughts,
complete immersion in each other’s interests. After those early painful
attempts to hold him up to the point from which they had hand in hand
so splendidly started, attempts in which she herself had got terribly
hurt and the Frederick she supposed she had married was mangled out of
recognition, she hung him up finally by her bedside as the chief
subject of her prayers, and left him, except for those, entirely to
God. She had loved Frederick too deeply to be able now to do anything
but pray for him. He had no idea that he never went out of the house
without her blessing going with him too, hovering, like a little echo
of finished love, round that once dear head. She didn’t dare think of
him as he used to be, as he had seemed to her to be in those marvellous
first days of their love-making, of their marriage. Her child had died;
she had nothing, nobody of her own to lavish herself on. The poor
became her children, and God the object of her love. What could be
happier than such a life, she sometimes asked herself; but her face,
and particularly her eyes, continued sad.

“Perhaps when we’re old . . . perhaps when we are both quite old . . .”
she would think wistfully.




Chapter 3


The owner of the mediaeval castle was an Englishman, a Mr. Briggs, who
was in London at the moment and wrote that it had beds enough for eight
people, exclusive of servants, three sitting-rooms, battlements,
dungeons, and electric light. The rent was £60 for the month, the
servants’ wages were extra, and he wanted references—he wanted
assurances that the second half of his rent would be paid, the first
half being paid in advance, and he wanted assurances of respectability
from a solicitor, or a doctor, or a clergyman. He was very polite in
his letter, explaining that his desire for references was what was
usual and should be regarded as a mere formality.

Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins had not thought of references, and they
had not dreamed a rent could be so high. In their minds had floated
sums like three guineas a week; or less, seeing that the place was
small and old.

Sixty pounds for a single month.

It staggered them.

Before Mrs. Arbuthnot’s eyes rose up boots: endless vistas, all the
stout boots that sixty pounds would buy; and besides the rent there
would be the servants’ wages, and the food, and the railway journeys
out and home. While as for references, these did indeed seem a
stumbling-block; it did seem impossible to give any without making
their plan more public than they had intended.

They had both—even Mrs. Arbuthnot, lured for once away from perfect
candour by the realisation of the great saving of trouble and criticism
an imperfect explanation would produce—they had both thought it would
be a good plan to give out, each to her own circle, their circles being
luckily distinct, that each was going to stay with a friend who had a
house in Italy. It would be true as far as it went—Mrs. Wilkins
asserted that it would be quite true, but Mrs. Arbuthnot thought it
wouldn’t be quite—and it was the only way, Mrs. Wilkins said, to keep
Mellersh even approximately quiet. To spend any of her money just on
the mere getting to Italy would cause him indignation; what he would
say if he knew she was renting part of a mediaeval castle on her own
account Mrs. Wilkins preferred not to think. It would take him days to
say it all; and this although it was her very own money, and not a
penny of it had ever been his.

“But I expect,” she said, “your husband is just the same. I expect all
husbands are alike in the long run.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing, because her reason for not wanting
Frederick to know was the exactly opposite one—Frederick would be only
too pleased for her to go, he would not mind it in the very least;
indeed, he would hail such a manifestation of self-indulgence and
worldliness with an amusement that would hurt, and urge her to have a
good time and not to hurry home with a crushing detachment. Far better,
she thought, to be missed by Mellersh than to be sped by Frederick. To
be missed, to be needed, from whatever motive, was, she thought, better
than the complete loneliness of not being missed or needed at all.

She therefore said nothing, and allowed Mrs. Wilkins to leap at her
conclusions unchecked. But they did, both of them, for a whole day feel
that the only thing to be done was to renounce the mediaeval castle;
and it was in arriving at this bitter decision that they really
realised how acute had been their longing for it.

Then Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose mind was trained in the finding of ways out
of difficulties, found a way out of the reference difficulty; and
simultaneously Mrs. Wilkins had a vision revealing to her how to reduce
the rent.

Mrs. Arbuthnot’s plan was simple, and completely successful. She took
the whole of the rent in person to the owner, drawing it out of her
Savings Bank—again she looked furtive and apologetic, as if the clerk
must know the money was wanted for purposes of self-indulgence—and,
going up with the six ten pound notes in her hand-bag to the address
near the Brompton Oratory where the owner lived, presented them to him,
waiving her right to pay only half. And when he saw her, and her parted
hair and soft dark eyes and sober apparel, and heard her grave voice,
he told her not to bother about writing round for those references.

“It’ll be all right,” he said, scribbling a receipt for the rent. “Do
sit down, won’t you? Nasty day, isn’t it? You’ll find the old castle
has lots of sunshine, whatever else it hasn’t got. Husband going?”

Mrs. Arbuthnot, unused to anything but candour, looked troubled at this
question and began to murmur inarticulately, and the owner at once
concluded that she was a widow—a war one, of course, for other widows
were old—and that he had been a fool not to guess it.

“Oh, I’m sorry,” he said, turning red right up to his fair hair. “I
didn’t mean—h’m, h’m, h’m—”

He ran his eye over the receipt he had written. “Yes, I think that’s
all right,” he said, getting up and giving it to her. “Now,” he added,
taking the six notes she held out and smiling, for Mrs. Arbuthnot was
agreeable to look at, “I’m richer, and you’re happier. I’ve got money,
and you’ve got San Salvatore. I wonder which is best.”

“I think you know,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot with her sweet smile.

He laughed and opened the door for her. It was a pity the interview was
over. He would have liked to ask her to lunch with him. She made him
think of his mother, of his nurse, of all things kind and comforting,
besides having the attraction of not being his mother or his nurse.

“I hope you’ll like the old place,” he said, holding her hand a minute
at the door. The very feel of her hand, even through its glove, was
reassuring; it was the sort of hand, he thought, that children would
like to hold in the dark. “In April, you know, it’s simply a mass of
flowers. And then there’s the sea. You must wear white. You’ll fit in
very well. There are several portraits of you there.”

“Portraits?”

“Madonnas, you know. There’s one on the stairs really exactly like
you.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot smiled and said good-bye and thanked him. Without the
least trouble and at once she had got him placed in his proper
category: he was an artist and of an effervescent temperament.

She shook hands and left, and he wished she hadn’t. After she was gone
he supposed that he ought to have asked for those references, if only
because she would think him so unbusiness-like not to, but he could as
soon have insisted on references from a saint in a nimbus as from that
grave, sweet lady.

Rose Arbuthnot.

Her letter, making the appointment, lay on the table.

Pretty name.

That difficulty, then, was overcome. But there still remained the other
one, the really annihilating effect of the expense on the nest-eggs,
and especially on Mrs. Wilkins’s, which was in size, compared with Mrs.
Arbuthnot’s, as the egg of the plover to that of the duck; and this in
its turn was overcome by the vision vouchsafed to Mrs. Wilkins,
revealing to her the steps to be taken for its overcoming. Having got
San Salvatore—the beautiful, the religious name, fascinated them—they
in their turn would advertise in the Agony Column of _The Times_, and
would inquire after two more ladies, of similar desires to their own,
to join them and share the expenses.

At once the strain of the nest-eggs would be reduced from half to a
quarter. Mrs. Wilkins was prepared to fling her entire egg into the
adventure, but she realised that if it were to cost even sixpence over
her ninety pounds her position would be terrible. Imagine going to
Mellersh and saying, “I owe.” It would be awful enough if some day
circumstances forced her to say, “I have no nest-egg,” but at least she
would be supported in such a case by the knowledge that the egg had
been her own. She therefore, though prepared to fling her last penny
into the adventure, was not prepared to fling into it a single farthing
that was not demonstrably her own; and she felt that if her share of
the rent was reduced to fifteen pounds only, she would have a safe
margin for the other expenses. Also they might economise very much on
food—gather olives off their own trees and eat them, for instance, and
perhaps catch fish.

Of course, as they pointed out to each other, they could reduce the
rent to an almost negligible sum by increasing the number of sharers;
they could have six more ladies instead of two if they wanted to,
seeing that there were eight beds. But supposing the eight beds were
distributed in couples in four rooms, it would not be altogether what
they wanted, to find themselves shut up at night with a stranger.
Besides, they thought that perhaps having so many would not be quite
so peaceful. After all, they were going to San Salvatore for peace and
rest and joy, and six more ladies, especially if they got into one’s
bedroom, might a little interfere with that.
speech first
However, there seemed to be only two ladies in England at that moment
who had any wish to join them, for they had only two answers to their
advertisement.

“Well, we only want two,” said Mrs. Wilkins, quickly recovering, for
she had imagined a great rush.

“I think a choice would have been a good thing,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“You mean because then we needn’t have had Lady Caroline Dester.”

“I didn’t say that,” gently protested Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“We needn’t have her,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “Just one more person would
help us a great deal with the rent. We’re not obliged to have two.”

“But why should we not have her? She seems really quite what we want.”

“Yes—she does from her letter,” said Mrs. Wilkins doubtfully.

She felt she would be terribly shy of Lady Caroline. Incredible as it
may seem, seeing how they get into everything, Mrs. Wilkins had never
come across any members of the aristocracy.

They interviewed Lady Caroline, and they interviewed the other
applicant, a Mrs. Fisher.

Lady Caroline came to the club in Shaftesbury Avenue, and appeared to
be wholly taken up by one great longing, a longing to get away from
everybody she had ever known. When she saw the club, and Mrs.
Arbuthnot, and Mrs. Wilkins, she was sure that here was exactly what
she wanted. She would be in Italy—a place she adored; she would not be
in hotels—places she loathed; she would not be staying with
friends—persons she disliked; and she would be in the company of
strangers who would never mention a single person she knew, for the
simple reason that they had not, could not have, and would not come
across them. She asked a few questions about the fourth woman, and was
satisfied with the answers. Mrs. Fisher, of Prince of Wales Terrace. A
widow. She too would be unacquainted with any of her friends. Lady
Caroline did not even know where Prince of Wales Terrace was.

“It’s in London,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Is it?” said Lady Caroline.

It all seemed most restful.

Mrs. Fisher was unable to come to the club because, she explained by
letter, she could not walk without a stick; therefore Mrs. Arbuthnot
and Mrs. Wilkins went to her.

“But if she can’t come to the club how can she go to Italy?” wondered
Mrs. Wilkins, aloud.

“We shall hear that from her own lips,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

From Mrs. Fisher’s lips they merely heard, in reply to delicate
questioning, that sitting in trains was not walking about; and they
knew that already. Except for the stick, however, she appeared to be a
most desirable fourth—quiet, educated, elderly. She was much older than
they or Lady Caroline—Lady Caroline had informed them she was
twenty-eight—but not so old as to have ceased to be active-minded. She
was very respectable indeed, and still wore a complete suit of black
though her husband had died, she told them, eleven years before. Her
house was full of signed photographs of illustrious Victorian dead, all
of whom she said she had known when she was little. Her father had been
an eminent critic, and in his house she had seen practically everybody
who was anybody in letters and art. Carlyle had scowled at her; Matthew
Arnold had held her on his knee; Tennyson had sonorously rallied her on
the length of her pig-tail. She animatedly showed them the photographs,
hung everywhere on her walls, pointing out the signatures with her
stick, and she neither gave any information about her own husband nor
asked for any about the husbands of her visitors; which was the
greatest comfort. Indeed, she seemed to think that they also were
widows, for on inquiring who the fourth lady was to be, and being told
it was a Lady Caroline Dester, she said, “Is she a widow too?” And on
their explaining that she was not, because she had not yet been
married, observed with abstracted amiability, “All in good time.”

But Mrs. Fisher’s very abstractedness—and she seemed to be absorbed
chiefly in the interesting people she used to know and in their
memorial photographs, and quite a good part of the interview was taken
up by reminiscent anecdote of Carlyle, Meredith, Matthew Arnold,
Tennyson, and a host of others—her very abstractedness was a
recommendation. She only asked, she said, to be allowed to sit quiet in
the sun and remember. That was all Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins
asked of their sharers. It was their idea of a perfect sharer that she
should sit quiet in the sun and remember, rousing herself on Saturday
evenings sufficiently to pay her share. Mrs. Fisher was very fond, too,
she said, of flowers, and once when she was spending a week-end with
her father at Box Hill—

“Who lived at Box Hill?” interrupted Mrs. Wilkins, who hung on Mrs.
Fisher’s reminiscences, intensely excited by meeting somebody who had
actually been familiar with all the really and truly and undoubtedly
great—actually seen them, heard them talking, touched them.

Mrs. Fisher looked at her over the top of her glasses in some surprise.
Mrs. Wilkins, in her eagerness to tear the heart out quickly of Mrs.
Fisher’s reminiscences, afraid that at any moment Mrs. Arbuthnot would
take her away and she wouldn’t have heard half, had already interrupted
several times with questions which appeared ignorant to Mrs. Fisher.

“Meredith of course,” said Mrs. Fisher rather shortly. “I remember a
particular week-end”—she continued. “My father often took me, but I
always remember this week-end particularly—”

“Did you know Keats?” eagerly interrupted Mrs. Wilkins.

Mrs. Fisher, after a pause, said with sub-acid reserve that she had
been unacquainted with both Keats and Shakespeare.

“Oh of course—how ridiculous of me!” cried Mrs. Wilkins, flushing
scarlet. “It’s because”—she floundered—“it’s because the immortals
somehow still seem alive, don’t they—as if they were here, going to
walk into the room in another minute—and one forgets they are dead. In
fact one knows perfectly well that they’re not dead—not nearly so dead
as you and I even now,” she assured Mrs. Fisher, who observed her over
the top of her glasses.

“I thought I _saw_ Keats the other day,” Mrs. Wilkins incoherently
proceeded, driven on by Mrs. Fisher’s look over the top of her glasses.
“In Hampstead—crossing the road in front of that house—you know—the
house where he lived—”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said they must be going.

Mrs. Fisher did nothing to prevent them.

“I _really_ thought I saw him,” protested Mrs. Wilkins, appealing for
belief first to one and then to the other while waves of colour passed
over her face, and totally unable to stop because of Mrs. Fisher’s
glasses and the steady eyes looking at her over their tops. “I believe
I _did_ see him—he was dressed in a—”

Even Mrs. Arbuthnot looked at her now, and in her gentlest voice said
they would be late for lunch.

It was at this point that Mrs. Fisher asked for references. She had no
wish to find herself shut up for four weeks with somebody who saw
things. It is true that there were three sitting-rooms, besides the
garden and the battlements at San Salvatore, so that there would be
opportunities of withdrawal from Mrs. Wilkins; but it would be
disagreeable to Mrs. Fisher, for instance, if Mrs. Wilkins were
suddenly to assert that she saw Mr. Fisher. Mr. Fisher was dead; let
him remain so. She had no wish to be told he was walking about the
garden. The only reference she really wanted, for she was much too old
and firmly seated in her place in the world for questionable associates
to matter to her, was one with regard to Mrs. Wilkins’s health. Was her
health quite normal? Was she an ordinary, everyday, sensible woman?
Mrs. Fisher felt that if she were given even one address she would be
able to find out what she needed. So she asked for references, and her
visitors appeared to be so much taken aback—Mrs. Wilkins, indeed, was
instantly sobered—that she added, “It is usual.”

Mrs. Wilkins found her speech first. “But,” she said, “aren’t we the
ones who ought to ask for some from you?”

And this seemed to Mrs. Arbuthnot too the right attitude. Surely it was
they who were taking Mrs. Fisher into their party, and not Mrs. Fisher
who was taking them into it?

For answer Mrs. Fisher, leaning on her stick, went to the writing-table
and in a firm hand wrote down three names and offered them to Mrs.
Wilkins, and the names were so respectable, more, they were so
momentous, they were so nearly august, that just to read them was
enough. The President of the Royal Academy, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Governor of the Bank of England—who would dare
disturb such personages in their meditations with inquiries as to
whether a female friend of theirs was all she should be?

“They have known me since I was little,” said Mrs. Fisher—everybody
seemed to have known Mrs. Fisher since or when she was little.

“I don’t think references are nice things at all between—between
ordinary decent women,” burst out Mrs. Wilkins, made courageous by
being, as she felt, at bay; for she very well knew that the only
reference she could give without getting into trouble was Shoolbred,
and she had little confidence in that, as it would be entirely based on
Mellersh’s fish. “We’re not business people. We needn’t distrust each
other—”

And Mrs. Arbuthnot said, with a dignity that yet was sweet, “I’m afraid
references do bring an atmosphere into our holiday plan that isn’t
quite what we want, and I don’t think we’ll take yours up or give you
any ourselves. So that I suppose you won’t wish to join us.”

And she held out her hand in good-bye.

Then Mrs. Fisher, her gaze diverted to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who inspired
trust and liking even in Tube officials, felt that she would be idiotic
to lose the opportunity of being in Italy in the particular conditions
offered, and that she and this calm-browed woman between them would
certainly be able to curb the other one when she had her attacks. So
she said, taking Mrs. Arbuthnot’s offered hand, “Very well. I waive
references.”

She waived references.

The two as they walked to the station in Kensington High Street could
not help thinking that this way of putting it was lofty. Even Mrs.
Arbuthnot, spendthrift of excuses for lapses, thought Mrs. Fisher might
have used other words; and Mrs. Wilkins, by the time she got to the
station, and the walk and the struggle on the crowded pavement with
other people’s umbrellas had warmed her blood, actually suggested
waiving Mrs. Fisher.

“If there is any waiving to be done, do let us be the ones who waive,”
she said eagerly.

But Mrs. Arbuthnot, as usual, held on to Mrs. Wilkins; and presently,
having cooled down in the train, Mrs. Wilkins announced that at San
Salvatore Mrs. Fisher would find her level. “I see her finding her
level there,” she said, her eyes very bright.

Whereupon Mrs. Arbuthnot, sitting with her quiet hands folded, turned
over in her mind how best she could help Mrs. Wilkins not to see quite
so much; or at least, if she must see, to see in silence.




Chapter 4


It had been arranged that Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins, travelling
together, should arrive at San Salvatore on the evening of March
31st—the owner, who told them how to get there, appreciated their
disinclination to begin their time in it on April 1st—and Lady Caroline
and Mrs. Fisher, as yet unacquainted and therefore under no obligations
to bore each other on the journey, for only towards the end would they
find out by a process of sifting who they were, were to arrive on the
morning of April 2nd. In this way everything would be got nicely ready
for the two who seemed, in spite of the equality of the sharing, yet to
have something about them of guests.

There were disagreeable incidents towards the end of March, when Mrs.
Wilkins, her heart in her mouth and her face a mixture of guilt, terror
and determination, told her husband that she had been invited to Italy,
and he declined to believe it. Of course he declined to believe it.
Nobody had ever invited his wife to Italy before. There was no
precedent. He required proofs. The only proof was Mrs. Arbuthnot, and
Mrs. Wilkins had produced her; but after what entreaties, what
passionate persuading! Mrs. Arbuthnot had not imagined she would have
to face Mr. Wilkins and say things to him that were short of the truth,
and it brought home to her what she had for some time suspected, that
she was slipping more and more away from God.

Indeed, the whole of March was filled with unpleasant, anxious moments.
It was an uneasy month. Mrs. Arbuthnot’s conscience, made
super-sensitive by years of pampering, could not reconcile what she was
doing with its own high standard of what was right. It gave her little
peace. It nudged her at her prayers. It punctuated her entreaties for
divine guidance with disconcerting questions, such as, “Are you not a
hypocrite? Do you really mean that? Would you not, frankly, be
disappointed if that prayer were granted?”

The prolonged wet, raw weather was on the side too of her conscience,
producing far more sickness than usual among the poor. They had
bronchitis; they had fevers; there was no end to the distress. And here
she was going off, spending precious money on going off, simply and
solely to be happy. One woman. One woman being happy, and these piteous
multitudes . . .

She was unable to look the vicar in the face. He did not know, nobody
knew, what she was going to do, and from the very beginning she was
unable to look anybody in the face. She excused herself from making
speeches appealing for money. How could she stand up and ask people for
money when she herself was spending so much on her own selfish
pleasure? Nor did it help her or quiet her that, having actually told
Frederick, in her desire to make up for what she was squandering, that
she would be grateful if he would let her have some money, he instantly
gave her a cheque for £100. He asked no questions. She was scarlet. He
looked at her a moment and then looked away. It was a relief to
Frederick that she should take some money. She gave it all immediately
to the organisation she worked with, and found herself more tangled in
doubts than ever.

Mrs. Wilkins, on the contrary, had no doubts. She was quite certain
that it was a most proper thing to have a holiday, and altogether right
and beautiful to spend one’s own hard-collected savings on being happy.

“Think how much nicer we shall be when we come back,” she said to Mrs.
Arbuthnot, encouraging that pale lady.

No, Mrs. Wilkins had no doubts, but she had fears; and March was for
her too an anxious month, with the unconscious Mr. Wilkins coming back
daily to his dinner and eating his fish in the silence of imagined
security.

Also things happen so awkwardly. It really is astonishing, how
awkwardly they happen. Mrs. Wilkins, who was very careful all this
month to give Mellersh only the food he liked, buying it and hovering
over its cooking with a zeal more than common, succeeded so well that
Mellersh was pleased; definitely pleased; so much pleased that he began
to think that he might, after all, have married the right wife instead
of, as he had frequently suspected, the wrong one. The result was that
on the third Sunday in the month—Mrs. Wilkins had made up her trembling
mind that on the fourth Sunday, there being five in that March and
it being on the fifth of them that she and Mrs. Arbuthnot were to
start, she would tell Mellersh of her invitation—on the third Sunday,
then, after a very well-cooked lunch in which the Yorkshire pudding
had melted in his mouth and the apricot tart had been so perfect that
he ate it all, Mellersh, smoking his cigar by the brightly burning
fire the while hail gusts banged on the window, said: “I am thinking
of taking you to Italy for Easter.” And paused for her astounded and
grateful ecstasy.

None came. The silence in the room, except for the hail hitting the
windows and the gay roar of the fire, was complete. Mrs. Wilkins could
not speak. She was dumbfounded. The next Sunday was the day she had
meant to break her news to him, and she had not yet even prepared the
form of words in which she would break it.

Mr. Wilkins, who had not been abroad since before the war, and was
noticing with increasing disgust, as week followed week of wind and
rain, the peculiar persistent vileness of the weather, had slowly
conceived a desire to get away from England for Easter. He was doing
very well in his business. He could afford a trip. Switzerland was
useless in April. There was a familiar sound about Easter in Italy. To
Italy he would go; and as it would cause comment if he did not take his
wife, take her he must—besides, she would be useful; a second person
was always useful in a country whose language one did not speak for
holding things, for waiting with the luggage.

He had expected an explosion of gratitude and excitement. The absence
of it was incredible. She could not, he concluded, have heard. Probably
she was absorbed in some foolish day-dream. It was regrettable how
childish she remained.

He turned his head—their chairs were in front of the fire—and looked at
her. She was staring straight into the fire, and it was no doubt the
fire that made her face so red.

“I am thinking,” he repeated, raising his clear, cultivated voice and
speaking with acerbity, for inattention at such a moment was
deplorable, “of taking you to Italy for Easter. Did you not hear me?”

Yes, she had heard him, and she had been wondering at the extraordinary
coincidence—really most extraordinary—she was just going to tell him
how—how she had been invited—a friend had invited her—Easter,
too—Easter was in April, wasn’t it?—her friend had a—had a house
there.

In fact Mrs. Wilkins, driven by terror, guilt and surprise, had been
more incoherent if possible than usual.

It was a dreadful afternoon. Mellersh, profoundly indignant, besides
having his intended treat coming back on him like a blessing to roost,
cross-examined her with the utmost severity. He demanded that she
refuse the invitation. He demanded that, since she had so outrageously
accepted it without consulting him, she should write and cancel her
acceptance. Finding himself up against an unsuspected, shocking rock of
obstinacy in her, he then declined to believe she had been invited to
Italy at all. He declined to believe in this Mrs. Arbuthnot, of whom
till that moment he had never heard; and it was only when the gentle
creature was brought round—with such difficulty, with such a desire on
her part to throw the whole thing up rather than tell Mr. Wilkins less
than the truth—and herself endorsed his wife’s statements that he was
able to give them credence. He could not but believe Mrs. Arbuthnot.
She produced the precise effect on him that she did on Tube officials.
She hardly needed to say anything. But that made no difference to her
conscience, which knew and would not let her forget that she had given
him an incomplete impression. “Do you,” asked her conscience, “see any
real difference between an incomplete impression and a completely
stated lie? God sees none.”

The remainder of March was a confused bad dream. Both Mrs. Arbuthnot
and Mrs. Wilkins were shattered; try as they would not to, both felt
extraordinarily guilty; and when on the morning of the 30th they did
finally get off there was no exhilaration about the departure, no
holiday feeling at all.

“We’ve been too good—_much_ too good,” Mrs. Wilkins kept on murmuring
as they walked up and down the platform at Victoria, having arrived
there an hour before they need have, “and that’s why we feel as though
we’re doing wrong. We’re brow-beaten—we’re not any longer real human
beings. Real human beings aren’t ever as good as we’ve been. Oh”—she
clenched her thin hands—“to _think_ that we ought to be so happy now,
here on the very station, actually starting, and we’re not, and it’s
being spoilt for us just simply because we’ve spoilt _them!_ What have
we done—what have we done, I should like to know,” she inquired of Mrs.
Arbuthnot indignantly, “except for once want to go away by ourselves
and have a little rest from _them?_”

Mrs. Arbuthnot, patiently pacing, did not ask who she meant by _them_,
because she knew. Mrs. Wilkins meant their husbands, persisting in her
assumption that Frederick was as indignant as Mellersh over the
departure of his wife, whereas Frederick did not even know his wife had
gone.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, always silent about him, had said nothing of this to
Mrs. Wilkins. Frederick went too deep into her heart for her to talk
about him. He was having an extra bout of work finishing another of
those dreadful books, and had been away practically continually the
last few weeks, and was away when she left. Why should she tell him
beforehand? Sure as she so miserably was that he would have no
objection to anything she did, she merely wrote him a note and put it
on the hall-table ready for him if and when he should come home. She
said she was going for a month’s holiday as she needed a rest and she
had not had one for so long, and that Gladys, the efficient
parlourmaid, had orders to see to his comforts. She did not say where
she was going; there was no reason why she should; he would not be
interested, he would not care.

The day was wretched, blustering and wet; the crossing was atrocious,
and they were very sick. But after having been very sick, just to
arrive at Calais and not be sick was happiness, and it was there that
the real splendour of what they were doing first began to warm their
benumbed spirits. It got hold of Mrs. Wilkins first, and spread from
her like a rose-coloured flame over her pale companion. Mellersh at
Calais, where they restored themselves with soles because of Mrs.
Wilkins’s desire to eat a sole Mellersh wasn’t having—Mellersh at
Calais had already begun to dwindle and seem less important. None of
the French porters knew him; not a single official at Calais cared a
fig for Mellersh. In Paris there was no time to think of him because
their train was late and they only just caught the Turin train at the
Gare de Lyons; and by the afternoon of the next day when they got into
Italy, England, Frederick, Mellersh, the vicar, the poor, Hampstead,
the club, Shoolbred, everybody and everything, the whole inflamed sore
dreariness, had faded to the dimness of a dream.




Chapter 5


It was cloudy in Italy, which surprised them. They had expected
brilliant sunshine. But never mind: it was Italy, and the very clouds
looked fat. Neither of them had ever been there before. Both gazed out
of the windows with rapt faces. The hours flew as long as it was
daylight, and after that there was the excitement of getting nearer,
getting quite near, getting there. At Genoa it had begun to rain—Genoa!
Imagine actually being at Genoa, seeing its name written up in the
station just like any other name—at Nervi it was pouring, and when at
last towards midnight, for again the train was late, they got to
Mezzago, the rain was coming down in what seemed solid sheets. But it
was Italy. Nothing it did could be bad. The very rain was
different—straight rain, falling properly on to one’s umbrella; not
that violently blowing English stuff that got in everywhere. And it did
leave off; and when it did, behold the earth would be strewn with
roses.

Mr. Briggs, San Salvatore’s owner, had said, “You get out at Mezzago,
and then you drive.” But he had forgotten what he amply knew, that
trains in Italy are sometimes late, and he had imagined his tenants
arriving at Mezzago at eight o’clock and finding a string of flys to
choose from.

The train was four hours late, and when Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins
scrambled down the ladder-like high steps of their carriage into the
black downpour, their skirts sweeping off great pools of sooty wet
because their hands were full of suit-cases, if it had not been for the
vigilance of Domenico, the gardener at San Salvatore, they would have
found nothing for them to drive in. All ordinary flys had long since
gone home. Domenico, foreseeing this, had sent his aunt’s fly, driven
by her son his cousin; and his aunt and her fly lived in Castagneto,
the village crouching at the feet of San Salvatore, and therefore,
however late the train was, the fly would not dare come home without
containing that which it had been sent to fetch.

Domenico’s cousin’s name was Beppo, and he presently emerged out of the
dark where Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins stood, uncertain what to do
next after the train had gone on, for they could see no porter and they
thought from the feel of it that they were standing not so much on a
platform as in the middle of the permanent way.

Beppo, who had been searching for them, emerged from the dark with a
kind of pounce and talked Italian to them vociferously. Beppo was a
most respectable young man, but he did not look as if he were,
especially not in the dark, and he had a dripping hat slouched over one
eye. They did not like the way he seized their suit-cases. He could not
be, they thought, a porter. However, they presently from out of his
streaming talk discerned the words San Salvatore, and after that they
kept on saying them to him, for it was the only Italian they knew, as
they hurried after him, unwilling to lose sight of their suit-cases,
stumbling across rails and through puddles out to where in the road a
small, high fly stood.

Its hood was up, and its horse was in an attitude of thought. They
climbed in, and the minute they were in—Mrs. Wilkins, indeed, could
hardly be called in—the horse awoke with a start from its reverie and
immediately began going home rapidly; without Beppo; without the
suit-cases.

Beppo darted after him, making the night ring with his shouts, and
caught the hanging reins just in time. He explained proudly, and as it
seemed to him with perfect clearness, that the horse always did that,
being a fine animal full of corn and blood, and cared for by him,
Beppo, as if he were his own son, and the ladies must not be alarmed—he
had noticed they were clutching each other; but clear, and loud, and
profuse of words though he was, they only looked at him blankly.

He went on talking, however, while he piled the suit-cases up round
them, sure that sooner or later they must understand him, especially as
he was careful to talk very loud and illustrate everything he said with
the simplest elucidatory gestures, but they both continued only to look
at him. They both, he noticed sympathetically, had white faces,
fatigued faces, and they both had big eyes, fatigued eyes. They were
beautiful ladies, he thought, and their eyes, looking at him over the
tops of the suit-cases watching his every movement—there were no
trunks, only numbers of suit-cases—were like the eyes of the Mother of
God. The only thing the ladies said, and they repeated it at regular
intervals, even after they had started, gently prodding him as he sat
on his box to call his attention to it, was, “San Salvatore?”

And each time he answered vociferously, encouragingly, “_Sì, sì_—San
Salvatore.”

“We don’t _know_ of course if he’s taking us there,” said Mrs.
Arbuthnot at last in a low voice, after they had been driving as it
seemed to them a long while, and had got off the paving-stones of the
sleep-shrouded town and were out on a winding road with what they could
just see was a low wall on their left beyond which was a great black
emptiness and the sound of the sea. On their right was something close
and steep and high and black—rocks, they whispered to each other; huge
rocks.

“No—we don’t _know_,” agreed Mrs. Wilkins, a slight coldness passing
down her spine.

They felt very uncomfortable. It was so late. It was so dark. The road
was so lonely. Suppose a wheel came off. Suppose they met Fascisti, or
the opposite of Fascisti. How sorry they were now that they had not
slept at Genoa and come on the next morning in daylight.

“But that would have been the first of April,” said Mrs. Wilkins, in a
low voice.

“It is that now,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot beneath her breath.

“So it is,” murmured Mrs. Wilkins.

They were silent.

Beppo turned round on his box—a disquieting habit already noticed, for
surely his horse ought to be carefully watched—and again addressed them
with what he was convinced was lucidity—no _patois_, and the clearest
explanatory movements.

How much they wished their mothers had made them learn Italian when
they were little. If only now they could have said, “Please sit round
the right way and look after the horse.” They did not even know what
horse was in Italian. It was contemptible to be so ignorant.

In their anxiety, for the road twisted round great jutting rocks, and
on their left was only the low wall to keep them out of the sea should
anything happen, they too began to gesticulate, waving their hands at
Beppo, pointing ahead. They wanted him to turn round again and face his
horse, that was all. He thought they wanted him to drive faster; and
there followed a terrifying ten minutes during which, as he supposed,
he was gratifying them. He was proud of his horse, and it could go very
fast. He rose in his seat, the whip cracked, the horse rushed forward,
the rocks leaped towards them, the little fly swayed, the suit-cases
heaved, Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins clung. In this way they
continued, swaying, heaving, clattering, clinging, till at a point near
Castagneto there was a rise in the road, and on reaching the foot of
the rise the horse, who knew every inch of the way, stopped suddenly,
throwing everything in the fly into a heap, and then proceeded up at
the slowest of walks.

Beppo twisted himself round to receive their admiration, laughing with
pride in his horse.

There was no answering laugh from the beautiful ladies. Their eyes,
fixed on him, seemed bigger than ever, and their faces against the
black of the night showed milky.

But here at least, once they were up the slope, were houses. The rocks
left off, and there were houses; the low wall left off, and there were
houses; the sea shrunk away, and the sound of it ceased, and the
loneliness of the road was finished. No lights anywhere, of course,
nobody to see them pass; and yet Beppo, when the houses began, after
looking over his shoulder and shouting “Castagneto” at the ladies, once
more stood up and cracked his whip and once more made his horse dash
forward.

“We shall be there in a minute,” Mrs. Arbuthnot said to herself,
holding on.

“We shall soon stop now,” Mrs. Wilkins said to herself, holding on.
They said nothing aloud, because nothing would have been heard above
the whip-cracking and the wheel-clattering and the boisterous inciting
noises Beppo was making at his horse.

Anxiously they strained their eyes for any sight of the beginning of
San Salvatore.

They had supposed and hoped that after a reasonable amount of village a
mediaeval archway would loom upon them, and through it they would drive
into a garden and draw up at an open, welcoming door, with light
streaming from it and those servants standing in it who, according to
the advertisement, remained.

Instead the fly suddenly stopped.

Peering out they could see they were still in the village street, with
small dark houses each side; and Beppo, throwing the reins over the
horse’s back as if completely confident this time that he would not go
any farther, got down off his box. At the same moment, springing as it
seemed out of nothing, a man and several half-grown boys appeared on
each side of the fly and began dragging out the suit-cases.

“No, no—San Salvatore, San Salvatore”—exclaimed Mrs. Wilkins, trying to
hold on to what suit-cases she could.

“_Sì, sì_—San Salvatore,” they all shouted, pulling.

“This _can’t_ be San Salvatore,” said Mrs. Wilkins, turning to Mrs.
Arbuthnot, who sat quite still watching her suit-cases being taken from
her with the same patience she applied to lesser evils. She knew she
could do nothing if these men were wicked men determined to have her
suit-cases.

“I don’t think it can be,” she admitted, and could not refrain from a
moment’s wonder at the ways of God. Had she really been brought here,
she and poor Mrs. Wilkins, after so much trouble in arranging it, so
much difficulty and worry, along such devious paths of prevarication
and deceit, only to be—

She checked her thoughts, and gently said to Mrs. Wilkins, while the
ragged youths disappeared with the suit-cases into the night and the
man with the lantern helped Beppo pull the rug off her, that they were
both in God’s hands; and for the first time on hearing this, Mrs.
Wilkins was afraid.

There was nothing for it but to get out. Useless to try to go on
sitting in the fly repeating San Salvatore. Every time they said it,
and their voices each time were fainter, Beppo and the other man merely
echoed it in a series of loud shouts. If only they had learned Italian
when they were little. If only they could have said, “We wish to be
driven to the door.” But they did not even know what door was in
Italian. Such ignorance was not only contemptible, it was, they now
saw, definitely dangerous. Useless, however, to lament it now. Useless
to put off whatever it was that was going to happen to them by trying
to go on sitting in the fly. They therefore got out.

The two men opened their umbrellas for them and handed them to them.
From this they received a faint encouragement, because they could not
believe that if these men were wicked they would pause to open
umbrellas. The man with the lantern then made signs to them to follow
him, talking loud and quickly, and Beppo, they noticed, remained
behind. Ought they to pay him? Not, they thought, if they were going to
be robbed and perhaps murdered. Surely on such an occasion one did not
pay. Besides, he had not after all brought them to San Salvatore. Where
they had got to was evidently somewhere else. Also, he did not show the
least wish to be paid; he let them go away into the night with no
clamour at all. This, they could not help thinking, was a bad sign. He
asked for nothing because presently he was to get so much.

They came to some steps. The road ended abruptly in a church and some
descending steps. The man held the lantern low for them to see the
steps.

“San Salvatore?” said Mrs. Wilkins once again, very faintly, before
committing herself to the steps. It was useless to mention it now, of
course, but she could not go down steps in complete silence. No
mediaeval castle, she was sure, was ever built at the bottom of steps.

Again, however, came the echoing shout—“_Sì, sì_—San Salvatore.”

They descended gingerly, holding up their skirts just as if they would
be wanting them another time and had not in all probability finished
with skirts for ever.

The steps ended in a steeply sloping path with flat stone slabs down
the middle. They slipped a good deal on these wet slabs, and the man
with the lantern, talking loud and quickly, held them up. His way of
holding them up was polite.

“Perhaps,” said Mrs. Wilkins in a low voice to Mrs. Arbuthnot, “It is
all right after all.”

“We’re in God’s hands,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot again; and again Mrs.
Wilkins was afraid.

They reached the bottom of the sloping path, and the light of the
lantern flickered over an open space with houses round three sides. The
sea was the fourth side, lazily washing backwards and forwards on
pebbles.

“San Salvatore,” said the man pointing with his lantern to a black mass
curved round the water like an arm flung about it.

They strained their eyes. They saw the black mass, and on the top of it
a light.

“San Salvatore?” they both repeated incredulously, for where were the
suit-cases, and why had they been forced to get out of the fly?

“_Sì, sì_—San Salvatore.”

They went along what seemed to be a quay, right on the edge of the
water. There was not even a low wall here—nothing to prevent the man
with the lantern tipping them in if he wanted to. He did not, however,
tip them in. Perhaps it was all right after all, Mrs. Wilkins again
suggested to Mrs. Arbuthnot on noticing this, who this time was herself
beginning to think that it might be, and said no more about God’s
hands.

The flicker of the lantern danced along, reflected in the wet pavement
of the quay. Out to the left, in the darkness and evidently at the end
of a jetty, was a red light. They came to an archway with a heavy iron
gate. The man with the lantern pushed the gate open. This time they
went up steps instead of down, and at the top of them was a little path
that wound upwards among flowers. They could not see the flowers, but
the whole place was evidently full of them.

It here dawned on Mrs. Wilkins that perhaps the reason why the fly had
not driven them up to the door was that there was no road, only a
footpath. That also would explain the disappearance of the suit-cases.
She began to feel confident that they would find their suit-cases
waiting for them when they got up to the top. San Salvatore was, it
seemed, on the top of a hill, as a mediaeval castle should be. At a
turn of the path they saw above them, much nearer now and shining more
brightly, the light they had seen from the quay. She told Mrs.
Arbuthnot of her dawning belief, and Mrs. Arbuthnot agreed that it was
very likely a true one.

Once more, but this time in a tone of real hopefulness, Mrs. Wilkins
said, pointing upwards at the black outline against the only slightly
less black sky, “San Salvatore?” And once more, but this time
comfortingly, encouragingly, came back the assurance, “_Sì, sì_—San
Salvatore.”

They crossed a little bridge, over what was apparently a ravine, and
then came a flat bit with long grass at the sides and more flowers.
They felt the grass flicking wet against their stockings, and the
invisible flowers were everywhere. Then up again through trees, along a
zigzag path with the smell all the way of the flowers they could not
see. The warm rain was bringing out all the sweetness. Higher and
higher they went in this sweet darkness, and the red light on the jetty
dropped farther and farther below them.

The path wound round to the other side of what appeared to be a little
peninsula; the jetty and the red light disappeared; across the
emptiness on their left were distant lights.

“Mezzago,” said the man, waving his lantern at the lights.

“_Sì, sì_,” they answered, for they had by now learned “_sì, sì_”. Upon
which the man congratulated them in a great flow of polite words, not
one of which they understood, on their magnificent Italian; for this
was Domenico, the vigilant and accomplished gardener of San Salvatore,
the prop and stay of the establishment, the resourceful, the gifted,
the eloquent, the courteous, the intelligent Domenico. Only they did
not know that yet; and he did in the dark, and even sometimes in the
light, look, with his knife-sharp swarthy features and swift, panther
movements, very like somebody wicked.

They passed along another flat bit of path, with a black shape like a
high wall towering above them on their right, and then the path went up
again under trellises, and trailing sprays of scented things caught at
them and shook raindrops on them, and the light of the lantern
flickered over lilies, and then came a flight of ancient steps worn
with centuries, and then another iron gate, and then they were inside,
though still climbing a twisting flight of stone steps with old walls
on either side like the walls of dungeons, and with a vaulted roof.

At the top was a wrought-iron door, and through it shone a flood of
electric light.

“_Ecco_,” said Domenico, lithely running up the last few steps ahead
and pushing the door open.

And there they were, arrived; and it was San Salvatore; and their
suit-cases were waiting for them; and they had not been murdered.

They looked at each other’s white faces and blinking eyes very
solemnly.

It was a great, a wonderful moment. Here they were, in their mediaeval
castle at last. Their feet touched its stones.

Mrs. Wilkins put her arm round Mrs. Arbuthnot’s neck and kissed her.

“The first thing to happen in this house,” she said softly, solemnly,
“shall be a kiss.”

“Dear Lotty,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Dear Rose,” said Mrs. Wilkins, her eyes brimming with gladness.

Domenico was delighted. He liked to see beautiful ladies kiss. He made
them a most appreciative speech of welcome, and they stood arm in arm,
holding each other up, for they were very tired, blinking smilingly at
him, and not understanding a word.




Chapter 6


When Mrs. Wilkins woke next morning she lay in bed a few minutes before
getting up and opening the shutters. What would she see out of her
window? A shining world, or a world of rain? But it would be beautiful;
whatever it was would be beautiful.

She was in a little bedroom with bare white walls and a stone floor
and sparse old furniture. The beds—there were two—were made of iron,
enamelled black and painted with bunches of gay flowers. She lay
putting off the great moment of going to the window as one puts off
opening a precious letter, gloating over it. She had no idea what time
it was; she had forgotten to wind up her watch ever since, centuries
ago, she last went to bed in Hampstead. No sounds were to be heard in
the house, so she supposed it was very early, yet she felt as if she
had slept a long while—so completely rested, so perfectly content.
She lay with her arms clasped round her head thinking how happy she
was, her lips curved upwards in a delighted smile. In bed by herself:
adorable condition. She had not been in a bed without Mellersh once
now for five whole years; and the cool roominess of it, the freedom
of one’s movements, the sense of recklessness, of audacity, in giving
the blankets a pull if one wanted to, or twitching the pillows more
comfortably! It was like the discovery of an entirely new joy.

Mrs. Wilkins longed to get up and open the shutters, but where she was
was really so very delicious. She gave a sigh of contentment, and went
on lying there looking round her, taking in everything in her room, her
own little room, her very own to arrange just as she pleased for this
one blessed month, her room bought with her own savings, the fruit of
her careful denials, whose door she could bolt if she wanted to, and
nobody had the right to come in. It was such a strange little room, so
different from any she had known, and so sweet. It was like a cell.
Except for the two beds, it suggested a happy austerity. “And the name
of the chamber,” she thought, quoting and smiling round at it, “was
Peace.”

Well, this was delicious, to lie there thinking how happy she was, but
outside those shutters it was more delicious still. She jumped up,
pulled on her slippers, for there was nothing on the stone floor but
one small rug, ran to the window and threw open the shutters.

“_Oh!_” cried Mrs. Wilkins.

All the radiance of April in Italy lay gathered together at her feet.
The sun poured in on her. The sea lay asleep in it, hardly stirring.
Across the bay the lovely mountains, exquisitely different in colour,
were asleep too in the light; and underneath her window, at the bottom
of the flower-starred grass slope from which the wall of the castle
rose up, was a great cypress, cutting through the delicate blues and
violets and rose-colours of the mountains and the sea like a great
black sword.

She stared. Such beauty; and she there to see it. Such beauty; and she
alive to feel it. Her face was bathed in light. Lovely scents came up
to the window and caressed her. A tiny breeze gently lifted her hair.
Far out in the bay a cluster of almost motionless fishing boats hovered
like a flock of white birds on the tranquil sea. How beautiful, how
beautiful. Not to have died before this . . . to have been allowed to
see, breathe, feel this. . . . She stared, her lips parted. Happy?
Poor, ordinary, everyday word. But what could one say, how could one
describe it? It was as though she could hardly stay inside herself, it
was as though she were too small to hold so much of joy, it was as
though she were washed through with light. And how astonishing to feel
this sheer bliss, for here she was, not doing and not going to do a
single unselfish thing, not going to do a thing she didn’t want to do.
According to everybody she had ever come across she ought at least to
have twinges. She had not one twinge. Something was wrong somewhere.
Wonderful that at home she should have been so good, so terribly good,
and merely felt tormented. Twinges of every sort had there been her
portion; aches, hurts, discouragements, and she the whole time being
steadily unselfish. Now she had taken off all her goodness and left it
behind her like a heap of rain-sodden clothes, and she only felt joy.
She was naked of goodness, and was rejoicing in being naked. She was
stripped, and exulting. And there, away in the dim mugginess of
Hampstead, was Mellersh being angry.

She tried to visualise Mellersh, she tried to see him having breakfast
and thinking bitter things about her; and lo, Mellersh himself began to
shimmer, became rose-colour, became delicate violet, became an
enchanting blue, became formless, became iridescent. Actually Mellersh,
after quivering a minute, was lost in light.

“_Well_,” thought Mrs. Wilkins, staring, as it were, after him. How
extraordinary not to be able to visualise Mellersh; and she who used to
know every feature, every expression of his by heart. She simply could
not see him as he was. She could only see him resolved into beauty,
melted into harmony with everything else. The familiar words of the
General Thanksgiving came quite naturally into her mind, and she found
herself blessing God for her creation, preservation, and all the
blessings of this life, but above all for His inestimable Love; out
loud; in a burst of acknowledgment. While Mellersh, at that moment
angrily pulling on his boots before going out into the dripping
streets, was indeed thinking bitter things about her.

She began to dress, choosing clean white clothes in honour of the
summer’s day, unpacking her suit-cases, tidying her adorable little
room. She moved about with quick, purposeful steps, her long thin body
held up straight, her small face, so much puckered at home with effort
and fear, smoothed out. All she had been and done before this morning,
all she had felt and worried about, was gone. Each of her worries
behaved as the image of Mellersh had behaved, and dissolved into colour
and light. And she noticed things she had not noticed for years—when
she was doing her hair in front of the glass she noticed it, and
thought, “Why, what pretty stuff.” For years she had forgotten she had
such a thing as hair, plaiting it in the evening and unplaiting it in
the morning with the same hurry and indifference with which she laced
and unlaced her shoes. Now she suddenly saw it, and she twisted it
round her fingers before the glass, and was glad it was so pretty.
Mellersh couldn’t have seen it either, for he had never said a word
about it. Well, when she got home she would draw his attention to it.
“Mellersh,” she would say, “look at my hair. Aren’t you pleased you’ve
got a wife with hair like curly honey?”

She laughed. She had never said anything like that to Mellersh yet, and
the idea of it amused her. But why had she not? Oh yes—she used to be
afraid of him. Funny to be afraid of anybody; and especially of one’s
husband, whom one saw in his more simplified moments, such as asleep,
and not breathing properly through his nose.

When she was ready she opened her door to go across to see if Rose, who
had been put the night before by a sleepy maidservant into a cell
opposite, were awake. She would say good-morning to her, and then she
would run down and stay with that cypress tree till breakfast was
ready, and after breakfast she wouldn’t so much as look out of a window
till she had helped Rose get everything ready for Lady Caroline and
Mrs. Fisher. There was much to be done that day, settling in, arranging
the rooms; she mustn’t leave Rose to do it alone. They would make it
all so lovely for the two to come, have such an entrancing vision ready
for them of little cells bright with flowers. She remembered she had
wanted Lady Caroline not to come; fancy wanting to shut some one out of
heaven because she thought she would be shy of her! And as though it
mattered if she were, and as though she would be anything so
self-conscious as shy. Besides, what a reason. She could not accuse
herself of goodness over that. And she remembered she had wanted not to
have Mrs. Fisher either, because she had seemed lofty. How funny of
her. So funny to worry about such little things, making them important.

The bedrooms and two of the sitting-rooms at San Salvatore were on the
top floor, and opened into a roomy hall with a wide glass window at the
north end. San Salvatore was rich in small gardens in different parts
and on different levels. The garden this window looked down on was made
on the highest part of the walls, and could only be reached through the
corresponding spacious hall on the floor below. When Mrs. Wilkins came
out of her room this window stood wide open, and beyond it in the sun
was a Judas tree in full flower. There was no sign of anybody, no sound
of voices or feet. Tubs of arum lilies stood about on the stone floor,
and on a table flamed a huge bunch of fierce nasturtiums. Spacious,
flowery, silent, with the wide window at the end opening into the
garden, and the Judas tree absurdly beautiful in the sunshine, it
seemed to Mrs. Wilkins, arrested on her way across to Mrs. Arbuthnot,
too good to be true. Was she really going to live in this for a whole
month? Up to now she had had to take what beauty she could as she went
along, snatching at little bits of it when she came across it—a patch
of daisies on a fine day in a Hampstead field, a flash of sunset
between two chimney pots. She had never been in definitely, completely
beautiful places. She had never been even in a venerable house; and
such a thing as a profusion of flowers in her rooms was unattainable to
her. Sometimes in the spring she had bought six tulips at Shoolbred’s,
unable to resist them, conscious that Mellersh if he knew what they had
cost would think it inexcusable; but they had soon died, and then there
were no more. As for the Judas tree, she hadn’t an idea what it was,
and gazed at it out there against the sky with the rapt expression of
one who sees a heavenly vision.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, coming out of her room, found her there like that,
standing in the middle of the hall staring.

“Now what does she think she sees now?” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“We _are_ in God’s hands,” said Mrs. Wilkins, turning to her, speaking
with extreme conviction.

“Oh!” said Mrs. Arbuthnot quickly, her face, which had been covered
with smiles when she came out of her room, falling. “Why, what has
happened?”

For Mrs. Arbuthnot had woken up with such a delightful feeling of
security, of relief, and she did not want to find she had not after all
escaped from the need of refuge. She had not even dreamed of Frederick.
For the first time for years she had been spared the nightly dream that
he was with her, that they were heart to heart, and its miserable
awakening. She had slept like a baby, and had woken up confident; she
had found there was nothing she wished to say in her morning prayer
except Thank you. It was disconcerting to be told she was after all in
God’s hands.

“I hope nothing has happened?” she asked anxiously.

Mrs. Wilkins looked at her a moment, and laughed. “How funny,” she
said, kissing her.

“What is funny?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, her face clearing because Mrs.
Wilkins laughed.

“We are. This is. Everything. It’s all so wonderful. It’s so funny and
so adorable that we should be in it. I daresay when we finally reach
heaven—the one they talk about so much—we shan’t find it a bit more
beautiful.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot relaxed to smiling security again. “Isn’t it divine?”
she said.

“Were you ever, ever in your life so happy?” asked Mrs. Wilkins,
catching her by the arm.

“No,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot. Nor had she been; not ever; not even in her
first love-days with Frederick. Because always pain had been close at
hand in that other happiness, ready to torture with doubts, to torture
even with the very excess of her love; while this was the simple
happiness of complete harmony with her surroundings, the happiness that
asks for nothing, that just accepts, just breathes, just is.

“Let’s go and look at that tree close,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “I don’t
believe it can only be a tree.”

And arm in arm they went along the hall, and their husbands would not
have known them their faces were so young with eagerness, and together
they stood at the open window, and when their eyes, having feasted on
the marvellous pink thing, wandered farther among the beauties of the
garden, they saw sitting on the low wall at the east edge of it, gazing
out over the bay, her feet in lilies, Lady Caroline.

They were astonished. They said nothing in their astonishment, but
stood quite still, arm in arm, staring down at her.

She too had on a white frock, and her head was bare. They had had no
idea that day in London, when her hat was down to her nose and her furs
were up to her ears, that she was so pretty. They had merely thought
her different from the other women in the club, and so had the other
women themselves, and so had all the waitresses, eyeing her sideways
and eyeing her again as they passed the corner where she sat talking;
but they had had no idea she was so pretty. She was exceedingly pretty.
Everything about her was very much that which it was. Her fair hair was
very fair, her lovely grey eyes were very lovely and grey, her dark
eyelashes were very dark, her white skin was very white, her red mouth
was very red. She was extravagantly slender—the merest thread of a
girl, though not without little curves beneath her thin frock where
little curves should be. She was looking out across the bay, and was
sharply defined against the background of empty blue. She was full in
the sun. Her feet dangled among the leaves and flowers of the lilies
just as if it did not matter that they should be bent or bruised.

“She ought to have a headache,” whispered Mrs. Arbuthnot at last,
“sitting there in the sun like that.”

“She ought to have a hat,” whispered Mrs. Wilkins.

“She’s treading on lilies.”

“But they’re hers as much as ours.”

“Only one-fourth of them.”

Lady Caroline turned her head. She looked up at them a moment,
surprised to see them so much younger than they had seemed that day at
the club, and so much less unattractive. Indeed, they were really
almost quite attractive, if any one could ever be really quite
attractive in the wrong clothes. Her eyes, swiftly glancing over them,
took in every inch of each of them in the half second before she smiled
and waved her hand and called out Good-morning. There was nothing, she
saw at once, to be hoped for in the way of interest from their clothes.
She did not consciously think this, for she was having a violent
reaction against beautiful clothes and the slavery they impose on one,
her experience being that the instant one had got them they took one in
hand and gave one no peace till they had been everywhere and been seen
by everybody. You didn’t take your clothes to parties; they took you.
It was quite a mistake to think that a woman, a really well-dressed
woman, wore out her clothes; it was the clothes that wore out the
woman—dragging her about at all hours of the day and night. No wonder
men stayed young longer. Just new trousers couldn’t excite them. She
couldn’t suppose that even the newest trousers ever behaved like that,
taking the bit between their teeth. Her images were disorderly, but she
thought as she chose, she used what images she liked. As she got off the
wall and came towards the window, it seemed a restful thing to know she
was going to spend an entire month with people in dresses made as she
dimly remembered dresses used to be made five summers ago.

“I got here yesterday morning,” she said, looking up at them and
smiling. She really was bewitching. She had everything, even a dimple.

“It’s a great pity,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, smiling back, “because we
were going to choose the nicest room for you.”

“Oh, but I’ve done that,” said Lady Caroline. “At least, I think it’s
the nicest. It looks two ways—I adore a room that looks two ways, don’t
you? Over the sea to the west, and over this Judas tree to the north.”

“And we had meant to make it pretty for you with flowers,” said Mrs.
Wilkins.

“Oh, Domenico did that. I told him to directly I got here. He’s the
gardener. He’s wonderful.”

“It’s a good thing, of course,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot a little
hesitatingly, “to be independent, and to know exactly what one wants.”

“Yes, it saves trouble,” agreed Lady Caroline.

“But one shouldn’t be so independent,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “as to leave
no opportunity for other people to exercise their benevolences on one.”

Lady Caroline, who had been looking at Mrs. Arbuthnot, now looked at
Mrs. Wilkins. That day at that queer club she had had merely a blurred
impression of Mrs. Wilkins, for it was the other one who did all the
talking, and her impression had been of somebody so shy, so awkward
that it was best to take no notice of her. She had not even been able
to say good-bye properly, doing it in an agony, turning red, turning
damp. Therefore she now looked at her in some surprise; and she was
still more surprised when Mrs. Wilkins added, gazing at her with the
most obvious sincere admiration, speaking indeed with a conviction that
refused to remain unuttered, “I didn’t realise you were _so_ pretty.”

She stared at Mrs. Wilkins. She was not usually told this quite so
immediately and roundly. Abundantly as she was used to it—impossible
not to be after twenty-eight solid years—it surprised her to be told it
with such bluntness, and by a woman.

“It’s very kind of you to think so,” she said.

“Why, you’re lovely,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “Quite, quite lovely.”

“I hope,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot pleasantly, “you make the most of it.”

Lady Caroline then stared at Mrs. Arbuthnot. “Oh yes,” she said. “I
make the most of it. I’ve been doing that ever since I can remember.”

“Because,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, smiling and raising a warning
forefinger, “it won’t last.”

Then Lady Caroline began to be afraid these two were originals. If so,
she would be bored. Nothing bored her so much as people who insisted
on being original, who came and buttonholed her and kept her waiting
while they were being original. And the one who admired her—it would
be tiresome if she dogged her about in order to look at her. What
she wanted of this holiday was complete escape from all she had had
before, she wanted the rest of complete contrast. Being admired, being
dogged, wasn’t contrast, it was repetition; and as for originals, to
find herself shut up with two on the top of a precipitous hill in a
mediaeval castle built for the express purpose of preventing easy
goings out and in, would not, she was afraid, be especially restful.
Perhaps she had better be a little less encouraging. They had seemed
such timid creatures, even the dark one—she couldn’t remember their
names—that day at the club, that she had felt it quite safe to be very
friendly. Here they had come out of their shells; already; indeed, at
once. There was no sign of timidity about either of them here. If they
had got out of their shells so immediately, at the very first contact,
unless she checked them they would soon begin to press upon her, and
then good-bye to her dream of thirty restful, silent days, lying
unmolested in the sun, getting her feathers smooth again, not being
spoken to, not waited on, not grabbed at and monopolised, but just
recovering from the fatigue, the deep and melancholy fatigue, of the
too much.

Besides, there was Mrs. Fisher. She too must be checked. Lady Caroline
had started two days earlier than had been arranged for two reasons:
first, because she wished to arrive before the others in order to pick
out the room or rooms she preferred, and second, because she judged it
likely that otherwise she would have to travel with Mrs. Fisher. She
did not want to travel with Mrs. Fisher. She did not want to arrive
with Mrs. Fisher. She saw no reason whatever why for a single moment
she should have to have anything at all to do with Mrs. Fisher.

But unfortunately Mrs. Fisher also was filled with a desire to get to
San Salvatore first and pick out the room or rooms she preferred, and
she and Lady Caroline had after all travelled together. As early as
Calais they began to suspect it; in Paris they feared it; at Modane
they knew it; at Mezzago they concealed it, driving out to Castagneto
in two separate flys, the nose of the one almost touching the back of
the other the whole way. But when the road suddenly left off at the
church and the steps, further evasion was impossible; and faced by this
abrupt and difficult finish to their journey there was nothing for it
but to amalgamate.

Because of Mrs. Fisher’s stick Lady Caroline had to see about
everything. Mrs. Fisher’s intentions, she explained from her fly when
the situation had become plain to her, were active, but her stick
prevented their being carried out. The two drivers told Lady Caroline
boys would have to carry the luggage up to the castle, and she went in
search of some, while Mrs. Fisher waited in the fly because of her
stick. Mrs. Fisher could speak Italian, but only, she explained, the
Italian of Dante, which Matthew Arnold used to read with her when she
was a girl, and she thought this might be above the heads of boys.
Therefore Lady Caroline, who spoke ordinary Italian very well, was
obviously the one to go and do things.

“I am in your hands,” said Mrs. Fisher, sitting firmly in her fly. “You
must please regard me as merely an old woman with a stick.”

And presently, down the steps and cobbles to the piazza, and along the
quay, and up the zigzag path, Lady Caroline found herself as much
obliged to walk slowly with Mrs. Fisher as if she were her own
grandmother.

“It’s my stick,” Mrs. Fisher complacently remarked at intervals.

And when they rested at those bends of the zigzag path where seats
were, and Lady Caroline, who would have liked to run on and get to the
top quickly, was forced in common humanity to remain with Mrs. Fisher
because of her stick, Mrs. Fisher told her how she had been on a zigzag
path once with Tennyson.

“Isn’t his cricket wonderful?” said Lady Caroline absently.

“_The_ Tennyson,” said Mrs. Fisher, turning her head and observing her
a moment over her spectacles.

“Isn’t he?” said Lady Caroline.

“I am speaking,” said Mrs. Fisher, “of Alfred.”

“Oh,” said Lady Caroline.

“And it was a path, too,” Mrs. Fisher went on severely, “curiously like
this. No eucalyptus tree, of course, but otherwise curiously like this.
And at one of the bends he turned and said to me—I see him now turning
and saying to me—”

Yes, Mrs. Fisher would have to be checked. And so would these two up at
the window. She had better begin at once. She was sorry she had got off
the wall. All she need have done was to have waved her hand, and waited
till they came down and out into the garden to her.

So she ignored Mrs. Arbuthnot’s remark and raised forefinger, and said
with marked coldness—at least, she tried to make it sound marked—that
she supposed they would be going to breakfast, and that she had had
hers; but it was her fate that however coldly she sent forth her words
they came out sounding quite warm and agreeable. That was because she
had a sympathetic and delightful voice, due entirely to some special
formation of her throat and the roof of her mouth, and having nothing
whatever to do with what she was feeling. Nobody in consequence ever
believed they were being snubbed. It was most tiresome. And if she
stared icily it did not look icy at all, because her eyes, lovely to
begin with, had the added loveliness of very long, soft, dark
eyelashes. No icy stare could come out of eyes like that; it got caught
and lost in the soft eyelashes, and the persons stared at merely
thought they were being regarded with a flattering and exquisite
attentiveness. And if ever she was out of humour or definitely
cross—and who would not be sometimes in such a world?—she only looked
so pathetic that people all rushed to comfort her, if possible by means
of kissing. It was more than tiresome, it was maddening. Nature was
determined that she should look and sound angelic. She could never be
disagreeable or rude without being completely misunderstood.

“I had my breakfast in my room,” she said, trying her utmost to sound
curt. “Perhaps I’ll see you later.”

And she nodded, and went back to where she had been sitting on the
wall, with the lilies being nice and cool round her feet.




Chapter 7


Their eyes followed her admiringly. They had no idea they had been
snubbed. It was a disappointment, of course, to find she had
forestalled them and that they were not to have the happiness of
preparing for her, of watching her face when she arrived and first saw
everything, but there was still Mrs. Fisher. They would concentrate on
Mrs. Fisher, and would watch her face instead; only, like everybody
else, they would have preferred to watch Lady Caroline’s.

Perhaps, then, as Lady Caroline had talked of breakfast, they had
better begin by going and having it, for there was too much to be done
that day to spend any more time gazing at the scenery—servants to be
interviewed, the house to be gone through and examined, and finally
Mrs. Fisher’s room to be got ready and adorned.

They waved their hands gaily at Lady Caroline, who seemed absorbed in
what she saw and took no notice, and turning away found the maidservant
of the night before had come up silently behind them in cloth slippers
with string soles.

She was Francesca, the elderly parlour-maid, who had been with the
owner, he had said, for years, and whose presence made inventories
unnecessary; and after wishing them good-morning and hoping they had
slept well, she told them breakfast was ready in the dining-room on the
floor below, and if they would follow her she would lead.

They did not understand a single word of the very many in which
Francesca succeeded in clothing this simple information, but they
followed her, for it at least was clear that they were to follow, and
going down the stairs, and along the broad hall like the one above
except for glass doors at the end instead of a window opening into the
garden, they were shown into the dining-room; where, sitting at the
head of the table having her breakfast, was Mrs. Fisher.

This time they exclaimed. Even Mrs. Arbuthnot exclaimed, though her
exclamation was only “Oh.”

Mrs. Wilkins exclaimed at greater length. “Why, but it’s like having
the bread taken out of one’s mouth!” exclaimed Mrs. Wilkins.

“How do you do,” said Mrs. Fisher. “I can’t get up because of my
stick.” And she stretched out her hand across the table.

They advanced and shook it.

“We had no idea you were here,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Fisher, resuming her breakfast. “Yes. I am here.” And
with composure she removed the top of her egg.

“It’s a great disappointment,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “We had meant to give
you _such_ a welcome.”

This was the one, Mrs. Fisher remembered, briefly glancing at her, who
when she came to Prince of Wales Terrace said she had seen Keats. She
must be careful with this one—curb her from the beginning.

She therefore ignored Mrs. Wilkins and said gravely, with a downward
face of impenetrable calm bent on her egg, “Yes. I arrived yesterday
with Lady Caroline.”

“It’s really dreadful,” said Mrs. Wilkins, exactly as if she had not
been ignored. “There’s nobody left to get anything ready for now. I
feel thwarted. I feel as if the bread had been taken out of my mouth
just when I was going to be happy swallowing it.”

“Where will you sit?” asked Mrs. Fisher of Mrs. Arbuthnot—markedly of
Mrs. Arbuthnot; the comparison with the bread seemed to her most
unpleasant.

“Oh, thank you—” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, sitting down rather suddenly next
to her.

There were only two places she could sit down in, the places laid on
either side of Mrs. Fisher. She therefore sat down in one, and Mrs.
Wilkins sat down opposite her in the other.

Mrs. Fisher was at the head of the table. Round her was grouped the
coffee and the tea. Of course they were all sharing San Salvatore
equally, but it was she herself and Lotty, Mrs. Arbuthnot mildly
reflected, who had found it, who had had the work of getting it, who
had chosen to admit Mrs. Fisher into it. Without them, she could not
help thinking, Mrs. Fisher would not have been there. Morally Mrs.
Fisher was a guest. There was no hostess in this party, but supposing
there had been a hostess it would not have been Mrs. Fisher, nor Lady
Caroline, it would have been either herself or Lotty. Mrs. Arbuthnot
could not help feeling this as she sat down, and Mrs. Fisher, the hand
which Ruskin had wrung suspended over the pots before her, inquired,
“Tea or coffee?” She could not help feeling it even more definitely
when Mrs. Fisher touched a small gong on the table beside her as though
she had been used to that gong and that table ever since she was
little, and, on Francesca’s appearing, bade her in the language of
Dante bring more milk. There was a curious air about Mrs. Fisher,
thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, of being in possession; and if she herself had
not been so happy she would have perhaps minded.

Mrs. Wilkins noticed it too, but it only made her discursive brain
think of cuckoos. She would no doubt immediately have begun to talk of
cuckoos, incoherently, unrestrainably and deplorably, if she had been
in the condition of nerves and shyness she was in last time she saw
Mrs. Fisher. But happiness had done away with shyness—she was very
serene; she could control her conversation; she did not have,
horrified, to listen to herself saying things she had no idea of saying
when she began; she was quite at her ease, and completely natural. The
disappointment of not going to be able to prepare a welcome for Mrs.
Fisher had evaporated at once, for it was impossible to go on being
disappointed in heaven. Nor did she mind her behaving as hostess. What
did it matter? You did not mind things in heaven. She and Mrs.
Arbuthnot, therefore, sat down more willingly than they otherwise would
have done, one on either side of Mrs. Fisher, and the sun, pouring
through the two windows facing east across the bay, flooded the room,
and there was an open door leading into the garden, and the garden was
full of many lovely things, especially freesias.

The delicate and delicious fragrance of the freesias came in through
the door and floated round Mrs. Wilkins’s enraptured nostrils. Freesias
in London were quite beyond her. Occasionally she went into a shop and
asked what they cost, so as just to have an excuse for lifting up a
bunch and smelling them, well knowing that it was something awful like
a shilling for about three flowers. Here they were everywhere—bursting
out of every corner and carpeting the rose beds. Imagine it—having
freesias to pick in armsful if you wanted to, and with glorious
sunshine flooding the room, and in your summer frock, and its being
only the first of April!

“I suppose you realise, don’t you, that we’ve got to heaven?” she said,
beaming at Mrs. Fisher with all the familiarity of a fellow-angel.

“They are considerably younger than I had supposed,” thought Mrs.
Fisher, “and not nearly so plain.” And she mused a moment, while she
took no notice of Mrs. Wilkins’s exuberance, on their instant and
agitated refusal that day at Prince of Wales Terrace to have anything
to do with the giving or the taking of references.

Nothing could affect her, of course; nothing that anybody did. She was
far too solidly seated in respectability. At her back stood massively
in a tremendous row those three great names she had offered, and they
were not the only ones she could turn to for support and countenance.
Even if these young women—she had no grounds for believing the one
out in the garden to be really Lady Caroline Dester, she had merely
been told she was—even if these young women should all turn out to be
what Browning used to call—how well she remembered his amusing and
delightful way of putting things—Fly-by-Nights, what could it possibly,
or in any way matter to her? Let them fly by night if they wished. One
was not sixty-five for nothing. In any case there would only be four
weeks of it, at the end of which she would see no more of them. And in
the meanwhile there were plenty of places where she could sit quietly
away from them and remember. Also there was her own sitting-room, a
charming room, all honey-coloured furniture and pictures, with windows
to the sea towards Genoa, and a door opening on to the battlements. The
house possessed two sitting-rooms, and she had explained to that pretty
creature Lady Caroline—certainly a pretty creature, whatever else she
was; Tennyson would have enjoyed taking her for blows on the downs—who
had seemed inclined to appropriate the honey-coloured one, that she
needed some little refuge entirely to herself because of her stick.

“Nobody wants to see an old woman hobbling about everywhere,” she had
said. “I shall be quite content to spend much of my time by myself in
here or sitting out on these convenient battlements.”

And she had a very nice bedroom, too; it looked two ways, across the
bay to the morning sun—she liked the morning sun—and onto the garden.
There were only two of these bedrooms with cross-views in the house,
she and Lady Caroline had discovered, and they were by far the airiest.
They each had two beds in them, and she and Lady Caroline had had the
extra beds taken out at once and put into two of the other rooms. In
this way there was much more space and comfort. Lady Caroline, indeed,
had turned hers into a bed-sitting-room, with the sofa out of the
bigger drawing-room and the writing-table and the most comfortable
chair, but she herself had not had to do that because she had her own
sitting-room, equipped with what was necessary. Lady Caroline had
thought at first of taking the bigger sitting-room entirely for her
own, because the dining-room on the floor below could quite well be
used between meals to sit in by the two others, and was a very pleasant
room with nice chairs, but she had not liked the bigger sitting-room’s
shape—it was a round room in the tower, with deep slit windows pierced
through the massive walls, and a domed and ribbed ceiling arranged to
look like an open umbrella, and it seemed a little dark. Undoubtedly
Lady Caroline had cast covetous glances at the honey-coloured room, and
if she, Mrs. Fisher, had been less firm would have installed herself in
it. Which would have been absurd.

“I hope,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, smilingly making an attempt to convey to
Mrs. Fisher that though she, Mrs. Fisher, might not be exactly a guest
she certainly was not in the very least a hostess, “your room is
comfortable.”

“Quite,” said Mrs. Fisher. “Will you have some more coffee?”

“No, thank you. Will you?”

“No, thank you. There were two beds in my bedroom, filling it up
unnecessarily, and I had one taken out. It has made it much more
convenient.”

“Oh _that’s_ why I’ve got two beds in my room!” exclaimed Mrs. Wilkins,
illuminated; the second bed in her little cell had seemed an unnatural
and inappropriate object from the moment she saw it.

“I gave no directions,” said Mrs. Fisher, addressing Mrs. Arbuthnot, “I
merely asked Francesca to remove it.”

“I have two in my room as well,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Your second one must be Lady Caroline’s. She had hers removed too,”
said Mrs. Fisher. “It seems foolish to have more beds in a room than
there are occupiers.”

“But _we_ haven’t got any husbands here either,” said Mrs. Wilkins,
“and I don’t see any use in extra beds in one’s room if one hasn’t got
husbands to put in them. Can’t we have them taken away too?”

“Beds,” said Mrs. Fisher coldly, “cannot be removed from one room after
another. They must remain somewhere.”

Mrs. Wilkins’s remarks seemed to Mrs. Fisher persistently unfortunate.
Each time she opened her mouth she said something best left unsaid.
Loose talk about husbands had never in Mrs. Fisher’s circle been
encouraged. In the ’eighties, when she chiefly flourished, husbands
were taken seriously, as the only real obstacles to sin. Beds too, if
they had to be mentioned, were approached with caution; and a decent
reserve prevented them and husbands ever being spoken of in the same
breath.

She turned more markedly than ever to Mrs. Arbuthnot. “Do let me give
you a little more coffee,” she said.

“No, thank you. But won’t you have some more?”

“No indeed. I never have more than two cups at breakfast. Would you
like an orange?”

“No, thank you. Would you?”

“No, I don’t eat fruit at breakfast. It is an American fashion which I
am too old now to adopt. Have you had all you want?”

“Quite. Have you?”

Mrs. Fisher paused before replying. Was this a habit, this trick of
answering a simple question with the same question? If so it must be
curbed, for no one could live for four weeks in any real comfort with
somebody who had a habit.

She glanced at Mrs. Arbuthnot, and her parted hair and gentle brow
reassured her. No; it was accident, not habit, that had produced those
echoes. She could as soon imagine a dove having tiresome habits as Mrs.
Arbuthnot. Considering her, she thought what a splendid wife she would
have been for poor Carlyle. So much better than that horrid clever
Jane. She would have soothed him.

“Then shall we go?” she suggested.

“Let me help you up,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, all consideration.

“Oh, thank you—I can manage perfectly. It’s only sometimes that my
stick prevents me—”

Mrs. Fisher got up quite easily; Mrs. Arbuthnot had hovered over her
for nothing.

“_I’m_ going to have one of these gorgeous oranges,” said Mrs. Wilkins,
staying where she was and reaching across to a black bowl piled with
them. “Rose, how can you resist them. Look—have this one. Do have this
beauty—” And she held out a big one.

“No, I’m going to see to my duties,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, moving
towards the door. “You’ll forgive me for leaving you, won’t you,” she
added politely to Mrs. Fisher.

Mrs. Fisher moved towards the door too; quite easily; almost quickly;
her stick did not hinder her at all. She had no intention of being left
with Mrs. Wilkins.

“What time would you like to have lunch?” Mrs. Arbuthnot asked her,
trying to keep her head as at least a non-guest, if not precisely a
hostess, above water.

“Lunch,” said Mrs. Fisher, “is at half-past twelve.”

“You shall have it at half-past twelve then,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.
“I’ll tell the cook. It will be a great struggle,” she continued,
smiling, “but I’ve brought a little dictionary—”

“The cook,” said Mrs. Fisher, “knows.”

“Oh?” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Lady Caroline has already told her,” said Mrs. Fisher.

“Oh?” said Mrs. Arbuthnot again.

“Yes. Lady Caroline speaks the kind of Italian cooks understand. I am
prevented going into the kitchen because of my stick. And even if I
were able to go, I fear I shouldn’t be understood.”

“But—” began Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“But it’s _too_ wonderful,” Mrs. Wilkins finished for her from the
table, delighted with these unexpected simplifications in her and
Rose’s lives. “Why, we’ve got positively nothing to do here, either of
us, except just be happy. You wouldn’t believe,” she said, turning her
head and speaking straight to Mrs. Fisher, portions of orange in either
hand, “how terribly good Rose and I have been for years without
stopping, and how much now we need a perfect rest.”

And Mrs. Fisher, going without answering her out of the room, said to
herself, “She must, she shall be curbed.”




Chapter 8


Presently, when Mrs. Wilkins and Mrs. Arbuthnot, unhampered by any
duties, wandered out and down the worn stone steps and under the
pergola into the lower garden, Mrs. Wilkins said to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who
seemed pensive, “Don’t you see that if somebody else does the ordering
it frees us?”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said she did see, but nevertheless she thought it rather
silly to have everything taken out of their hands.

“I love things to be taken out of my hands,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“But we found San Salvatore,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, “and it is rather
silly that Mrs. Fisher should behave as if it belonged only to her.”

“What is rather silly,” said Mrs. Wilkins with much serenity, “is to
mind. I can’t see the least point in being in authority at the price of
one’s liberty.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing to that for two reasons—first, because she
was struck by the remarkable and growing calm of the hitherto
incoherent and excited Lotty, and secondly because what she was looking
at was so very beautiful.

All down the stone steps on either side were periwinkles in full
flower, and she could now see what it was that had caught at her the
night before and brushed, wet and scented, across her face. It was
wistaria. _Wistaria and sunshine_ . . . she remembered the
advertisement. Here indeed were both in profusion. The wistaria was
tumbling over itself in its excess of life, its prodigality of
flowering; and where the pergola ended the sun blazed on scarlet
geraniums, bushes of them, and nasturtiums in great heaps, and
marigolds so brilliant that they seemed to be burning, and red and pink
snapdragons, all outdoing each other in bright, fierce colour. The
ground behind these flaming things dropped away in terraces to the sea,
each terrace a little orchard, where among the olives grew vines on
trellises, and fig-trees, and peach-trees, and cherry-trees. The
cherry-trees and peach-trees were in blossom—lovely showers of white
and deep rose-colour among the trembling delicacy of the olives; the
fig-leaves were just big enough to smell of figs, the vine-buds were
only beginning to show. And beneath these trees were groups of blue and
purple irises, and bushes of lavender, and grey, sharp cactuses, and
the grass was thick with dandelions and daisies, and right down at the
bottom was the sea. Colour seemed flung down anyhow, anywhere; every
sort of colour, piled up in heaps, pouring along in rivers—the
periwinkles looked exactly as if they were being poured down each side
of the steps—and flowers that grow only in borders in England, proud
flowers keeping themselves to themselves over there, such as the great
blue irises and the lavender, were being jostled by small, shining
common things like dandelions and daisies and the white bells of the
wild onion, and only seemed the better and the more exuberant for it.

They stood looking at this crowd of loveliness, this happy jumble, in
silence. No, it didn’t matter what Mrs. Fisher did; not here; not in
such beauty. Mrs. Arbuthnot’s discomposure melted out of her. In the
warmth and light of what she was looking at, of what to her was a
manifestation, an entirely new side of God, how could one be
discomposed? If only Frederick were with her, seeing it too, seeing as
he would have seen it when first they were lovers, in the days when he
saw what she saw and loved what she loved. . .

She sighed.

“You mustn’t sigh in heaven,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “One doesn’t.”

“I was thinking how one longs to share this with those one loves,” said
Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“You mustn’t long in heaven,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “You’re supposed to be
quite complete there. And it is heaven, isn’t it, Rose? See how
everything has been let in together—the dandelions and the irises, the
vulgar and the superior, me and Mrs. Fisher—all welcome, all mixed up
anyhow, and all so visibly happy and enjoying ourselves.”

“Mrs. Fisher doesn’t seem happy—not visibly, anyhow,” said Mrs.
Arbuthnot, smiling.

“She’ll begin soon, you’ll see.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said she didn’t believe that after a certain age people
began anything.

Mrs. Wilkins said she was sure no one, however old and tough, could
resist the effects of perfect beauty. Before many days, perhaps only
hours, they would see Mrs. Fisher bursting out into every kind of
exuberance. “I’m quite sure,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “that we’ve got to
heaven, and once Mrs. Fisher realises that that’s where she is, she’s
bound to be different. You’ll see. She’ll leave off being ossified, and
go all soft and able to stretch, and we shall get quite—why, I
shouldn’t be surprised if we get quite fond of her.”

The idea of Mrs. Fisher bursting out into anything, she who seemed so
particularly firmly fixed inside her buttons, made Mrs. Arbuthnot
laugh. She condoned Lotty’s loose way of talking of heaven, because in
such a place, on such a morning, condonation was in the very air.
Besides, what an excuse there was.

And Lady Caroline, sitting where they had left her before breakfast on
the wall, peeped over when she heard laughter, and saw them standing on
the path below, and thought what a mercy it was they were laughing down
there and had not come up and done it round her. She disliked jokes at
all times, but in the morning she hated them; especially close up;
especially crowding in her ears. She hoped the originals were on their
way out for a walk, and not on their way back from one. They were
laughing more and more. What could they possibly find to laugh at?

She looked down on the tops of their heads with a very serious face,
for the thought of spending a month with laughers was a grave one, and
they, as though they felt her eyes, turned suddenly and looked up.

The dreadful geniality of those women. . .

She shrank away from their smiles and wavings, but she could not shrink
out of sight without falling into the lilies. She neither smiled nor
waved back, and turning her eyes to the more distant mountains surveyed
them carefully till the two, tired of waving, moved away along the path
and turned the corner and disappeared.

This time they both did notice that they had been met with, at least,
unresponsiveness.

“If we weren’t in heaven,” said Mrs. Wilkins serenely, “I should say we
had been snubbed, but as nobody snubs anybody there of course we can’t
have been.”

“Perhaps she is unhappy,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Whatever it is she is she’ll get over it here,” said Mrs. Wilkins with
conviction.

“We must try and help her,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Oh, but nobody helps anybody in heaven. That’s finished with. You
don’t try to be, or do. You simply _are_.”

Well, Mrs. Arbuthnot wouldn’t go into that—not here, not to-day. The
vicar, she knew, would have called Lotty’s talk levity, if not
profanity. How old he seemed from here; an old, old vicar.

They left the path, and clambered down the olive terraces, down and
down, to where at the bottom the warm, sleepy sea heaved gently among
the rocks. There a pine-tree grew close to the water, and they sat
under it, and a few yards away was a fishing-boat lying motionless and
green-bellied on the water. The ripples of the sea made little gurgling
noises at their feet. They screwed up their eyes to be able to look
into the blaze of light beyond the shade of their tree. The hot smell
from the pine-needles and from the cushions of wild thyme that padded
the spaces between the rocks, and sometimes a smell of pure honey from
a clump of warm irises up behind them in the sun, puffed across their
faces. Very soon Mrs. Wilkins took her shoes and stockings off, and let
her feet hang in the water. After watching her a minute Mrs. Arbuthnot
did the same. Their happiness was then complete. Their husbands would
not have known them. They left off talking. They ceased to mention
heaven. They were just cups of acceptance.

Meanwhile Lady Caroline, on her wall, was considering her position. The
garden on the top of the wall was a delicious garden, but its situation
made it insecure and exposed to interruptions. At any moment the others
might come and want to use it, because both the hall and the
dining-room had doors opening straight into it. Perhaps, thought Lady
Caroline, she could arrange that it should be solely hers. Mrs. Fisher
had the battlements, delightful with flowers, and a watch-tower all to
herself, besides having snatched the one really nice room in the house.
There were plenty of places the originals could go to—she had herself
seen at least two other little gardens, while the hill the castle stood
on was itself a garden, with walks and seats. Why should not this one
spot be kept exclusively for her? She liked it; she liked it best of
all. It had the Judas tree and an umbrella pine, it had the freesias
and the lilies, it had a tamarisk beginning to flush pink, it had the
convenient low wall to sit on, it had from each of its three sides the
most amazing views—to the east the bay and mountains, to the north the
village across the tranquil clear green water of the little harbour and
the hills dotted with white houses and orange groves, and to the west
was the thin thread of land by which San Salvatore was tied to the
mainland, and then the open sea and the coast line beyond Genoa
reaching away into the blue dimness of France. Yes, she would say she
wanted to have this entirely to herself. How obviously sensible if each
of them had their own special place to sit in apart. It was essential
to her comfort that she should be able to be apart, left alone, not
talked to. The others ought to like it best too. Why herd? One had
enough of that in England, with one’s relations and friends—oh, the
numbers of them!—pressing on one continually. Having successfully
escaped them for four weeks why continue, and with persons having no
earthly claim on one, to herd?

She lit a cigarette. She began to feel secure. Those two had gone for a
walk. There was no sign of Mrs. Fisher. How very pleasant this was.

Somebody came out through the glass doors, just as she was drawing a
deep breath of security. Surely it couldn’t be Mrs. Fisher, wanting to
sit with her? Mrs. Fisher had her battlements. She ought to stay on
them, having snatched them. It would be too tiresome if she wouldn’t,
and wanted not only to have them and her sitting-room but to establish
herself in this garden as well.

No; it wasn’t Mrs. Fisher, it was the cook.

She frowned. Was she going to have to go on ordering the food? Surely
one or other of those two waving women would do that now.

The cook, who had been waiting in increasing agitation in the kitchen,
watching the clock getting nearer to lunch-time while she still was
without knowledge of what lunch was to consist of, had gone at last to
Mrs. Fisher, who had immediately waved her away. She then wandered
about the house seeking a mistress, any mistress, who would tell her
what to cook, and finding none; and at last, directed by Francesca, who
always knew where everybody was, came out to Lady Caroline.

Domenico had provided this cook. She was Costanza, the sister of that
one of his cousins who kept a restaurant down on the piazza. She helped
her brother in his cooking when she had no other job, and knew every
sort of fat, mysterious Italian dish such as the workmen of Castagneto,
who crowded the restaurant at midday, and the inhabitants of Mezzago
when they came over on Sundays, loved to eat. She was a fleshless
spinster of fifty, grey-haired, nimble, rich of speech, and thought
Lady Caroline more beautiful than anyone she had ever seen; and so did
Domenico; and so did the boy Giuseppe who helped Domenico and was,
besides, his nephew; and so did the girl Angela who helped Francesca
and was, besides, Domenico’s niece; and so did Francesca herself.
Domenico and Francesca, the only two who had seen them, thought the two
ladies who arrived last very beautiful, but compared to the fair young
lady who arrived first they were as candles to the electric light that
had lately been installed, and as the tin tubs in the bedrooms to the
wonderful new bathroom their master had had arranged on his last visit.

Lady Caroline scowled at the cook. The scowl, as usual, was transformed
on the way into what appeared to be an intent and beautiful gravity,
and Costanza threw up her hands and took the saints aloud to witness
that here was the very picture of the Mother of God.

Lady Caroline asked her crossly what she wanted, and Costanza’s head
went on one side with delight at the sheer music of her voice. She
said, after waiting a moment in case the music was going to continue,
for she didn’t wish to miss any of it, that she wanted orders; she had
been to the Signorina’s mother, but in vain.

“She is not my mother,” repudiated Lady Caroline angrily; and her anger
sounded like the regretful wail of a melodious orphan.

Costanza poured forth pity. She too, she explained, had no mother—

Lady Caroline interrupted with the curt information that her mother was
alive and in London.

Costanza praised God and the saints that the young lady did not yet
know what it was like to be without a mother. Quickly enough did
misfortunes overtake one; no doubt the young lady already had a
husband.

“No,” said Lady Caroline icily. Worse than jokes in the morning did she
hate the idea of husbands. And everybody was always trying to press
them on her—all her relations, all her friends, all the evening papers.
After all, she could only marry one, anyhow; but you would think from
the way everybody talked, and especially those persons who wanted to be
husbands, that she could marry at least a dozen.

Her soft, pathetic “No” made Costanza, who was standing close to her,
well with sympathy.

“Poor little one,” said Costanza, moved actually to pat her
encouragingly on the shoulder, “take hope. There is still time.”

“For lunch,” said Lady Caroline freezingly, marvelling as she spoke
that she should be patted, she who had taken so much trouble to come to
a place, remote and hidden, where she could be sure that among other
things of a like oppressive nature pattings also were not, “we will
have—”

Costanza became business-like. She interrupted with suggestions, and
her suggestions were all admirable and all expensive.

Lady Caroline did not know they were expensive, and fell in with them
at once. They sounded very nice. Every sort of young vegetables and
fruits came into them, and much butter and a great deal of cream and
incredible numbers of eggs. Costanza said enthusiastically at the end,
as a tribute to this acquiescence, that of the many ladies and
gentlemen she had worked for on temporary jobs such as this she
preferred the English ladies and gentlemen. She more than preferred
them—they roused devotion in her. For they knew what to order; they did
not skimp; they refrained from grinding down the faces of the poor.

From this Lady Caroline concluded that she had been extravagant, and
promptly countermanded the cream.

Costanza’s face fell, for she had a cousin who had a cow, and the cream
was to have come from them both.

“And perhaps we had better not have chickens,” said Lady Caroline.

Costanza’s face fell more, for her brother at the restaurant kept
chickens in his back-yard, and many of them were ready for killing.

“Also do not order strawberries till I have consulted with the other
ladies,” said Lady Caroline, remembering that it was only the first of
April, and that perhaps people who lived in Hampstead might be poor;
indeed, must be poor, or why live in Hampstead? “It is not I who am
mistress here.”

“Is it the old one?” asked Costanza, her face very long.

“No,” said Lady Caroline.

“Which of the other two ladies is it?”

“Neither,” said Lady Caroline.

Then Costanza’s smiles returned, for the young lady was having fun with
her and making jokes. She told her so, in her friendly Italian way, and
was genuinely delighted.

“I never make jokes,” said Lady Caroline briefly. “You had better go,
or lunch will certainly not be ready by half-past twelve.”

And these curt words came out sounding so sweet that Costanza felt as
if kind compliments were being paid her, and forgot her disappointment
about the cream and the chickens, and went away all gratitude and
smiles.

“This,” thought Lady Caroline, “will never do. I haven’t come here to
housekeep, and I won’t.”

She called Costanza back. Costanza came running. The sound of her name
in that voice enchanted her.

“I have ordered the lunch for to-day,” said Lady Caroline, with the
serious angel face that was hers when she was annoyed, “and I have also
ordered the dinner, but from now on you will go to one of the other
ladies for orders. I give no more.”

The idea that she would go on giving orders was too absurd. She never
gave orders at home. Nobody there dreamed of asking her to do anything.
That such a very tiresome activity should be thrust upon her here,
simply because she happened to be able to talk Italian, was ridiculous.
Let the originals give orders if Mrs. Fisher refused to. Mrs. Fisher,
of course, was the one Nature intended for such a purpose. She had the
very air of a competent housekeeper. Her clothes were the clothes of a
housekeeper, and so was the way she did her hair.

Having delivered herself of her ultimatum with an acerbity that turned
sweet on the way, and accompanied it by a peremptory gesture of
dismissal that had the grace and loving-kindness of a benediction, it
was annoying that Costanza should only stand still with her head on one
side gazing at her in obvious delight.

“Oh, _go_ away!” exclaimed Lady Caroline in English, suddenly
exasperated.

There had been a fly in her bedroom that morning which had stuck just
as Costanza was sticking; only one, but it might have been a myriad it
was so tiresome from daylight on. It was determined to settle on her
face, and she was determined it should not. Its persistence was
uncanny. It woke her, and would not let her go to sleep again. She hit
at it, and it eluded her without fuss or effort and with an almost
visible blandness, and she had only hit herself. It came back again
instantly, and with a loud buzz alighted on her cheek. She hit at it
again and hurt herself, while it skimmed gracefully away. She lost her
temper, and sat up in bed and waited, watching to hit at it and kill
it. She kept on hitting at it at last with fury and with all her
strength, as if it were a real enemy deliberately trying to madden her;
and it elegantly skimmed in and out of her blows, not even angry, to be
back again the next instant. It succeeded every time in getting on to
her face, and was quite indifferent how often it was driven away. That
was why she had dressed and come out so early. Francesca had already
been told to put a net over her bed, for she was not going to allow
herself to be annoyed twice like that. People were exactly like flies.
She wished there were nets for keeping them off too. She hit at them
with words and frowns, and like the fly they slipped between her blows
and were untouched. Worse than the fly, they seemed unaware that she
had even tried to hit them. The fly at least did for a moment go away.
With human beings the only way to get rid of them was to go away
herself. That was what, so tired, she had done this April; and having
got here, having got close up to the details of life at San Salvatore,
it appeared that here, too, she was not to be let alone.

Viewed from London there had seemed to be no details. San Salvatore
from there seemed to be an empty, a delicious blank. Yet, after only
twenty-four hours of it, she was discovering that it was not a blank at
all, and that she was having to ward off as actively as ever. Already
she had been much stuck to. Mrs. Fisher had stuck nearly the whole of
the day before, and this morning there had been no peace, not ten
minutes uninterruptedly alone.

Costanza of course had finally to go because she had to cook, but
hardly had she gone before Domenico came. He came to water and tie up.
That was natural, since he was the gardener, but he watered and tied up
all the things that were nearest to her; he hovered closer and closer;
he watered to excess; he tied plants that were as straight and steady
as arrows. Well, at least he was a man, and therefore not quite so
annoying, and his smiling good-morning was received with an answering
smile; upon which Domenico forgot his family, his wife, his mother, his
grown-up children and all his duties, and only wanted to kiss the young
lady’s feet.

He could not do that, unfortunately, but he could talk while he worked,
and talk he did; voluminously; pouring out every kind of information,
illustrating what he said with gestures so lively that he had to put
down the watering-pot, and thus delay the end of the watering.

Lady Caroline bore it for a time but presently was unable to bear it,
and as he would not go, and she could not tell him to, seeing that he
was engaged in his proper work, once again it was she who had to.

She got off the wall and moved to the other side of the garden, where
in a wooden shed were some comfortable low cane chairs. All she wanted
was to turn one of these round with its back to Domenico and its front
to the sea towards Genoa. Such a little thing to want. One would have
thought she might have been allowed to do that unmolested. But he, who
watched her every movement, when he saw her approaching the chairs
darted after her and seized one and asked to be told where to put it.

Would she never get away from being waited on, being made comfortable,
being asked where she wanted things put, having to say thank you? She
was short with Domenico, who instantly concluded the sun had given her
a headache, and ran in and fetched her a sunshade and a cushion and a
footstool, and was skilful, and was wonderful, and was one of Nature’s
gentlemen.

She shut her eyes in a heavy resignation. She could not be unkind to
Domenico. She could not get up and walk indoors as she would have done
if it had been one of the others. Domenico was intelligent and very
competent. She had at once discovered that it was he who really ran the
house, who really did everything. And his manners were definitely
delightful, and he undoubtedly was a charming person. It was only that
she did so much long to be let alone. If only, only she could be left
quite quiet for this one month, she felt that she might perhaps make
something of herself after all.

She kept her eyes shut, because then he would think she wanted to sleep
and would go away.

Domenico’s romantic Italian soul melted within him at the sight, for
having her eyes shut was extraordinarily becoming to her. He stood
entranced, quite still, and she thought he had stolen away, so she
opened them again.

No; there he was, staring at her. Even he. There was no getting away
from being stared at.

“I have a headache,” she said, shutting them again.

“It is the sun,” said Domenico, “and sitting on the wall without a
hat.”

“I wish to sleep.”

“_Sì signorina_,” he said sympathetically; and went softly away.

She opened her eyes with a sigh of relief. The gentle closing of the
glass doors showed her that he had not only gone quite away but had
shut her out in the garden so that she should be undisturbed. Now
perhaps she would be alone till lunch-time.

It was very curious, and no one in the world could have been more
surprised than she herself, but she wanted to think. She had never
wanted to do that before. Everything else that it is possible to do
without too much inconvenience she had either wanted to do or had done
at one period or another of her life, but not before had she wanted to
think. She had come to San Salvatore with the single intention of lying
comatose for four weeks in the sun, somewhere where her parents and
friends were not, lapped in forgetfulness, stirring herself only to be
fed, and she had not been there more than a few hours when this strange
new desire took hold of her.

There had been wonderful stars the evening before, and she had gone out
into the top garden after dinner, leaving Mrs. Fisher alone over her
nuts and wine, and, sitting on the wall at the place where the lilies
crowded their ghost heads, she had looked out into the gulf of the
night, and it had suddenly seemed as if her life had been a noise all
about nothing.

She had been intensely surprised. She knew stars and darkness did
produce unusual emotions because, in others, she had seen them being
produced, but they had not before done it in herself. A noise all about
nothing. Could she be quite well? She had wondered. For a long while
past she had been aware that her life was a noise, but it had seemed to
be very much about something; a noise, indeed, about so much that she
felt she must get out of earshot for a little or she would be
completely, and perhaps permanently, deafened. But suppose it was only
a noise about nothing?

She had not had a question like that in her mind before. It had made
her feel lonely. She wanted to be alone, but not lonely. That was very
different; that was something that ached and hurt dreadfully right
inside one. It was what one dreaded most. It was what made one go to so
many parties; and lately even the parties had seemed once or twice not
to be a perfectly certain protection. Was it possible that loneliness
had nothing to do with circumstances, but only with the way one met
them? Perhaps, she had thought, she had better go to bed. She couldn’t
be very well.

She went to bed; and in the morning, after she had escaped the fly and
had her breakfast and got out again into the garden, there was this
same feeling again, and in broad daylight. Once more she had that
really rather disgusting suspicion that her life till now had not only
been loud but empty. Well, if that were so, and if her first
twenty-eight years—the best ones—had gone just in meaningless noise,
she had better stop a moment and look round her; pause, as they said in
tiresome novels, and consider. She hadn’t got many sets of twenty-eight
years. One more would see her growing very like Mrs. Fisher. Two more—
She averted her eyes.

Her mother would have been concerned if she had known. Her mother
doted. Her father would have been concerned too, for he also doted.
Everybody doted. And when, melodiously obstinate, she had insisted on
going off to entomb herself in Italy for a whole month with queer
people she had got out of an advertisement, refusing even to take her
maid, the only explanation her friends could imagine was that poor
Scrap—such was her name among them—had overdone it and was feeling a
little nervy.

Her mother had been distressed at her departure. It was such an odd
thing to do, such a sign of disappointment. She encouraged the general
idea of the verge of a nervous breakdown. If she could have seen her
adored Scrap, more delightful to look upon than any other mother’s
daughter had ever yet been, the object of her utmost pride, the source
of all her fondest hopes, sitting staring at the empty noonday
Mediterranean considering her three possible sets of twenty-eight
years, she would have been miserable. To go away alone was bad; to
think was worse. No good could come out of the thinking of a beautiful
young woman. Complications could come out of it in profusion, but no
good. The thinking of the beautiful was bound to result in hesitations,
in reluctances, in unhappiness all round. And here, if she could have
seen her, sat her Scrap thinking quite hard. And such things. Such old
things. Things nobody ever began to think till they were at least
forty.




Chapter 9


That one of the two sitting-rooms which Mrs. Fisher had taken for her
own was a room of charm and character. She surveyed it with
satisfaction on going into it after breakfast, and was glad it was
hers. It had a tiled floor, and walls the colour of pale honey, and
inlaid furniture the colour of amber, and mellow books, many in ivory
or lemon-coloured covers. There was a big window overlooking the sea
towards Genoa, and a glass door through which she could proceed out on
to the battlements and walk along past the quaint and attractive
watch-tower, in itself a room with chairs and a writing table, to where
on the other side of the tower the battlements ended in a marble seat,
and one could see the western bay and the point round which began the
Gulf of Spezia. Her south view, between these two stretches of sea, was
another hill, higher than San Salvatore, the last of the little
peninsula, with the bland turrets of a smaller and uninhabited castle
on the top, on which the setting sun still shone when everything else
was sunk in shadow. Yes, she was very comfortably established here; and
receptacles—Mrs. Fisher did not examine their nature closely, but they
seemed to be small stone troughs, or perhaps little sarcophagi—ringed
round the battlements with flowers.

These battlements, she thought, considering them, would have been a
perfect place for her to pace up and down gently in moments when she
least felt the need of her stick, or to sit in on the marble seat,
having first put a cushion on it, if there had not unfortunately been a
second glass door opening on to them, destroying their complete
privacy, spoiling her feeling that the place was only for her. The
second door belonged to the round drawing-room, which both she and Lady
Caroline had rejected as too dark. That room would probably be sat in
by the women from Hampstead, and she was afraid they would not confine
themselves to sitting in it, but would come out through the glass door
and invade her battlements. This would ruin the battlements. It would
ruin them as far as she was concerned if they were to be overrun; or
even if, not actually overrun, they were liable to be raked by the eyes
of persons inside the room. No one could be perfectly at ease if they
were being watched and knew it. What she wanted, what she surely had a
right to, was privacy. She had no wish to intrude on the others; why
then should they intrude on her? And she could always relax her privacy
if, when she became better acquainted with her companions, she should
think it worth while, but she doubted whether any of the three would so
develop as to make her think it worth while.

Hardly anything was really worth while, reflected Mrs. Fisher, except
the past. It was astonishing, it was simply amazing, the superiority of
the past to the present. Those friends of hers in London, solid persons
of her own age, knew the same past that she knew, could talk about it
with her, could compare it as she did with the tinkling present, and in
remembering great men forget for a moment the trivial and barren young
people who still, in spite of the war, seemed to litter the world in
such numbers. She had not come away from these friends, these
conversable ripe friends, in order to spend her time in Italy chatting
with three persons of another generation and defective experience; she
had come away merely to avoid the treacheries of a London April. It was
true what she had told the two who came to Prince of Wales Terrace,
that all she wished to do at San Salvatore was to sit by herself in the
sun and remember. They knew this, for she had told them. It had been
plainly expressed and clearly understood. Therefore she had a right to
expect them to stay inside the round drawing-room and not to emerge
interruptingly on to her battlements.

But would they? The doubt spoilt her morning. It was only towards
lunch-time that she saw a way to be quite safe, and ringing for
Francesca, bade her, in slow and majestic Italian, shut the shutters of
the glass door of the round drawing-room, and then, going with her into
the room, which had become darker than ever in consequence, but also,
Mrs. Fisher observed to Francesca, who was being voluble, would because
of this very darkness remain agreeably cool, and after all there were
the numerous slit-windows in the walls to let in light and it was
nothing to do with her if they did not let it in, she directed the
placing of a cabinet of curios across the door on its inside.

This would discourage egress.

Then she rang for Domenico, and caused him to move one of the
flower-filled sarcophagi across the door on its outside.

This would discourage ingress.

“No one,” said Domenico, hesitating, “will be able to use the door.”

“No one,” said Mrs. Fisher firmly, “will wish to.”

She then retired to her sitting-room, and from a chair placed where she
could look straight on to them, gazed at her battlements, secured to
her now completely, with calm pleasure.

Being here, she reflected placidly, was much cheaper than being in an
hotel and, if she could keep off the others, immeasurably more
agreeable. She was paying for her rooms—extremely pleasant rooms, now
that she was arranged in them—£3 a week, which came to about eight
shillings a day, battlements, watch-tower and all. Where else abroad
could she live as well for so little, and have as many baths as she
liked, for eight shillings a day? Of course she did not yet know what
her food would cost, but she would insist on carefulness over that,
though she would also insist on its being carefulness combined with
excellence. The two were perfectly compatible if the caterer took
pains. The servants’ wages, she had ascertained, were negligible, owing
to the advantageous exchange, so that there was only the food to cause
her anxiety. If she saw signs of extravagance she would propose that
they each hand over a reasonable sum every week to Lady Caroline which
should cover the bills, any of it that was not used to be returned, and
if it were exceeded the loss to be borne by the caterer.

Mrs. Fisher was well off and had the desire for comforts proper to her
age, but she disliked expenses. So well off was she that, had she so
chosen, she could have lived in an opulent part of London and driven
from it and to it in a Rolls-Royce. She had no such wish. It needed
more vitality than went with true comfort to deal with a house in an
opulent spot and a Rolls-Royce. Worries attended such possessions,
worries of every kind, crowned by bills. In the sober gloom of Prince
of Wales Terrace she could obscurely enjoy inexpensive yet real
comfort, without being snatched at by predatory men-servants or
collectors for charities, and a taxi stand was at the end of the road.
Her annual outlay was small. The house was inherited. Death had
furnished it for her. She trod in the dining-room on the Turkey carpet
of her fathers; she regulated her day by the excellent black marble
clock on the mantelpiece which she remembered from childhood; her walls
were entirely covered by the photographs her illustrious deceased
friends had given either herself or her father, with their own
handwriting across the lower parts of their bodies, and the windows,
shrouded by the maroon curtains of all her life, were decorated besides
with the selfsame aquariums to which she owed her first lessons in
sealore, and in which still swam slowly the goldfishes of her youth.

Were they the same goldfish? She did not know. Perhaps, like carp, they
outlived everybody. Perhaps, on the other hand, behind the deep-sea
vegetation provided for them at the bottom, they had from time to time
as the years went by withdrawn and replaced themselves. Were they or
were they not, she sometimes wondered, contemplating them between the
courses of her solitary meals, the same goldfish that had that day been
there when Carlyle—how well she remembered it—angrily strode up to them
in the middle of some argument with her father that had grown heated,
and striking the glass smartly with his fist had put them to flight,
shouting as they fled, “Och, ye deaf deevils! Och, ye lucky deaf
deevils! Ye can’t hear anything of the blasted, blethering, doddering,
glaikit fool-stuff yer maister talks, can ye?” Or words to that effect.

Dear, great-souled Carlyle. Such natural gushings forth; such true
freshness; such real grandeur. Rugged, if you will—yes, undoubtedly
sometimes rugged, and startling in a drawing-room, but magnificent. Who
was there now to put beside him? Who was there to mention in the same
breath? Her father, than whom no one had had more _flair_, said:
“Thomas is immortal.” And here was this generation, this generation of
puniness, raising its little voice in doubts, or, still worse, not
giving itself the trouble to raise it at all, not—it was incredible,
but it had been thus reported to her—even reading him. Mrs. Fisher did
not read him either, but that was different. She had read him; she had
certainly read him. Of course she had read him. There was
Teufelsdröck—she quite well remembered a tailor called Teufelsdröck. So
like Carlyle to call him that. Yes, she must have read him, though
naturally details escaped her.

The gong sounded. Lost in reminiscence Mrs. Fisher had forgotten time,
and hastened to her bedroom to wash her hands and smoothe her hair. She
did not wish to be late and set a bad example, and perhaps find her
seat at the head of the table taken. One could put no trust in the
manners of the younger generation; especially not in those of that Mrs.
Wilkins.

She was, however, the first to arrive in the dining-room. Francesca in
a white apron stood ready with an enormous dish of smoking hot,
glistening maccaroni, but nobody was there to eat it.

Mrs. Fisher sat down, looking stern. Lax, lax.

“Serve me,” she said to Francesca, who showed a disposition to wait for
the others.

Francesca served her. Of the party she liked Mrs. Fisher least, in fact
she did not like her at all. She was the only one of the four ladies
who had not yet smiled. True she was old, true she was unbeautiful,
true she therefore had no reason to smile, but kind ladies smiled,
reason or no. They smiled, not because they were happy but because they
wished to make happy. This one of the four ladies could not then,
Francesca decided, be kind; so she handed her the maccaroni, being
unable to hide any of her feelings, morosely.

It was very well cooked, but Mrs. Fisher had never cared for maccaroni,
especially not this long, worm-shaped variety. She found it difficult
to eat—slippery, wriggling off her fork, making her look, she felt,
undignified when, having got it as she supposed into her mouth, ends of
it yet hung out. Always, too, when she ate it she was reminded of Mr.
Fisher. He had during their married life behaved very much like
maccaroni. He had slipped, he had wriggled, he had made her feel
undignified, and when at last she had got him safe, as she thought,
there had invariably been little bits of him that still, as it were,
hung out.

Francesca from the sideboard watched Mrs. Fisher’s way with maccaroni
gloomily, and her gloom deepened when she saw her at last take her
knife to it and chop it small.

Mrs. Fisher really did not know how else to get hold of the stuff. She
was aware that knives in this connection were improper, but one did
finally lose patience. Maccaroni was never allowed to appear on her
table in London. Apart from its tiresomeness she did not even like it,
and she would tell Lady Caroline not to order it again. Years of
practice, reflected Mrs. Fisher, chopping it up, years of actual living
in Italy, would be necessary to learn the exact trick. Browning managed
maccaroni wonderfully. She remembered watching him one day when he came
to lunch with her father, and a dish of it had been ordered as a
compliment to his connection with Italy. Fascinating, the way it went
in. No chasing round the plate, no slidings off the fork, no subsequent
protrusions of loose ends—just one dig, one whisk, one thrust, one
gulp, and lo, yet another poet had been nourished.

“Shall I go and seek the young lady?” asked Francesca, unable any
longer to look on a good maccaroni being cut with a knife.

Mrs. Fisher came out of her reminiscent reflections with difficulty.
“She knows lunch is at half-past twelve,” she said. “They all know.”

“She may be asleep,” said Francesca. “The other ladies are further
away, but this one is not far away.”

“Beat the gong again then,” said Mrs. Fisher.

What manners, she thought; what, what manners. It was not an hotel, and
considerations were due. She must say she was surprised at Mrs.
Arbuthnot, who had not looked like somebody unpunctual. Lady Caroline,
too—she had seemed amiable and courteous, whatever else she might be.
From the other one, of course, she expected nothing.

Francesca fetched the gong, and took it out into the garden and
advanced, beating it as she advanced, close up to Lady Caroline, who,
still stretched in her low chair, waited till she had done, and then
turned her head and in the sweetest tones poured forth what appeared to
be music but was really invective.

Francesca did not recognise the liquid flow as invective; how was she
to, when it came out sounding like that? And with her face all smiles,
for she could not but smile when she looked at this young lady, she
told her the maccaroni was getting cold.

“When I do not come to meals it is because I do not wish to come to
meals,” said the irritated Scrap, “and you will not in future disturb
me.”

“Is she ill?” asked Francesca, sympathetic but unable to stop smiling.
Never, never had she seen hair so beautiful. Like pure flax; like the
hair of northern babes. On such a little head only blessing could rest,
on such a little head the nimbus of the holiest saints could fitly be
placed.

Scrap shut her eyes and refused to answer. In this she was injudicious,
for its effect was to convince Francesca, who hurried away full of
concern to tell Mrs. Fisher, that she was indisposed. And Mrs. Fisher,
being prevented, she explained, from going out to Lady Caroline herself
because of her stick, sent the two others instead, who had come in at
that moment heated and breathless and full of excuses, while she
herself proceeded to the next course, which was a very well-made
omelette, bursting most agreeably at both its ends with young green
peas.

“Serve me,” she directed Francesca, who again showed a disposition to
wait for the others.

“_Oh_, why won’t they leave me alone?—oh, why _won’t_ they leave me
alone?” Scrap asked herself when she heard more scrunchings on the
little pebbles which took the place of grass, and therefore knew some
one else was approaching.

She kept her eyes tight shut this time. Why should she go in to lunch
if she didn’t want to? This wasn’t a private house; she was in no way
tangled up in duties towards a tiresome hostess. For all practical
purposes San Salvatore was an hotel, and she ought to be let alone to
eat or not to eat exactly as if she really had been in an hotel.

But the unfortunate Scrap could not just sit still and close her eyes
without rousing that desire to stroke and pet in her beholders with
which she was only too familiar. Even the cook had patted her. And now
a gentle hand—how well she knew and how much she dreaded gentle
hands—was placed on her forehead.

“I’m afraid you’re not well,” said a voice that was not Mrs. Fisher’s,
and therefore must belong to one of the originals.

“I have a headache,” murmured Scrap. Perhaps it was best to say that;
perhaps it was the shortest cut to peace.

“I’m so sorry,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot softly, for it was her hand being
gentle.

“And I,” said Scrap to herself, “who thought if I came here I would
escape mothers.”

“Don’t you think some tea would do you good?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot
tenderly.

Tea? The idea was abhorrent to Scrap. In this heat to be drinking tea
in the middle of the day. . .

“No,” she murmured.

“I expect what would really be best for her,” said another voice, “is
to be left quiet.”

How sensible, thought Scrap; and raised the eye-lashes of one eye just
enough to peep through and see who was speaking.

It was the freckled original. The dark one, then, was the one with the
hand. The freckled one rose in her esteem.

“But I can’t bear to think of you with a headache and nothing being
done for it,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot. “Would a cup of strong black
coffee—?”

Scrap said no more. She waited, motionless and dumb, till Mrs.
Arbuthnot should remove her hand. After all, she couldn’t stand there
all day, and when she went away she would have to take her hand with
her.

“I do think,” said the freckled one, “that she wants nothing except
quiet.”

And perhaps the freckled one pulled the one with the hand by the
sleeve, for the hold on Scrap’s forehead relaxed, and after a minute’s
silence, during which no doubt she was being contemplated—she was
always being contemplated—the footsteps began to scrunch the pebbles
again, and grew fainter, and were gone.

“Lady Caroline has a headache,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, re-entering the
dining-room and sitting down in her place next to Mrs. Fisher. “I can’t
persuade her to have even a little tea, or some black coffee. Do you
know what aspirin is in Italian?”

“The proper remedy for headaches,” said Mrs. Fisher firmly, “is castor
oil.”

“But she hasn’t got a headache,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“Carlyle,” said Mrs. Fisher, who had finished her omelette and had
leisure, while she waited for the next course, to talk, “suffered at
one period terribly from headaches, and he constantly took castor oil
as a remedy. He took it, I should say, almost to excess, and called it,
I remember, in his interesting way the oil of sorrow. My father said it
coloured for a time his whole attitude to life, his whole philosophy.
But that was because he took too much. What Lady Caroline wants is one
dose, and one only. It is a mistake to keep on taking castor oil.”

“Do you know the Italian for it?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Ah, that I’m afraid I don’t. However, she would know. You can ask
her.”

“But she hasn’t got a headache,” repeated Mrs. Wilkins, who was
struggling with the maccaroni. “She only wants to be let alone.”

They both looked at her. The word shovel crossed Mrs. Fisher’s mind in
connection with Mrs. Wilkins’s actions at that moment.

“Then why should she say she has?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Because she is still trying to be polite. Soon she won’t try, when the
place has got more into her—she’ll really be it. Without trying.
Naturally.”

“Lotty, you see,” explained Mrs. Arbuthnot, smiling to Mrs. Fisher, who
sat waiting with a stony patience for her next course, delayed because
Mrs. Wilkins would go on trying to eat the maccaroni, which must be
less worth eating than ever now that it was cold; “Lotty, you see, has
a theory about this place—”

But Mrs. Fisher had no wish to hear any theory of Mrs. Wilkins’s.

“I am sure I don’t know,” she interrupted, looking severely at Mrs.
Wilkins, “why you should assume Lady Caroline is not telling the
truth.”

“I don’t assume—I know,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“And pray how do you know?” asked Mrs. Fisher icily, for Mrs. Wilkins
was actually helping herself to more maccaroni, offered her officiously
and unnecessarily a second time by Francesca.

“When I was out there just now I saw inside her.”

Well, Mrs. Fisher wasn’t going to say anything to that; she wasn’t
going to trouble to reply to downright idiocy. Instead she sharply
rapped the little table-gong by her side, though there was Francesca
standing at the sideboard, and said, for she would wait no longer for
her next course, “Serve me.”

And Francesca—it must have been wilful—offered her the maccaroni again.




Chapter 10


There was no way of getting into or out of the top garden at San
Salvatore except through the two glass doors, unfortunately side by
side, of the dining-room and the hall. A person in the garden who
wished to escape unseen could not, for the person to be escaped from
would be met on the way. It was a small, oblong garden, and concealment
was impossible. What trees there were—the Judas tree, the tamarisk, the
umbrella-pine—grew close to the low parapets. Rose bushes gave no real
cover; one step to right or left of them, and the person wishing to be
private was discovered. Only the north-west corner was a little place
jutting out from the great wall, a kind of excrescence or loop, no
doubt used in the old distrustful days for observation, where it was
possible to sit really unseen, because between it and the house was a
thick clump of daphne.

Scrap, after glancing round to see that no one was looking, got up and
carried her chair into this place, stealing away as carefully on tiptoe
as those steal whose purpose is sin. There was another excrescence on
the walls just like it at the north-east corner, but this, though the
view from it was almost more beautiful, for from it you could see the
bay and the lovely mountains behind Mezzago, was exposed. No bushes
grew near it, nor had it any shade. The north-west loop then was where
she would sit, and she settled into it, and nestling her head in her
cushion and putting her feet comfortably on the parapet, from whence
they appeared to the villagers on the piazza below as two white doves,
thought that now indeed she would be safe.

Mrs. Fisher found her there, guided by the smell of her cigarette. The
incautious Scrap had not thought of that. Mrs. Fisher did not smoke
herself, and all the more distinctly could she smell the smoke of
others. The virile smell met her directly she went out into the garden
from the dining-room after lunch in order to have her coffee. She had
bidden Francesca set the coffee in the shade of the house just outside
the glass door, and when Mrs. Wilkins, seeing a table being carried
there, reminded her, very officiously and tactlessly Mrs. Fisher
considered, that Lady Caroline wanted to be alone, she retorted—and
with what propriety—that the garden was for everybody.

Into it accordingly she went, and was immediately aware that Lady
Caroline was smoking. She said to herself, “These modern young women,”
and proceeded to find her; her stick, now that lunch was over, being no
longer the hindrance to action that it was before her meal had been
securely, as Browning once said—surely it was Browning? Yes, she
remembered how much diverted she had been—roped in.

Nobody diverted her now, reflected Mrs. Fisher, making straight for the
clump of daphne; the world had grown very dull, and had entirely lost
its sense of humour. Probably they still had their jokes, these
people—in fact she knew they did, for _Punch_ still went on; but how
differently it went on, and what jokes. Thackeray, in his inimitable
way, would have made mincemeat of this generation. Of how much it
needed the tonic properties of that astringent pen it was of course
unaware. It no longer even held him—at least, so she had been
informed—in any particular esteem. Well, she could not give it eyes to
see and ears to hear and a heart to understand, but she could and would
give it, represented and united in the form of Lady Caroline, a good
dose of honest medicine.

“I hear you are not well,” she said, standing in the narrow entrance of
the loop and looking down with the inflexible face of one who is
determined to do good at the motionless and apparently sleeping Scrap.

Mrs. Fisher had a deep voice, very like a man’s, for she had been
overtaken by that strange masculinity that sometimes pursues a woman
during the last laps of her life.

Scrap tried to pretend that she was asleep, but if she had been her
cigarette would not have been held in her fingers but would have been
lying on the ground.

She forgot this. Mrs. Fisher did not, and coming inside the loop, sat
down on a narrow stone seat built out of the wall. For a little she
could sit on it; for a little, till the chill began to penetrate.

She contemplated the figure before her. Undoubtedly a pretty creature,
and one that would have had a success at Farringford. Strange how
easily even the greatest men were moved by exteriors. She had seen with
her own eyes Tennyson turn away from everybody—turn, positively, his
back on a crowd of eminent people assembled to do him honour, and
withdraw to the window with a young person nobody had ever heard of,
who had been brought there by accident and whose one and only merit—if
it be a merit, that which is conferred by chance—was beauty. Beauty!
All over before you can turn round. An affair, one might almost say, of
minutes. Well, while it lasted it did seem able to do what it liked
with men. Even husbands were not immune. There had been passages in the
life of Mr. Fisher . . .

“I expect the journey has upset you,” she said in her deep voice. “What
you want is a good dose of some simple medicine. I shall ask Domenico
if there is such a thing in the village as castor oil.”

Scrap opened her eyes and looked straight at Mrs. Fisher.

“Ah,” said Mrs. Fisher, “I knew you were not asleep. If you had been
you would have let your cigarette fall to the ground.”

Scrap threw the cigarette over the parapet.

“Waste,” said Mrs. Fisher. “I don’t like smoking for women, but I still
less like waste.”

“What _does_ one do with people like this?” Scrap asked herself, her
eyes fixed on Mrs. Fisher in what felt to her an indignant stare but
appeared to Mrs. Fisher as really charming docility.

“Now you’ll take my advice,” said Mrs. Fisher, touched, “and not
neglect what may very well turn into an illness. We are in Italy, you
know, and one has to be careful. You ought, to begin with, to go to
bed.”

“I never go to bed,” snapped Scrap; and it sounded as moving, as
forlorn, as that line spoken years and years ago by an actress playing
the part of Poor Jo in dramatised version of Bleak House—“I’m always
moving on,” said Poor Jo in this play, urged to do so by a policeman;
and Mrs. Fisher, then a girl, had laid her head on the red velvet
parapet of the front row of the dress circle and wept aloud.

It was wonderful, Scrap’s voice. It had given her, in the ten years
since she came out, all the triumphs that intelligence and wit can
have, because it made whatever she said seem memorable. She ought, with
a throat formation like that, to have been a singer, but in every kind
of music Scrap was dumb except this one music of the speaking voice;
and what a fascination, what a spell lay in that. Such was the
loveliness of her face and the beauty of her colouring that there was
not a man into whose eyes at the sight of her there did not leap a
flame of intensest interest; but, when he heard her voice, the flame in
that man’s eyes was caught and fixed. It was the same with every man,
educated and uneducated, old, young, desirable themselves or
undesirable, men of her own world and bus-conductors, generals and
Tommies—during the war she had had a perplexing time—bishops equally
with vergers—round about her confirmation startling occurrences had
taken place—wholesome and unwholesome, rich and penniless, brilliant or
idiotic; and it made no difference at all what they were, or how long
and securely married: into the eyes of every one of them, when they saw
her, leapt this flame, and when they heard her it stayed there.

Scrap had had enough of this look. It only led to difficulties. At
first it had delighted her. She had been excited, triumphant. To be
apparently incapable of doing or saying the wrong thing, to be
applauded, listened to, petted, adored wherever she went, and when she
came home to find nothing there either but the most indulgent proud
fondness—why, how extremely pleasant. And so easy, too. No preparation
necessary for this achievement, no hard work, nothing to learn. She
need take no trouble. She had only to appear, and presently say
something.

But gradually experiences gathered round her. After all, she had to
take trouble, she had to make efforts, because, she discovered with
astonishment and rage, she had to defend herself. That look, that
leaping look, meant that she was going to be grabbed at. Some of those
who had it were more humble than others, especially if they were young,
but they all, according to their several ability, grabbed; and she who
had entered the world so jauntily, with her head in the air and the
completest confidence in anybody whose hair was grey, began to
distrust, and then to dislike, and soon to shrink away from, and
presently to be indignant. Sometimes it was just as if she didn’t
belong to herself, wasn’t her own at all, but was regarded as a
universal thing, a sort of beauty-of-all-work. Really men . . . And she
found herself involved in queer, vague quarrels, being curiously hated.
Really women . . . And when the war came, and she flung herself into it
along with everybody else, it finished her. Really generals . . .

The war finished Scrap. It killed the one man she felt safe with, whom
she would have married, and it finally disgusted her with love. Since
then she had been embittered. She was struggling as angrily in the
sweet stuff of life as a wasp got caught in honey. Just as desperately
did she try to unstick her wings. It gave her no pleasure to outdo
other women; she didn’t want their tiresome men. What could one do with
men when one had got them? None of them would talk to her of anything
but the things of love, and how foolish and fatiguing that became after
a bit. It was as though a healthy person with a normal hunger was given
nothing whatever to eat but sugar. Love, love . . . the very word made
her want to slap somebody. “_Why_ should I love you? _Why_ should I?”
she would ask amazed sometimes when somebody was trying—somebody was
always trying—to propose to her. But she never got a real answer, only
further incoherence.

A deep cynicism took hold of the unhappy Scrap. Her inside grew
hoary with disillusionment, while her gracious and charming outside
continued to make the world more beautiful. What had the future in it
for her? She would not be able, after such a preparation, to take hold
of it. She was fit for nothing; she had wasted all this time being
beautiful. Presently she wouldn’t be beautiful, and what then? Scrap
didn’t know what then, it appalled her to wonder even. Tired as she
was of being conspicuous she was at least used to that, she had never
known anything else; and to become inconspicuous, to fade, to grow
shabby and dim, would probably be most painful. And once she began,
what years and years of it there would be! Imagine, thought Scrap,
having most of one’s life at the wrong end. Imagine being old for two
or three times as long as being young. Stupid, stupid. Everything was
stupid. There wasn’t a thing she wanted to do. There were thousands
of things she didn’t want to do. Avoidance, silence, invisibility, if
possible unconsciousness—these negations were all she asked for at the
moment; and here, even here, she was not allowed a minute’s peace, and
this absurd woman must come pretending, merely because she wanted to
exercise power and make her go to bed and make her—hideous—drink castor
oil, that she thought she was ill.

“I’m sure,” said Mrs. Fisher, who felt the cold of the stone beginning
to come through and knew she could not sit much longer, “you’ll do what
is reasonable. Your mother would wish—have you a mother?”

A faint wonder came into Scrap’s eyes. Have you a mother? If ever
anybody had a mother it was Scrap. It had not occurred to her that
there could be people who had never heard of her mother. She was one of
the major marchionesses—there being, as no one knew better than Scrap,
marchionesses and marchionesses—and had held high positions at Court.
Her father, too, in his day had been most prominent. His day was a
little over, poor dear, because in the war he had made some important
mistakes, and besides he was now grown old; still, there he was, an
excessively well-known person. How restful, how extraordinarily restful
to have found some one who had never heard of any of her lot, or at
least had not yet connected her with them.

She began to like Mrs. Fisher. Perhaps the originals didn’t know
anything about her either. When she first wrote to them and signed her
name, that great name of Dester which twisted in and out of English
history like a bloody thread, for its bearers constantly killed, she
had taken it for granted that they would know who she was; and at the
interview in Shaftesbury Avenue she was sure they did know, because
they hadn’t asked, as they otherwise would have, for references.

Scrap began to cheer up. If nobody at San Salvatore had ever heard of
her, if for a whole month she could shed herself, get right away from
everything connected with herself, be allowed really to forget the
clinging and the clogging and all the noise, why, perhaps she might
make something of herself after all. She might really think; really
clear up her mind; really come to some conclusion.

“What I want to do here,” she said, leaning forward in her chair and
clasping her hands round her knees and looking up at Mrs. Fisher, whose
seat was higher than hers, almost with animation, so much pleased was
she that Mrs. Fisher knew nothing about her, “is to come to a
conclusion. That’s all. It isn’t much to want, is it? Just that.”

She gazed at Mrs. Fisher, and thought that almost any conclusion would
do; the great thing was to get hold of something, catch something
tight, cease to drift.

Mrs. Fisher’s little eyes surveyed her. “I should say,” she said, “that
what a young woman like you wants is a husband and children.”

“Well, that’s one of the things I’m going to consider,” said Scrap
amiably. “But I don’t think it would be a conclusion.”

“And meanwhile,” said Mrs. Fisher, getting up, for the cold of the
stone was now through, “I shouldn’t trouble my head if I were you with
considerings and conclusions. Women’s heads weren’t made for thinking,
I assure you. I should go to bed and get well.”

“I am well,” said Scrap.

“Then why did you send a message that you were ill?”

“I didn’t.”

“Then I’ve had all the trouble of coming out here for nothing.”

“But wouldn’t you prefer coming out and finding me well than coming out
and finding me ill?” asked Scrap, smiling.

Even Mrs. Fisher was caught by the smile.

“Well, you’re a pretty creature,” she said forgivingly. “It’s a pity
you weren’t born fifty years ago. My friends would have liked looking
at you.”

“I’m very glad I wasn’t,” said Scrap. “I dislike being looked at.”

“Absurd,” said Mrs. Fisher, growing stern again. “That’s what you are
made for, young women like you. For what else, pray? And I assure you
that if my friends had looked at you, you would have been looked at by
some very great people.”

“I dislike very great people,” said Scrap, frowning. There had been an
incident quite recently—really potentates. . .

“What _I_ dislike,” said Mrs. Fisher, now as cold as the stone she had
got up from, “is the pose of the modern young woman. It seems to me
pitiful, positively pitiful, in its silliness.”

And, her stick crunching the pebbles, she walked away.

“That’s all right,” Scrap said to herself, dropping back into her
comfortable position with her head in the cushion and her feet on the
parapet; if only people would go away she didn’t in the least mind why
they went.

“Don’t you think darling Scrap is growing a little, just a little,
peculiar?” her mother had asked her father a short time before that
latest peculiarity of the flight to San Salvatore, uncomfortably struck
by the very odd things Scrap said and the way she had taken to slinking
out of reach whenever she could and avoiding everybody except—such a
sign of age—quite young men, almost boys.

“Eh? What? Peculiar? Well, let her be peculiar if she likes. A woman
with her looks can be any damned thing she pleases,” was the infatuated
answer.

“I do let her,” said her mother meekly; and indeed if she did not, what
difference would it make?

Mrs. Fisher was sorry she had bothered about Lady Caroline. She went
along the hall towards her private sitting-room, and her stick as she
went struck the stone floor with a vigour in harmony with her feelings.
Sheer silliness, these poses. She had no patience with them. Unable to
be or do anything of themselves, the young of the present generation
tried to achieve a reputation for cleverness by decrying all that was
obviously great and obviously good and by praising everything, however
obviously bad, that was different. Apes, thought Mrs. Fisher, roused.
Apes. Apes. And in her sitting-room she found more apes, or what seemed
to her in her present mood more, for there was Mrs. Arbuthnot placidly
drinking coffee, while at the writing-table, the writing-table she
already looked upon as sacred, using her pen, her own pen brought for
her hand alone from Prince of Wales Terrace, sat Mrs. Wilkins writing;
at the table; in her room; with her pen.

“Isn’t this a delightful place?” said Mrs. Arbuthnot cordially. “We
have just discovered it.”

“I’m writing to Mellersh,” said Mrs. Wilkins, turning her head and also
cordially—as though, Mrs. Fisher thought, she cared a straw who she was
writing to and anyhow knew who the person she called Mellersh was.
“He’ll want to know,” said Mrs. Wilkins, optimism induced by her
surroundings, “that I’ve got here safely.”




Chapter 11


The sweet smells that were everywhere in San Salvatore were alone
enough to produce concord. They came into the sitting-room from the
flowers on the battlements, and met the ones from the flowers inside
the room, and almost, thought Mrs. Wilkins, could be seen greeting each
other with a holy kiss. Who could be angry in the middle of such
gentlenesses? Who could be acquisitive, selfish, in the old rasped
London way, in the presence of this bounteous beauty?

Yet Mrs. Fisher seemed to be all three of these things.

There was so much beauty, so much more than enough for every one, that
it did appear to be a vain activity to try and make a corner in it.

Yet Mrs. Fisher was trying to make a corner in it, and had railed off a
portion for her exclusive use.

Well, she would get over that presently; she would get over it
inevitably, Mrs. Wilkins was sure, after a day or two in the
extraordinary atmosphere of peace in that place.

Meanwhile she obviously hadn’t even begun to get over it. She stood
looking at her and Rose with an expression that appeared to be one of
anger. Anger. Fancy. Silly old nerve-racked London feelings, thought
Mrs. Wilkins, whose eyes saw the room full of kisses, and everybody in
it being kissed, Mrs. Fisher as copiously as she herself and Rose.

“You don’t like us being in here,” said Mrs. Wilkins, getting up and at
once, after her manner, fixing on the truth. “Why?”

“I should have thought,” said Mrs. Fisher leaning on her stick, “you
could have seen that it is my room.”

“You mean because of the photographs,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, who was a little red and surprised, got up too.

“And the notepaper,” said Mrs. Fisher. “Notepaper with my London
address on it. That pen—”

She pointed. It was still in Mrs. Wilkins’s hand.

“Is yours. I’m very sorry,” said Mrs. Wilkins, laying it on the table.
And she added smiling, that it had just been writing some very amiable
things.

“But why,” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, who found herself unable to acquiesce
in Mrs. Fisher’s arrangements without at least a gentle struggle,
“ought we not to be here? It’s a sitting-room.”

“There is another one,” said Mrs. Fisher. “You and your friend cannot
sit in two rooms at once, and if I have no wish to disturb you in yours
I am unable to see why you should wish to disturb me in mine.”

“But why—” began Mrs. Arbuthnot again.

“It’s quite natural,” Mrs. Wilkins interrupted, for Rose was looking
stubborn; and turning to Mrs. Fisher she said that although sharing
things with friends was pleasant she could understand that Mrs. Fisher,
still steeped in the Prince of Wales Terrace attitude to life, did not
yet want to, but that she would get rid of that after a bit and feel
quite different. “Soon you’ll want us to share,” said Mrs. Wilkins
reassuringly. “Why, you may even get so far as _asking_ me to use your
pen if you knew I hadn’t got one.”

Mrs. Fisher was moved almost beyond control by this speech. To have a
ramshackle young woman from Hampstead patting her on the back as it
were, in breezy certitude that quite soon she would improve, stirred
her more deeply than anything had stirred her since her first discovery
that Mr. Fisher was not what he seemed. Mrs. Wilkins must certainly be
curbed. But how? There was a curious imperviousness about her. At that
moment, for instance, she was smiling as pleasantly and with as
unclouded a face as if she were saying nothing in the least
impertinent. Would she know she was being curbed? If she didn’t know,
if she were too tough to feel it, then what? Nothing, except avoidance;
except, precisely, one’s own private sitting-room.

“I’m an old woman,” said Mrs. Fisher, “and I need a room to myself. I
cannot get about, because of my stick. As I cannot get about I have to
sit. Why should I not sit quietly and undisturbed, as I told you in
London I intended to? If people are to come in and out all day long,
chattering and leaving doors open, you will have broken the agreement,
which was that I was to be quiet.”

“But we haven’t the least wish—” began Mrs. Arbuthnot, who was again
cut short by Mrs. Wilkins.

“We’re only too glad,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “for you to have this room if
it makes you happy. We didn’t know about it, that’s all. We wouldn’t
have come in if we had—not till you invited us, anyhow. I expect,” she
finished looking down cheerfully at Mrs. Fisher, “you soon will.” And
picking up her letter she took Mrs. Arbuthnot’s hand and drew her
towards the door.

Mrs. Arbuthnot did not want to go. She, the mildest of women, was
filled with a curious and surely unchristian desire to stay and fight.
Not, of course, really, nor even with any definitely aggressive words.
No; she only wanted to reason with Mrs. Fisher, and to reason
patiently. But she did feel that something ought to be said, and that
she ought not to allow herself to be rated and turned out as if she
were a schoolgirl caught in ill behaviour by Authority.

Mrs. Wilkins, however, drew her firmly to and through the door, and
once again Rose wondered at Lotty, at her balance, her sweet and
equable temper—she who in England had been such a thing of gusts. From
the moment they got into Italy it was Lotty who seemed the elder. She
certainly was very happy; blissful, in fact. Did happiness so
completely protect one? Did it make one so untouchable, so wise? Rose
was happy herself, but not anything like _so_ happy. Evidently not, for
not only did she want to fight Mrs. Fisher but she wanted something
else, something more than this lovely place, something to complete it;
she wanted Frederick. For the first time in her life she was surrounded
by perfect beauty, and her one thought was to show it to him, to share
it with him. She wanted Frederick. She yearned for Frederick. Ah, if
only, only Frederick . . .

“Poor old thing,” said Mrs. Wilkins, shutting the door gently on Mrs.
Fisher and her triumph. “Fancy on a day like this.”

“She’s a very rude old thing,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“She’ll get over that. I’m sorry we chose just her room to go and sit
in.”

“It’s much the nicest,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot. “And it isn’t hers.”

“Oh but there are lots of other places, and she’s such a poor old
thing. Let her have the room. Whatever does it matter?”

And Mrs. Wilkins said she was going down to the village to find out
where the post-office was and post her letter to Mellersh, and would
Rose go too.

“I’ve been thinking about Mellersh,” said Mrs. Wilkins as they walked,
one behind the other, down the narrow zigzag path up which they had
climbed in the rain the night before.

She went first. Mrs. Arbuthnot, quite naturally now, followed. In
England it had been the other way about—Lotty, timid, hesitating,
except when she burst out so awkwardly, getting behind the calm and
reasonable Rose whenever she could.

“I’ve been thinking about Mellersh,” repeated Mrs. Wilkins over her
shoulder, as Rose seemed not to have heard.

“Have you?” said Rose, a faint distaste in her voice, for her
experiences with Mellersh had not been of a kind to make her enjoy
remembering him. She had deceived Mellersh; therefore she didn’t like
him. She was unconscious that this was the reason of her dislike, and
thought it was that there didn’t seem to be much, if any, of the grace
of God about him. And yet how wrong to feel that, she rebuked herself,
and how presumptuous. No doubt Lotty’s husband was far, far nearer to
God than she herself was ever likely to be. Still, she didn’t like him.

“I’ve been a mean dog,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“A what?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, incredulous of her hearing.

“All this coming away and leaving him in that dreary place while I
rollick in heaven. He had planned to take me to Italy for Easter
himself. Did I tell you?”

“No,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot; and indeed she had discouraged talk about
husbands. Whenever Lotty had begun to blurt out things she had swiftly
changed the conversation. One husband led to another, in conversation
as well as in life, she felt, and she could not, she would not, talk of
Frederick. Beyond the bare fact that he was there, he had not been
mentioned. Mellersh had had to be mentioned, because of his
obstructiveness, but she had carefully kept him from overflowing
outside the limits of necessity.

“Well, he did,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “He had never done such a thing in
his life before, and I was horrified. Fancy—just as I had planned to
come to it myself.”

She paused on the path and looked up at Rose.

“Yes,” said Rose, trying to think of something else to talk about.

“Now you see why I say I’ve been a mean dog. _He_ had planned a holiday
in Italy with me, and _I_ had planned a holiday in Italy leaving him at
home. I think,” she went on, her eyes fixed on Rose’s face, “Mellersh
has every reason to be both angry and hurt.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot was astonished. The extraordinary quickness with which,
hour by hour, under her very eyes, Lotty became more selfless,
disconcerted her. She was turning into something surprisingly like a
saint. Here she was now being affectionate about Mellersh—Mellersh, who
only that morning, while they hung their feet into the sea, had seemed
a mere iridescence, Lotty had told her, a thing of gauze. That was only
that morning; and by the time they had had lunch Lotty had developed so
far as to have got him solid enough again to write to, and to write to
at length. And now, a few minutes later, she was announcing that he had
every reason to be angry with her and hurt, and that she herself had
been—the language was unusual, but it did express real penitence—a mean
dog.

Rose stared at her astonished. If she went on like this, soon a nimbus
might be expected round her head, was there already, if one didn’t know
it was the sun through the tree-trunks catching her sandy hair.

A great desire to love and be friends, to love everybody, to be friends
with everybody, seemed to be invading Lotty—a desire for sheer
goodness. Rose’s own experience was that goodness, the state of being
good, was only reached with difficulty and pain. It took a long time to
get to it; in fact one never did get to it, or, if for a flashing
instant one did, it was only for a flashing instant. Desperate
perseverance was needed to struggle along its path, and all the way was
dotted with doubts. Lotty simply flew along. She had certainly, thought
Rose, not got rid of her impetuousness. It had merely taken another
direction. She was now impetuously becoming a saint. Could one really
attain goodness so violently? Wouldn’t there be an equally violent
reaction?

“I shouldn’t,” said Rose with caution, looking down into Lotty’s bright
eyes—the path was steep, so that Lotty was well below her—“I shouldn’t
be sure of that too quickly.”

“But I am sure of it, and I’ve written and told him so.”

Rose stared. “Why, but only this morning—” she began.

“It’s all in this,” interrupted Lotty, tapping the envelope and looking
pleased.

“What—everything?”

“You mean about the advertisement and my savings being spent? Oh no—not
yet. But I’ll tell him all that when he comes.”

“When he comes?” repeated Rose.

“I’ve invited him to come and stay with us.”

Rose could only go on staring.

“It’s the least I could do. Besides—look at this.” Lotty waved her
hand. “Disgusting not to share it. I was a mean dog to go off and leave
him, but no dog I’ve ever heard of was ever as mean as I’d be if I
didn’t try and persuade Mellersh to come out and enjoy this too. It’s
barest decency that he should have some of the fun out of my nest-egg.
After all, he has housed me and fed me for years. One shouldn’t be
churlish.”

“But—do you think he’ll come?”

“Oh, I _hope_ so,” said Lotty with the utmost earnestness; and added,
“Poor lamb.”

At that Rose felt she would like to sit down. Mellersh a poor lamb?
That same Mellersh who a few hours before was mere shimmer? There was a
seat at the bend of the path, and Rose went to it and sat down. She
wished to get her breath, gain time. If she had time she might perhaps
be able to catch up the leaping Lotty, and perhaps be able to stop her
before she committed herself to what she probably presently would be
sorry for. Mellersh at San Salvatore? Mellersh, from whom Lotty had
taken such pains so recently to escape?

“I _see_ him here,” said Lotty, as if in answer to her thoughts.

Rose looked at her with real concern: for every time Lotty said in that
convinced voice, “I _see_,” what she saw came true. Then it was to be
supposed that Mr. Wilkins too would presently come true.

“I wish,” said Rose anxiously, “I understood you.”

“Don’t try,” said Lotty, smiling.

“But I must, because I love you.”

“Dear Rose,” said Lotty, swiftly bending down and kissing her.

“You’re so quick,” said Rose. “I can’t follow your developments. I
can’t keep touch. It was what happened with Freder—”

She broke off and looked frightened.

“The whole idea of our coming here,” she went on again, as Lotty didn’t
seem to have noticed, “was to get away, wasn’t it? Well, we’ve got
away. And now, after only a single day of it, you want to write to the
very people—”

She stopped.

“The very people we were getting away from,” finished Lotty. “It’s
quite true. It seems idiotically illogical. But I’m so happy, I’m so
well, I feel so fearfully wholesome. This place—why, it makes me feel
_flooded_ with love.”

And she stared down at Rose in a kind of radiant surprise.

Rose was silent a moment. Then she said, “And do you think it will have
the same effect on Mr. Wilkins?”

Lotty laughed. “I don’t know,” she said. “But even if it doesn’t,
there’s enough love about to flood fifty Mr. Wilkinses, as you call
him. The great thing is to have lots of love _about_. I don’t see,” she
went on, “at least I don’t see here, though I did at home, that it
matters who loves as long as somebody does. I was a stingy beast at
home, and used to measure and count. I had a queer obsession about
justice. As though justice mattered. As though justice can really be
distinguished from vengeance. It’s only love that’s any good. At home I
wouldn’t love Mellersh unless he loved me back, exactly as much,
absolute fairness. Did you ever. And as he didn’t, neither did I, and
the _aridity_ of that house! The _aridity_ . . .”

Rose said nothing. She was bewildered by Lotty. One odd effect of San
Salvatore on her rapidly developing friend was her sudden free use of
robust words. She had not used them in Hampstead. Beast and dog were
more robust than Hampstead cared about. In words, too, Lotty had come
unchained.

But how she wished, oh how Rose wished, that she too could write to her
husband and say “Come.” The Wilkins _ménage_, however pompous Mellersh
might be, and he had seemed to Rose pompous, was on a healthier, more
natural footing than hers. Lotty could write to Mellersh and would get
an answer. She couldn’t write to Frederick, for only too well did she
know he wouldn’t answer. At least, he might answer—a hurried scribble,
showing how much bored he was at doing it, with perfunctory thanks for
her letter. But that would be worse than no answer at all; for his
handwriting, her name on an envelope addressed by him, stabbed her
heart. Too acutely did it bring back the letters of their beginnings
together, the letters from him so desolate with separation, so aching
with love and longing. To see apparently one of these very same letters
arrive, and open it and find:

Dear Rose—Thanks for letter. Glad you’re having a good time. Don’t
hurry back. Say if you want any money. Everything going splendidly
here.—Yours,
                                                         Frederick.

—no, it couldn’t be borne.

“I don’t think I’ll come down to the village with you to-day,” she
said, looking up at Lotty with eyes suddenly gone dim. “I think I want
to think.”

“All right,” said Lotty, at once starting off briskly down the path.
“But don’t think too long,” she called back over her shoulder. “Write
and invite him at once.”

“Invite whom?” asked Rose, startled.

“Your husband.”




Chapter 12


At the evening meal, which was the first time the whole four sat round
the dining-room table together, Scrap appeared.

She appeared quite punctually, and in one of those wrappers or
tea-gowns which are sometimes described as ravishing. This one really
was ravishing. It certainly ravished Mrs. Wilkins, who could not take
her eyes off the enchanting figure opposite. It was a shell-pink
garment, and clung to the adorable Scrap as though it, too, loved her.

“What a beautiful dress!” exclaimed Mrs. Wilkins eagerly.

“What—this old rag?” said Scrap, glancing down at it as if to see which
one she had got on. “I’ve had it a hundred years.” And she concentrated
on her soup.

“You must be very cold in it,” said Mrs. Fisher, thin-lipped; for it
showed a great deal of Scrap—the whole of her arms, for instance, and
even where it covered her up it was so thin that you still saw her.

“Who—me?” said Scrap, looking up a moment. “Oh, no.”

And she continued her soup.

“You mustn’t catch a chill, you know,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, feeling
that such loveliness must at all costs be preserved unharmed. “There’s
a great difference here when the sun goes down.”

“I’m quite warm,” said Scrap, industriously eating her soup.

“You look as if you had nothing at all on underneath,” said Mrs.
Fisher.

“I haven’t. At least, hardly anything,” said Scrap, finishing her soup.

“How very imprudent,” said Mrs. Fisher, “and how highly improper.”

Whereupon Scrap stared at her.

Mrs. Fisher had arrived at dinner feeling friendly towards Lady
Caroline. She at least had not intruded into her room and sat at her
table and written with her pen. She did, Mrs. Fisher had supposed, know
how to behave. Now it appeared that she did not know, for was this
behaving, to come dressed—no, undressed—like that to a meal? Such
behaviour was not only exceedingly improper but also most
inconsiderate, for the indelicate creature would certainly catch a
chill, and then infect the entire party. Mrs. Fisher had a great
objection to other people’s chills. They were always the fruit of
folly; and then they were handed on to her, who had done nothing at all
to deserve them.

“Bird-brained,” thought Mrs. Fisher, sternly contemplating Lady
Caroline. “Not an idea in her head except vanity.”

“But there are no men here,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “so how can it be
improper? Have you noticed,” she inquired of Mrs. Fisher, who
endeavoured to pretend she did not hear, “how difficult it is to be
improper without men?”

Mrs. Fisher neither answered her nor looked at her; but Scrap looked at
her, and did that with her mouth which in any other mouth would have
been a faint grin. Seen from without, across the bowl of nasturtiums,
it was the most beautiful of brief and dimpled smiles.

She had a very alive sort of face, that one, thought Scrap, observing
Mrs. Wilkins with a dawn of interest. It was rather like a field of
corn swept by lights and shadows. Both she and the dark one, Scrap
noticed, had changed their clothes, but only in order to put on silk
jumpers. The same amount of trouble would have been enough to dress
them properly, reflected Scrap. Naturally they looked like nothing on
earth in the jumpers. It didn’t matter what Mrs. Fisher wore; indeed,
the only thing for her, short of plumes and ermine, was what she did
wear. But these others were quite young still, and quite attractive.
They really definitely had faces. How different life would be for them
if they made the most of themselves instead of the least. And yet—Scrap
was suddenly bored, and turned away her thoughts and absently ate
toast. What did it matter? If you did make the best of yourself, you
only collected people round you who ended by wanting to grab.

“I’ve had the most wonderful day,” began Mrs. Wilkins, her eyes
shining.

Scrap lowered hers. “Oh,” she thought, “she’s going to gush.”

“As though anybody were interested in her day,” thought Mrs. Fisher,
lowering hers also.

In fact, whenever Mrs. Wilkins spoke Mrs. Fisher deliberately cast down
her eyes. Thus would she mark her disapproval. Besides, it seemed the
only safe thing to do with her eyes, for no one could tell what the
uncurbed creature would say next. That which she had just said, for
instance, about men—addressed too, to her—what could she mean? Better
not conjecture, thought Mrs. Fisher; and her eyes, though cast down,
yet saw Lady Caroline stretch out her hand to the Chianti flask and
fill her glass again.

Again. She had done it once already, and the fish was only just going
out of the room. Mrs. Fisher could see that the other respectable
member of the party, Mrs. Arbuthnot, was noticing it too. Mrs.
Arbuthnot was, she hoped and believed, respectable and well-meaning. It
is true she also had invaded her sitting-room, but no doubt she had
been dragged there by the other one, and Mrs. Fisher had little if
anything against Mrs. Arbuthnot, and observed with approval that she
only drank water. That was as it should be. So, indeed, to give her her
dues, did the freckled one; and very right at their age. She herself
drank wine, but with what moderation: one meal, one glass. And she was
sixty-five, and might properly, and even beneficially, have had at
least two.

“That,” she said to Lady Caroline, cutting right across what Mrs.
Wilkins was telling them about her wonderful day and indicating the
wine-glass, “is very bad for you.”

Lady Caroline, however, could not have heard, for she continued to sip,
her elbow on the table, and listen to what Mrs. Wilkins was saying.

And what was it she was saying? She had invited somebody to come and
stay? A man?

Mrs. Fisher could not credit her ears. Yet it evidently was a man, for
she spoke of the person as he.

Suddenly and for the first time—but then this was most important—Mrs.
Fisher addressed Mrs. Wilkins directly. She was sixty-five, and cared
very little what sorts of women she happened to be with for a month,
but if the women were to be mixed with men it was a different
proposition altogether. She was not going to be made a cat’s-paw of.
She had not come out there to sanction by her presence what used in her
day to be called fast behaviour. Nothing had been said at the interview
in London about men; if there had been she would have declined, of
course, to come.

“What is his name?” asked Mrs. Fisher, abruptly interposing.

Mrs. Wilkins turned to her with a slight surprise. “Wilkins,” she said.

“Wilkins?”

“Yes.”

“Your name?”

“And his.”

“A relation?”

“Not blood.”

“A connection?”

“A husband.”

Mrs. Fisher once more cast down her eyes. She could not talk to Mrs.
Wilkins. There was something about the things she said. . . “A
husband.” Suggesting one of many. Always that unseemly twist to
everything. Why could she not say “My husband”? Besides, Mrs. Fisher
had, she herself knew not for what reason, taken both the Hampstead
young women for widows. War ones. There had been an absence of mention
of husbands at the interview which would not, she considered, be
natural if such persons did after all exist. And if a husband was not a
relation, who was? “Not blood.” What a way to talk. Why, a husband was
the first of all relations. How well she remembered Ruskin—no, it was
not Ruskin, it was the Bible that said a man should leave his father
and mother and cleave only to his wife; showing that she became by
marriage an even more than blood relation. And if the husband’s father
and mother were to be nothing to him compared to his wife, how much
less than nothing ought the wife’s father and mother be to her compared
to her husband. She herself had been unable to leave her father and
mother in order to cleave to Mr. Fisher because they were no longer,
when she married, alive, but she certainly would have left them if they
had been there to leave. Not blood, indeed. Silly talk.

The dinner was very good. Succulence succeeded succulence. Costanza had
determined to do as she chose in the matter of cream and eggs the first
week, and see what happened at the end of it when the bills had to be
paid. Her experience of the English was that they were quiet about
bills. They were shy of words. They believed readily. Besides, who was
the mistress here? In the absence of a definite one, it occurred to
Costanza that she might as well be the mistress herself. So she did as
she chose about the dinner, and it was very good.

The four, however, were so much preoccupied by their own conversation
that they ate it without noticing how good it was. Even Mrs. Fisher,
she who in such matters was manly, did not notice. The entire excellent
cooking was to her as though it were not; which shows how much she must
have been stirred.

She was stirred. It was that Mrs. Wilkins. She was enough to stir
anybody. And she was undoubtedly encouraged by Lady Caroline, who, in
her turn, was no doubt influenced by the Chianti.

Mrs. Fisher was very glad there were no men present, for they certainly
would have been foolish about Lady Caroline. She was precisely the sort
of young woman to unbalance them; especially, Mrs. Fisher recognised,
at that moment. Perhaps it was the Chianti momentarily intensifying her
personality, but she was undeniably most attractive; and there were few
things Mrs. Fisher disliked more than having to look on while sensible,
intelligent men, who the moment before were talking seriously and
interestingly about real matters, became merely foolish and
simpering—she had seen them actually simpering—just because in walked a
bit of bird-brained beauty. Even Mr. Gladstone, that great wise
statesman, whose hand had once rested for an unforgettable moment
solemnly on her head, would have, she felt, on perceiving Lady Caroline
left off talking sense and horribly embarked on badinage.

“You see,” Mrs. Wilkins said—a silly trick that, with which she mostly
began her sentences; Mrs. Fisher each time wished to say, “Pardon me—I
do not see, I hear”—but why trouble?—“You see,” said Mrs. Wilkins,
leaning across towards Lady Caroline, “we arranged, didn’t we, in
London that if any of us wanted to we could each invite one guest. So
now I’m doing it.”

“I don’t remember that,” said Mrs. Fisher, her eyes on her plate.

“Oh yes, we did—didn’t we, Rose?”

“Yes—I remember,” said Lady Caroline. “Only it seemed so incredible
that one could ever want to. One’s whole idea was to get away from
one’s friends.”

“And one’s husbands.”

Again that unseemly plural. But how altogether unseemly, thought Mrs.
Fisher. Such implications. Mrs. Arbuthnot clearly thought so too, for
she had turned red.

“And family affection,” said Lady Caroline—or was it the Chianti
speaking? Surely it was the Chianti.

“And the want of family affection,” said Mrs. Wilkins—what a light she
was throwing on her home life and real character.

“That wouldn’t be so bad,” said Lady Caroline. “I’d stay with that. It
would give one room.”

“Oh no, no—it’s dreadful,” cried Mrs. Wilkins. “It’s as if one had no
clothes on.”

“But I like that,” said Lady Caroline.

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher.

“It’s a divine feeling, getting rid of things,” said Lady Caroline, who
was talking altogether to Mrs. Wilkins and paid no attention to the
other two.

“Oh, but in a bitter wind to have nothing on and know there never will
be anything on and you going to get colder and colder till at last you
die of it—that’s what it was like, living with somebody who didn’t love
one.”

These confidences, thought Mrs. Fisher . . . and no excuse whatever for
Mrs. Wilkins, who was making them entirely on plain water. Mrs.
Arbuthnot, judging from her face, quite shared Mrs. Fisher’s
disapproval; she was fidgeting.

“But didn’t he?” asked Lady Caroline—every bit as shamelessly
unreticent as Mrs. Wilkins.

“Mellersh? He showed no signs of it.”

“Delicious,” murmured Lady Caroline.

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher.

“I didn’t think it was at all delicious. I was miserable. And now,
since I’ve been here, I simply stare at myself being miserable. As
miserable as that. And about Mellersh.”

“You mean he wasn’t worth it.”

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher.

“No, I don’t. I mean I’ve suddenly got well.”

Lady Caroline, slowly twisting the stem of her glass in her fingers,
scrutinised the lit-up face opposite.

“And now I’m well I find I can’t sit here and gloat all to myself. I
can’t be happy, shutting him out. I must share. I understand exactly
what the Blessed Damozel felt like.”

“What was the Blessed Damozel?” asked Scrap.

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher; and with such emphasis this time that Lady
Caroline turned to her.

“Ought I to know?” she asked. “I don’t know any natural history. It
sounds like a bird.”

“It is a poem,” said Mrs. Fisher with extraordinary frost.

“Oh,” said Scrap.

“I’ll lend it to you,” said Mrs. Wilkins, over whose face laughter
rippled.

“No,” said Scrap.

“And its author,” said Mrs. Fisher icily, “though not perhaps quite
what one would have wished him to be, was frequently at my father’s
table.”

“What a bore for you,” said Scrap. “That’s what mother’s always
doing—inviting authors. I hate authors. I wouldn’t mind them so much if
they didn’t write books. Go on about Mellersh,” she said, turning to
Mrs. Wilkins.

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher.

“All those empty beds,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“What empty beds?” asked Scrap.

“The ones in this house. Why, of course they each ought to have
somebody happy inside them. Eight beds, and only four people. It’s
dreadful, dreadful to be so greedy and keep everything just for
oneself. I want Rose to ask her husband out too. You and Mrs. Fisher
haven’t got husbands, but why not give some friend a glorious time?”

Rose bit her lip. She turned red, she turned pale. If only Lotty would
keep quiet, she thought. It was all very well to have suddenly become a
saint and want to love everybody, but need she be so tactless? Rose
felt that all her poor sore places were being danced on. If only Lotty
would keep quiet . . .

And Mrs. Fisher, with even greater frostiness than that with which she
had received Lady Caroline’s ignorance of the Blessed Damozel, said,
“There is only one unoccupied bedroom in this house.”

“Only one?” echoed Mrs. Wilkins, astonished. “Then who are in all the
others?”

“We are,” said Mrs. Fisher.

“But we’re not in all the bedrooms. There must be at least six. That
leaves two over, and the owner told us there were eight beds—didn’t he
Rose?”

“There are six bedrooms,” said Mrs. Fisher; for both she and Lady
Caroline had thoroughly searched the house on arriving, in order to see
which part of it they would be most comfortable in, and they both knew
that there were six bedrooms, two of which were very small, and in one
of these small ones Francesca slept in the company of a chair and a
chest of drawers, and the other, similarly furnished, was empty.

Mrs. Wilkins and Mrs. Arbuthnot had hardly looked at the house, having
spent most of their time out-of-doors gaping at the scenery, and had,
in the agitated inattentiveness of their minds when first they began
negotiating for San Salvatore, got into their heads that the eight beds
of which the owner spoke were the same as eight bedrooms; which they
were not. There were indeed eight beds, but four of them were in Mrs.
Wilkins’s and Mrs. Arbuthnot’s rooms.

“There are six bedrooms,” repeated Mrs. Fisher. “We have four,
Francesca has the fifth, and the sixth is empty.”

“So that,” said Scrap, “however kind we feel we would be if we could,
we can’t. Isn’t it fortunate?”

“But then there’s only room for one?” said Mrs. Wilkins, looking round
at the three faces.

“Yes—and you’ve got him,” said Scrap.

Mrs. Wilkins was taken aback. This question of the beds was unexpected.
In inviting Mellersh she had intended to put him in one of the four
spare-rooms that she imagined were there. When there were plenty of
rooms and enough servants there was no reason why they should, as they
did in their small, two-servanted house at home, share the same one.
Love, even universal love, the kind of love with which she felt herself
flooded, should not be tried. Much patience and self-effacement were
needed for successful married sleep. Placidity; a steady faith; these
too were needed. She was sure she would be much fonder of Mellersh, and
he not mind her nearly so much, if they were not shut up together at
night, if in the morning they could meet with the cheery affection of
friends between whom lies no shadow of differences about the window or
the washing arrangements, or of absurd little choked-down resentments
at something that had seemed to one of them unfair. Her happiness, she
felt, and her ability to be friends with everybody, was the result of
her sudden new freedom and its peace. Would there be that sense of
freedom, that peace, after a night shut up with Mellersh? Would she be
able in the morning to be full towards him, as she was at that moment
full, of nothing at all but loving-kindness? After all, she hadn’t been
very long in heaven. Suppose she hadn’t been in it long enough for her
to have become fixed in blandness? And only that morning what an
extraordinary joy it had been to find herself alone when she woke, and
able to pull the bed-clothes any way she liked!

Francesca had to nudge her. She was so much absorbed that she did not
notice the pudding.

“If,” thought Mrs. Wilkins, distractedly helping herself, “I share my
room with Mellersh I risk losing all I now feel about him. If on the
other hand I put him in the one spare-room, I prevent Mrs. Fisher and
Lady Caroline from giving somebody a treat. True they don’t seem to
want to at present, but at any moment in this place one or the other of
them may be seized with a desire to make somebody happy, and then they
wouldn’t be able to because of Mellersh.”

“What a problem,” she said aloud, her eyebrows puckered.

“What is?” asked Scrap.

“Where to put Mellersh.”

Scrap stared. “Why, isn’t one room enough for him?” she asked.

“Oh yes, quite. But then there won’t be any room left at all—any room
for somebody you may want to invite.”

“I shan’t want to,” said Scrap.

“Or _you_,” said Mrs. Wilkins to Mrs. Fisher. “Rose, of course, doesn’t
count. I’m sure she would like sharing her room with her husband. It’s
written all over her.”

“Really—” said Mrs. Fisher.

“Really what?” asked Mrs. Wilkins, turning hopefully to her, for she
thought the word this time was the preliminary to a helpful suggestion.

It was not. It stood by itself. It was, as before, mere frost.

Challenged, however, Mrs. Fisher did fasten it on to a sentence.
“Really am I to understand,” she asked, “that you propose to reserve
the one spare-room for the exclusive use of your own family?”

“He isn’t my own family,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “He’s my husband. You
see—”

“I see nothing,” Mrs. Fisher could not this time refrain from
interrupting—for what an intolerable trick. “At the most I hear, and
that reluctantly.”

But Mrs. Wilkins, as impervious to rebuke as Mrs. Fisher had feared,
immediately repeated the tiresome formula and launched out into a long
and excessively indelicate speech about the best place for the person
she called Mellersh to sleep in.

Mellersh—Mrs. Fisher, remembering the Thomases and Johns and Alfreds
and Roberts of her day, plain names that yet had all become glorious,
thought it sheer affectation to be christened Mellersh—was, it seemed,
Mrs. Wilkins’s husband, and therefore his place was clearly indicated.
Why this talk? She herself, as if foreseeing his arrival, had had a
second bed put in Mrs. Wilkins’s room. There were certain things in
life which were never talked about but only done. Most things connected
with husbands were not talked about; and to have a whole dinner-table
taken up with a discussion as to where one of them should sleep was an
affront to the decencies. How and where husbands slept should be known
only to their wives. Sometimes it was not known to them, and then the
marriage had less happy moments; but these moments were not talked
about either; the decencies continued to be preserved. At least, it was
so in her day. To have to hear whether Mr. Wilkins should or should not
sleep with Mrs. Wilkins, and the reasons why he should and the reasons
why he shouldn’t, was both uninteresting and indelicate.

She might have succeeded in imposing propriety and changing the
conversation if it had not been for Lady Caroline. Lady Caroline
encouraged Mrs. Wilkins, and threw herself into the discussion with
every bit as much unreserve as Mrs. Wilkins herself. No doubt she was
impelled on this occasion by Chianti, but whatever the reason there it
was. And, characteristically, Lady Caroline was all for Mr. Wilkins
being given the solitary spare-room. She took that for granted. Any
other arrangement would be impossible, she said; her expression was,
“Barbarous.” Had she never read her Bible, Mrs. Fisher was tempted to
inquire—_And they two shall be one flesh?_ Clearly also, then, one
room. But Mrs. Fisher did not inquire. She did not care even to allude
to such texts to some one unmarried.

However, there was one way she could force Mr. Wilkins into his proper
place and save the situation: she could say she herself intended to
invite a friend. It was her right. They had all said so. Apart from
propriety, it was monstrous that Mrs. Wilkins should want to monopolise
the one spare-room, when in her own room was everything necessary for
her husband. Perhaps she really would invite somebody—not invite, but
suggest coming. There was Kate Lumley, for instance. Kate could
perfectly afford to come and pay her share; and she was of her own
period and knew, and had known, most of the people she herself knew and
had known. Kate, of course, had only been on the fringe; she used to be
asked only to the big parties, not to the small ones, and she still was
only on the fringe. There were some people who never got off the
fringe, and Kate was one. Often, however, such people were more
permanently agreeable to be with than the others, in that they remained
grateful.

Yes; she might really consider Kate. The poor soul had never married,
but then everybody could not expect to marry, and she was quite
comfortably off—not too comfortably, but just comfortably enough to pay
her own expenses if she came and yet be grateful. Yes; Kate was the
solution. If she came, at one stroke, Mrs. Fisher saw, would the
Wilkinses be regularised and Mrs. Wilkins be prevented from having more
than her share of the rooms. Also, Mrs. Fisher would save herself from
isolation; spiritual isolation. She desired physical isolation between
meals, but she disliked that isolation which is of the spirit. Such
isolation would, she feared, certainly be hers with these three
alien-minded young women. Even Mrs. Arbuthnot was, owing to her
friendship with Mrs. Wilkins, necessarily alien-minded. In Kate she
would have a support. Kate, without intruding on her sitting-room, for
Kate was tractable, would be there at meals to support her.

Mrs. Fisher said nothing at the moment; but presently in the
drawing-room, when they were gathered round the wood fire—she had
discovered there was no fireplace in her own sitting-room, and
therefore she would after all be forced, so long as the evenings
remained cool, to spend them in the other room—presently, while
Francesca was handing coffee round and Lady Caroline was poisoning the
air with smoke, Mrs. Wilkins, looking relieved and pleased, said:
“Well, if nobody really wants that room, and wouldn’t use it anyhow, I
shall be very glad if Mellersh may have it.”

“Of course he must have it,” said Lady Caroline.

Then Mrs. Fisher spoke.

“I have a friend,” she said in her deep voice; and sudden silence fell
upon the others.

“Kate Lumley,” said Mrs. Fisher.

Nobody spoke.

“Perhaps,” continued Mrs. Fisher, addressing Lady Caroline, “you know
her?”

No, Lady Caroline did not know Kate Lumley; and Mrs. Fisher, without
asking the others if they did, for she was sure they knew no one,
proceeded. “I wish to invite her to join me,” said Mrs. Fisher.

Complete silence.

Then Scrap said, turning to Mrs. Wilkins, “That settles Mellersh,
then.”

“It settles the question of Mr. Wilkins,” said Mrs. Fisher, “although I
am unable to understand that there should ever have been a question, in
the only way that is right.”

“I’m afraid you’re in for it, then,” said Lady Caroline, again to Mrs.
Wilkins. “Unless,” she added, “he can’t come.”

But Mrs. Wilkins, her brow perturbed—for suppose after all she were not
yet quite stable in heaven?—could only say, a little uneasily, “I _see_
him here.”




Chapter 13


The uneventful days—only outwardly uneventful—slipped by in floods of
sunshine, and the servants, watching the four ladies, came to the
conclusion there was very little life in them.

To the servants San Salvatore seemed asleep. No one came to tea, nor
did the ladies go anywhere to tea. Other tenants in other springs had
been far more active. There had been stir and enterprise; the boat had
been used; excursions had been made; Beppo’s fly was ordered; people
from Mezzago came over and spent the day; the house rang with voices;
even sometimes champagne had been drunk. Life was varied, life was
interesting. But this? What was this? The servants were not even
scolded. They were left completely to themselves. They yawned.

Perplexing, too, was the entire absence of gentlemen. How could
gentlemen keep away from so much beauty? For, added up, and even after
the subtraction of the old one, the three younger ladies produced a
formidable total of that which gentlemen usually sought.

Also the evident desire of each lady to spend long hours separated from
the other ladies puzzled the servants. The result was a deathly
stillness in the house, except at meal-times. It might have been as
empty as it had been all the winter, for any sounds of life there were.
The old lady sat in her room, alone; the dark-eyed lady wandered off
alone, loitering, so Domenico told them, who sometimes came across her
in the course of his duties, incomprehensibly among the rocks; the very
beautiful fair lady lay in her low chair in the top garden, alone; the
less, but still beautiful fair lady went up the hills and stayed up
them for hours, alone; and every day the sun blazed slowly round the
house, and disappeared at evening into the sea, and nothing at all had
happened.

The servants yawned.

Yet the four visitors, while their bodies sat—that was Mrs. Fisher’s—or
lay—that was Lady Caroline’s—or loitered—that was Mrs. Arbuthnot’s—or
went in solitude up into the hills—that was Mrs. Wilkins’s—were
anything but torpid really. Their minds were unusually busy. Even at
night their minds were busy, and the dreams they had were clear, thin,
quick things, entirely different from the heavy dreams of home. There
was that in the atmosphere of San Salvatore which produced
active-mindedness in all except the natives. They, as before, whatever
the beauty around them, whatever the prodigal seasons did, remained
immune from thoughts other than those they were accustomed to. All
their lives they had seen, year by year, the amazing recurrent
spectacle of April in the gardens, and custom had made it invisible to
them. They were as blind to it, as unconscious of it, as Domenico’s dog
asleep in the sun.

The visitors could not be blind to it—it was too arresting after London
in a particularly wet and gloomy March. Suddenly to be transported to
that place where the air was so still that it held its breath, where
the light was so golden that the most ordinary things were
transfigured—to be transported into that delicate warmth, that
caressing fragrance, and to have the old grey castle as the setting,
and, in the distance, the serene clear hills of Perugini’s backgrounds,
was an astonishing contrast. Even Lady Caroline, used all her life to
beauty, who had been everywhere and seen everything, felt the surprise
of it. It was, that year, a particularly wonderful spring, and of all
the months at San Salvatore April, if the weather was fine, was best.
May scorched and withered; March was restless, and could be hard and
cold in its brightness; but April came along softly like a blessing,
and if it were a fine April it was so beautiful that it was impossible
not to feel different, not to feel stirred and touched.

Mrs. Wilkins, we have seen, responded to it instantly. She, so to
speak, at once flung off all her garments and dived straight into
glory, unhesitatingly, with a cry of rapture.

Mrs. Arbuthnot was stirred and touched, but differently. She had odd
sensations—presently to be described.

Mrs. Fisher, being old, was of a closer, more impermeable texture, and
offered more resistance; but she too had odd sensations, also in their
place to be described.

Lady Caroline, already amply acquainted with beautiful houses and
climates, to whom they could not come quite with the same surprise, yet
was very nearly as quick to react as Mrs. Wilkins. The place had an
almost instantaneous influence on her as well, and of one part of this
influence she was aware: it had made her, beginning on the very first
evening, want to think, and acted on her curiously like a conscience.
What this conscience seemed to press upon her notice with an insistence
that startled her—Lady Caroline hesitated to accept the word, but it
would keep on coming into her head—was that she was tawdry.

Tawdry. She. Fancy.

She must think that out.

The morning after the first dinner together, she woke up in a condition
of regret that she should have been so talkative to Mrs. Wilkins the
night before. What had made her be, she wondered. Now, of course, Mrs.
Wilkins would want to grab, she would want to be inseparable; and the
thought of a grabbing and an inseparableness that should last four
weeks made Scrap’s spirit swoon within her. No doubt the encouraged
Mrs. Wilkins would be lurking in the top garden waiting to waylay her
when she went out, and would hail her with morning cheerfulness. How
much she hated being hailed with morning cheerfulness—or indeed, hailed
at all. She oughtn’t to have encouraged Mrs. Wilkins the night before.
Fatal to encourage. It was bad enough not to encourage, for just
sitting there and saying nothing seemed usually to involve her, but
actively to encourage was suicidal. What on earth had made her? Now she
would have to waste all the precious time, the precious, lovely time
for thinking in, for getting square with herself, in shaking Mrs.
Wilkins off.

With great caution and on the tips of her toes, balancing herself
carefully lest the pebbles should scrunch, she stole out when she was
dressed to her corner; but the garden was empty. No shaking off was
necessary. Neither Mrs. Wilkins nor anybody else was to be seen. She
had it entirely to herself. Except for Domenico, who presently came and
hovered, watering his plants, again especially all the plants that were
nearest her, no one came out at all; and when, after a long while of
following up thoughts which seemed to escape her just as she had got
them, and dropping off exhausted to sleep in the intervals of this
chase, she felt hungry and looked at her watch and saw that it was past
three, she realised that nobody had even bothered to call her in to
lunch. So that, Scrap could not but remark, if any one was shaken off
it was she herself.

Well, but how delightful, and how very new. Now she would really be
able to think, uninterruptedly. Delicious to be forgotten.

Still, she was hungry; and Mrs. Wilkins, after that excessive
friendliness the night before, might at least have told her lunch was
ready. And she had really been excessively friendly—so nice about
Mellersh’s sleeping arrangements, wanting him to have the spare-room
and all. She wasn’t usually interested in arrangements, in fact she
wasn’t ever interested in them; so that Scrap considered she might be
said almost to have gone out of her way to be agreeable to Mrs.
Wilkins. And, in return, Mrs. Wilkins didn’t even bother whether or not
she had any lunch.

Fortunately, though she was hungry, she didn’t mind missing a meal.
Life was full of meals. They took up an enormous proportion of one’s
time; and Mrs. Fisher was, she was afraid, one of those persons who at
meals linger. Twice now had she dined with Mrs. Fisher, and each time
she had been difficult at the end to dislodge, lingering on slowly
cracking innumerable nuts and slowly drinking a glass of wine that
seemed as if it would never be finished. Probably it would be a good
thing to make a habit of missing lunch, and as it was quite easy to
have tea brought out to her, and as she breakfasted in her room, only
once a day would she have to sit at the dining-room table and endure
the nuts.

Scrap burrowed her head comfortably in the cushions, and with her feet
crossed on the low parapet gave herself up to more thought. She said to
herself, as she had said at intervals throughout the morning: Now I’m
going to think. But, never having thought out anything in her life, it
was difficult. Extraordinary how one’s attention wouldn’t stay fixed;
extraordinary how one’s mind slipped sideways. Settling herself down to
a review of her past as a preliminary to the consideration of her
future, and hunting in it to begin with for any justification of that
distressing word tawdry, the next thing she knew was that she wasn’t
thinking about this at all, but had somehow switched on to Mr. Wilkins.

Well, Mr. Wilkins was quite easy to think about, though not pleasant.
She viewed his approach with misgivings. For not only was it a profound
and unexpected bore to have a man added to the party, and a man, too,
of the kind she was sure Mr. Wilkins must be, but she was afraid—and
her fear was the result of a drearily unvarying experience—that he
might wish to hang about her.

This possibility had evidently not yet occurred to Mrs. Wilkins, and it
was not one to which she could very well draw her attention; not, that
is, without being too fatuous to live. She tried to hope that Mr.
Wilkins would be a wonderful exception to the dreadful rule. If only he
were, she would be so much obliged to him that she believed she might
really quite like him.

But—she had misgivings. Suppose he hung about her so that she was
driven from her lovely top garden; suppose the light in Mrs. Wilkins’s
funny, flickering face was blown out. Scrap felt she would particularly
dislike this to happen to Mrs. Wilkins’s face, yet she had never in her
life met any wives, not any at all, who had been able to understand
that she didn’t in the least want their husbands. Often she had met
wives who didn’t want their husbands either, but that made them none
the less indignant if they thought somebody else did, and none the less
sure, when they saw them hanging round Scrap, that she was trying to
get them. Trying to get them! The bare thought, the bare recollection
of these situations, filled her with a boredom so extreme that it
instantly sent her to sleep again.

When she woke up she went on with Mr. Wilkins.

Now if, thought Scrap, Mr. Wilkins were not an exception and behaved in
the usual way, would Mrs. Wilkins understand, or would it just simply
spoil her holiday? She seemed quick, but would she be quick about just
this? She seemed to understand and see inside one, but would she
understand and see inside one when it came to Mr. Wilkins?

The experienced Scrap was full of doubts. She shifted her feet on the
parapet; she jerked a cushion straight. Perhaps she had better try and
explain to Mrs. Wilkins, during the days still remaining before the
arrival—explain in a general way, rather vague and talking at large—her
attitude towards such things. She might also expound to her her
peculiar dislike of people’s husbands, and her profound craving to be,
at least for this one month, let alone.

But Scrap had her doubts about this too. Such talk meant a certain
familiarity, meant embarking on a friendship with Mrs. Wilkins; and if,
after having embarked on it and faced the peril it contained of too
much Mrs. Wilkins, Mr. Wilkins should turn out to be artful—and people
did get very artful when they were set on anything—and manage after all
to slip through into the top garden, Mrs. Wilkins might easily believe
she had been taken in, and that she, Scrap, was deceitful. Deceitful!
And about Mr. Wilkins. Wives were really pathetic.

At half-past four she heard sounds of saucers on the other side of the
daphne bushes. Was tea being sent out to her?

No; the sounds came no closer, they stopped near the house. Tea was to
be in the garden, in her garden. Scrap considered she might at least
have been asked if she minded being disturbed. They all knew she sat
there.

Perhaps some one would bring hers to her in her corner.

No; nobody brought anything.

Well, she was too hungry not to go and have it with the others to-day,
but she would give Francesca strict orders for the future.

She got up, and walked with that slow grace which was another of her
outrageous number of attractions towards the sounds of tea. She was
conscious not only of being very hungry but of wanting to talk to Mrs.
Wilkins again. Mrs. Wilkins had not grabbed, she had left her quite
free all day in spite of the _rapprochement_ the night before. Of
course she was an original, and put on a silk jumper for dinner, but
she hadn’t grabbed. This was a great thing. Scrap went towards the
tea-table quite looking forward to Mrs. Wilkins; and when she came in
sight of it she saw only Mrs. Fisher and Mrs. Arbuthnot.

Mrs. Fisher was pouring out the tea, and Mrs. Arbuthnot was offering
Mrs. Fisher macaroons. Every time Mrs. Fisher offered Mrs. Arbuthnot
anything—her cup, or milk, or sugar—Mrs. Arbuthnot offered her
macaroons—pressed them on her with an odd assiduousness, almost with
obstinacy. Was it a game? Scrap wondered, sitting down and seizing a
macaroon.

“Where is Mrs. Wilkins?” asked Scrap.

They did not know. At least, Mrs. Arbuthnot, on Scrap’s inquiry, did
not know; Mrs. Fisher’s face, at the name, became elaborately
uninterested.

It appeared that Mrs. Wilkins had not been seen since breakfast. Mrs.
Arbuthnot thought she had probably gone for a picnic. Scrap missed her.
She ate the enormous macaroons, the best and biggest she had ever come
across, in silence. Tea without Mrs. Wilkins was dull; and Mrs.
Arbuthnot had that fatal flavour of motherliness about her, of wanting
to pet one, to make one very comfortable, coaxing one to eat—coaxing
her, who was already so frankly, so even excessively, eating—that
seemed to have dogged Scrap’s steps through life. Couldn’t people leave
one alone? She was perfectly able to eat what she wanted unincited. She
tried to quench Mrs. Arbuthnot’s zeal by being short with her. Useless.
The shortness was not apparent. It remained, as all Scrap’s evil
feelings remained, covered up by the impenetrable veil of her
loveliness.

Mrs. Fisher sat monumentally, and took no notice of either of them. She
had had a curious day, and was a little worried. She had been quite
alone, for none of the three had come to lunch, and none of them had
taken the trouble to let her know they were not coming; and Mrs.
Arbuthnot, drifting casually into tea, had behaved oddly till Lady
Caroline joined them and distracted her attention.

Mrs. Fisher was prepared not to dislike Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose parted
hair and mild expression seemed very decent and womanly, but she
certainly had habits that were difficult to like. Her habit of
instantly echoing any offer made her of food or drink, of throwing the
offer back on one, as it were, was not somehow what one expected of
her. “Will you have some more tea?” was surely a question to which the
answer was simply yes or no; but Mrs. Arbuthnot persisted in the trick
she had exhibited the day before at breakfast, of adding to her yes
or no the words, “Will _you?_” She had done it again that morning at
breakfast and here she was doing it at tea—the two meals at which Mrs.
Fisher presided and poured out. Why did she do it? Mrs. Fisher failed
to understand.

But this was not what was worrying her; this was merely by the way.
What was worrying her was that she had been quite unable that day to
settle to anything, and had done nothing but wander restlessly from her
sitting-room to her battlements and back again. It had been a wasted
day, and how much she disliked waste. She had tried to read, and she
had tried to write to Kate Lumley; but no—a few words read, a few lines
written, and up she got again and went out on to the battlements and
stared at the sea.

It did not matter that the letter to Kate Lumley should not be written.
There was time enough for that. Let the others suppose her coming was
definitely fixed. All the better. So would Mr. Wilkins be kept out of
the spare-room and put where he belonged. Kate would keep. She could be
held in reserve. Kate in reserve was just as potent as Kate in
actuality, and there were points about Kate in reserve which might be
missing from Kate in actuality. For instance, if Mrs. Fisher were going
to be restless, she would rather Kate were not there to see. There was
a want of dignity about restlessness, about trotting backwards and
forwards. But it did matter that she could not read a sentence of any
of her great dead friends’ writings; no, not even of Browning’s, who
had been so much in Italy, nor of Ruskin’s, whose _Stones of Venice_
she had brought with her to re-read so nearly on the very spot; nor
even a sentence of a really interesting book like the one she had found
in her sitting-room about the home life of the German Emperor, poor
man—written in the nineties, when he had not yet begun to be more
sinned against than sinning, which was, she was firmly convinced, what
was the matter with him now, and full of exciting things about his
birth and his right arm and _accoucheurs_—without having to put it down
and go and stare at the sea.

Reading was very important; the proper exercise and development of
one’s mind was a paramount duty. How could one read if one were
constantly trotting in and out? Curious, this restlessness. Was she
going to be ill? No, she felt well; indeed, unusually well, and she
went in and out quite quickly—trotted, in fact—and without her stick.
Very odd that she shouldn’t be able to sit still, she thought, frowning
across the tops of some purple hyacinths at the Gulf of Spezia
glittering beyond a headland; very odd that she, who walked so slowly,
with such dependence on her stick, should suddenly trot.

It would be interesting to talk to some one about it, she felt. Not to
Kate—to a stranger. Kate would only look at her and suggest a cup of
tea. Kate always suggested cups of tea. Besides, Kate had a flat face.
That Mrs. Wilkins, now—annoying as she was, loose-tongued as she was,
impertinent, objectionable, would probably understand, and perhaps know
what was making her be like this. But she could say nothing to Mrs.
Wilkins. She was the last person to whom one would admit sensations.
Dignity alone forbade it. Confide in Mrs. Wilkins? Never.

And Mrs. Arbuthnot, while she wistfully mothered the obstructive Scrap
at tea, felt too that she had had a curious day. Like Mrs. Fisher’s, it
had been active, but, unlike Mrs. Fisher’s, only active in mind. Her
body had been quite still; her mind had not been still at all, it had
been excessively active. For years she had taken care to have no time
to think. Her scheduled life in the parish had prevented memories and
desires from intruding on her. That day they had crowded. She went back
to tea feeling dejected, and that she should feel dejected in such a
place with everything about her to make her rejoice, only dejected her
the more. But how could she rejoice alone? How could anybody rejoice
and enjoy and appreciate, really appreciate, alone? Except Lotty. Lotty
seemed able to. She had gone off down the hill directly after
breakfast, alone yet obviously rejoicing, for she had not suggested
that Rose should go too, and she was singing as she went.

Rose had spent the day by herself, sitting with her hands clasping her
knees, staring straight in front of her. What she was staring at were
the grey swords of the agaves, and, on their tall stalks, the pale
irises that grew in the remote place she had found, while beyond them,
between the grey leaves and the blue flowers, she saw the sea. The
place she had found was a hidden corner where the sun-baked stones were
padded with thyme, and nobody was likely to come. It was out of sight
and sound of the house; it was off any path; it was near the end of the
promontory. She sat so quiet that presently lizards darted over her
feet, and some tiny birds like finches, frightened away at first, came
back again and flitted among the bushes round her just as if she hadn’t
been there. How beautiful it was. And what was the good of it with no
one there, no one who loved being with one, who belonged to one, to
whom one could say, “Look.” And wouldn’t one say, “Look—_dearest?_”
Yes, one would say _dearest_ and the sweet word, just to say it to
somebody who loved one, would make one happy.

She sat quite still, staring straight in front of her. Strange that in
this place she did not want to pray. She who had prayed so constantly
at home didn’t seem able to do it here at all. The first morning she
had merely thrown up a brief thank you to heaven on getting out of bed,
and had gone straight to the window to see what everything looked
like—thrown up the thank you as carelessly as a ball, and thought no
more about it. That morning, remembering this and ashamed, she had
knelt down with determination; but perhaps determination was bad for
prayers, for she had been unable to think of a thing to say. And as for
her bedtime prayers, on neither of the nights had she said a single
one. She had forgotten them. She had been so much absorbed in other
thoughts that she had forgotten them; and, once in bed, she was asleep
and whirling along among bright, thin swift dreams before she had so
much time as to stretch herself out.

What had come over her? Why had she let go the anchor of prayer? And
she had difficulty, too, in remembering her poor, in remembering even
that there were such things as poor. Holidays, of course, were good,
and were recognised by everybody as good, but ought they so completely
to blot out, to make such havoc of, the realities? Perhaps it was
healthy to forget her poor; with all the greater gusto would she go
back to them. But it couldn’t be healthy to forget her prayers, and
still less could it be healthy not to mind.

Rose did not mind. She knew she did not mind. And, even worse, she knew
she did not mind not minding. In this place she was indifferent to both
the things that had filled her life and made it seem as if it were
happy for years. Well, if only she could rejoice in her wonderful new
surroundings, have that much at least to set against the indifference,
the letting go—but she could not. She had no work; she did not pray;
she was left empty.

Lotty had spoilt her day that day, as she had spoilt her day the day
before—Lotty, with her invitation to her husband, with her suggestion
that she too should invite hers. Having flung Frederick into her mind
again the day before, Lotty had left her; for the whole afternoon she
had left her alone with her thoughts. Since then they had been all of
Frederick. Where at Hampstead he came to her only in her dreams, here
he left her dreams free and was with her during the day instead. And
again that morning, as she was struggling not to think of him, Lotty
had asked her, just before disappearing singing down the path, if she
had written yet and invited him, and again he was flung into her mind
and she wasn’t able to get him out.

How could she invite him? It had gone on so long, their estrangement,
such years; she would hardly know what words to use; and besides, he
would not come. Why should he come? He didn’t care about being with
her. What could they talk about? Between them was the barrier of his
work and her religion. She could not—how could she, believing as she
did in purity, in responsibility for the effect of one’s actions on
others—bear his work, bear living by it; and he, she knew, had at first
resented and then been merely bored by her religion. He had let her
slip away; he had given her up; he no longer minded; he accepted her
religion indifferently, as a settled fact. Both it and she—Rose’s mind,
becoming more luminous in the clear light of April at San Salvatore,
suddenly saw the truth—bored him.

Naturally when she saw this, when that morning it flashed upon her for
the first time, she did not like it; she liked it so little that for a
space the whole beauty of Italy was blotted out. What was to be done
about it? She could not give up believing in good and not liking evil,
and it must be evil to live entirely on the proceeds of adulteries,
however dead and distinguished they were. Besides, if she did, if she
sacrificed her whole past, her bringing up, her work for the last ten
years, would she bore him less? Rose felt right down at her very roots
that if you have once thoroughly bored somebody it is next to
impossible to unbore him. Once a bore always a bore—certainly, she
thought, to the person originally bored.

Then, thought she, looking out to sea through eyes grown misty, better
cling to her religion. It was better—she hardly noticed the
reprehensibleness of her thought—than nothing. But oh, she wanted to
cling to something tangible, to love something living, something that
one could hold against one’s heart, that one could see and touch and do
things for. If her poor baby hadn’t died . . . babies didn’t get bored
with one, it took them a long while to grow up and find one out. And
perhaps one’s baby never did find one out; perhaps one would always be
to it, however old and bearded it grew, somebody special, somebody
different from every one else, and if for no other reason, precious in
that one could never be repeated.

Sitting with dim eyes looking out to sea she felt an extraordinary
yearning to hold something of her very own tight to her bosom. Rose was
slender, and as reserved in figure as in character, yet she felt a
queer sensation of—how could she describe it?—bosom. There was
something about San Salvatore that made her feel all bosom. She wanted
to gather to her bosom, to comfort and protect, soothing the dear head
that should lie on it with softest strokings and murmurs of love.
Frederick, Frederick’s child—come to her, pillowed on her, because they
were unhappy, because they had been hurt. . . They would need her then,
if they had been hurt; they would let themselves be loved then, if they
were unhappy.

Well, the child was gone, would never come now; but perhaps
Frederick—some day—when he was old and tired . . .

Such were Mrs. Arbuthnot’s reflections and emotions that first day at
San Salvatore by herself. She went back to tea dejected as she had not
been for years. San Salvatore had taken her carefully built-up
semblance of happiness away from her, and given her nothing in
exchange. Yes—it had given her yearnings in exchange, this ache and
longing, this queer feeling of bosom; but that was worse than nothing.
And she who had learned balance, who never at home was irritated but
always able to be kind, could not, even in her dejection, that
afternoon endure Mrs. Fisher’s assumption of the position as hostess at
tea.

One would have supposed that such a little thing would not have touched
her, but it did. Was her nature changing? Was she to be not only thrown
back on long-stifled yearnings after Frederick, but also turned into
somebody who wanted to fight over little things? After tea, when both
Mrs. Fisher and Lady Caroline had disappeared again—it was quite
evident that nobody wanted her—she was more dejected than ever,
overwhelmed by the discrepancy between the splendour outside her, the
warm, teeming beauty and self-sufficiency of nature, and the blank
emptiness of her heart.

Then came Lotty, back to dinner, incredibly more freckled, exuding the
sunshine she had been collecting all day, talking, laughing, being
tactless, being unwise, being without reticence; and Lady Caroline, so
quiet at tea, woke up to animation, and Mrs. Fisher was not so
noticeable, and Rose was beginning to revive a little, for Lotty’s
spirits were contagious as she described the delights of her day, a day
which might easily to any one else have had nothing in it but a very
long and very hot walk and sandwiches, when she suddenly said catching
Rose’s eye, “Letter gone?”

Rose flushed. This tactlessness . . .

“What letter?” asked Scrap, interested. Both her elbows were on the
table and her chin was supported in her hands, for the nut-stage had
been reached, and there was nothing for it but to wait in as
comfortable as position as possible till Mrs. Fisher had finished
cracking.

“Asking her husband here,” said Lotty.

Mrs. Fisher looked up. Another husband? Was there to be no end to them?
Nor was this one, then, a widow either; but her husband was no doubt a
decent, respectable man, following a decent, respectable calling. She
had little hope of Mr. Wilkins; so little, that she had refrained from
inquiring what he did.

“Has it?” persisted Lotty, as Rose said nothing.

“No,” said Rose.

“Oh, well—to-morrow then,” said Lotty.

Rose wanted to say No again to this. Lotty would have in her place, and
would, besides, have expounded all her reasons. But she could not turn
herself inside out like that and invite any and everybody to come and
look. How was it that Lotty, who saw so many things, didn’t see stuck
on her heart, and seeing keep quiet about it, the sore place that was
Frederick?

“Who is your husband?” asked Mrs. Fisher, carefully adjusting another
nut between the crackers.

“Who should he be,” said Rose quickly, roused at once by Mrs. Fisher to
irritation, “except _Mr._ Arbuthnot?”

“I mean, of course, what is Mr. Arbuthnot?”

And Rose, gone painfully red at this, said after a tiny pause, “My
husband.”

Naturally, Mrs. Fisher was incensed. She couldn’t have believed it of
this one, with her decent hair and gentle voice, that she too should be
impertinent.




Chapter 14


That first week the wistaria began to fade, and the flowers of the
Judas-tree and peach-trees fell off and carpeted the ground with
rose-colour. Then all the freesias disappeared, and the irises grew
scarce. And then, while these were clearing themselves away, the double
banksia roses came out, and the big summer roses suddenly flaunted
gorgeously on the walls and trellises. Fortune’s Yellow was one of
them; a very beautiful rose. Presently the tamarisk and the daphnes
were at their best, and the lilies at their tallest. By the end of the
week the fig-trees were giving shade, the plum-blossom was out among
the olives, the modest weigelias appeared in their fresh pink clothes,
and on the rocks sprawled masses of thick-leaved, star-shaped flowers,
some vivid purple and some a clear, pale lemon.

By the end of the week, too, Mr. Wilkins arrived; even as his wife had
foreseen he would, so he did. And there were signs almost of eagerness
about his acceptance of her suggestion, for he had not waited to write
a letter in answer to hers, but had telegraphed.

That, surely, was eager. It showed, Scrap thought, a definite wish for
reunion; and watching his wife’s happy face, and aware of her desire
that Mellersh should enjoy his holiday, she told herself that he would
be a very unusual fool should he waste his time bothering about anybody
else. “If he isn’t nice to her,” Scrap thought, “he shall be taken to
the battlements and tipped over.” For, by the end of the week, she and
Mrs. Wilkins had become Caroline and Lotty to each other, and were
friends.

Mrs. Wilkins had always been friends, but Scrap had struggled not to
be. She had tried hard to be cautious, but how difficult was caution
with Mrs. Wilkins! Free herself from every vestige of it, she was so
entirely unreserved, so completely expansive, that soon Scrap, almost
before she knew what she was doing, was being unreserved too. And
nobody could be more unreserved than Scrap, once she let herself go.

The only difficulty about Lotty was that she was nearly always
somewhere else. You couldn’t catch her; you couldn’t pin her down to
come and talk. Scrap’s fears that she would grab seemed grotesque in
retrospect. Why, there was no grab in her. At dinner and after dinner
were the only times one really saw her. All day long she was invisible,
and would come back in the late afternoon looking a perfect sight, her
hair full of bits of moss, and her freckles worse than ever. Perhaps
she was making the most of her time before Mellersh arrived to do all
the things she wanted to do, and meant to devote herself afterwards to
going about with him, tidy and in her best clothes.

Scrap watched her, interested in spite of herself, because it seemed so
extraordinary to be as happy as all that on so little. San Salvatore
was beautiful, and the weather was divine; but scenery and weather had
never been enough for Scrap, and how could they be enough for somebody
who would have to leave them quite soon and go back to life in
Hampstead? Also, there was the imminence of Mellersh, of that Mellersh
from whom Lotty had so lately run. It was all very well to feel one
ought to share, and to make a _beau geste_ and do it, but the _beaux
gestes_ Scrap had known hadn’t made anybody happy. Nobody really liked
being the object of one, and it always meant an effort on the part of
the maker. Still, she had to admit there was no effort about Lotty; it
was quite plain that everything she did and said was effortless, and
that she was just simply, completely happy.

And so Mrs. Wilkins was; for her doubts as to whether she had had time
to become steady enough in serenity to go on being serene in Mellersh’s
company when she had it uninterruptedly right round the clock, had gone
by the middle of the week, and she felt that nothing now could shake
her. She was ready for anything. She was firmly grafted, rooted, built
into heaven. Whatever Mellersh said or did, she would not budge an inch
out of heaven, would not rouse herself a single instant to come outside
it and be cross. On the contrary, she was going to pull him up into it
beside her, and they would sit comfortably together, suffused in light,
and laugh at how much afraid of him she used to be in Hampstead, and at
how deceitful her afraidness had made her. But he wouldn’t need much
pulling. He would come in quite naturally after a day or two,
irresistibly wafted on the scented breezes of that divine air; and
there he would sit arrayed in stars, thought Mrs. Wilkins, in whose
mind, among much other _débris_, floated occasional bright shreds of
poetry. She laughed to herself a little at the picture of Mellersh,
that top-hatted, black-coated, respectable family solicitor, arrayed in
stars, but she laughed affectionately, almost with a maternal pride in
how splendid he would look in such fine clothes. “Poor lamb,” she
murmured to herself affectionately. And added, “What he wants is a
thorough airing.”

This was during the first half of the week. By the beginning of the
last half, at the end of which Mr. Wilkins arrived, she left off even
assuring herself that she was unshakeable, that she was permeated
beyond altering by the atmosphere, she no longer thought of it or
noticed it; she took it for granted. If one may say so, and she
certainly said so, not only to herself but also to Lady Caroline, she
had found her celestial legs.

Contrary to Mrs. Fisher’s idea of the seemly—but of course contrary;
what else would one expect of Mrs. Wilkins?—she did not go to meet her
husband at Mezzago, but merely walked down to the point where Beppo’s
fly would leave him and his luggage in the street of Castagneto. Mrs.
Fisher disliked the arrival of Mr. Wilkins, and was sure that anybody
who could have married Mrs. Wilkins must be at least of an injudicious
disposition, but a husband, whatever his disposition, should be
properly met. Mr. Fisher had always been properly met. Never once in
his married life had he gone unmet at a station, nor had he ever not
been seen off. These observances, these courtesies, strengthened the
bonds of marriage, and made the husband feel he could rely on his
wife’s being always there. Always being there was the essential secret
for a wife. What would have become of Mr. Fisher if she had neglected
to act on this principle she preferred not to think. Enough things
became of him as it was; for whatever one’s care in stopping up,
married life yet seemed to contain chinks.

But Mrs. Wilkins took no pains. She just walked down the hill
singing—Mrs. Fisher could hear her—and picked up her husband in the
street as casually as if he were a pin. The three others, still in bed,
for it was not nearly time to get up, heard her as she passed beneath
their windows down the zigzag path to meet Mr. Wilkins, who was coming
by the morning train, and Scrap smiled, and Rose sighed, and Mrs.
Fisher rang her bell and desired Francesca to bring her her breakfast
in her room. All three had breakfast that day in their rooms, moved by
a common instinct to take cover.

Scrap always breakfasted in bed, but she had the same instinct for
cover, and during breakfast she made plans for spending the whole day
where she was. Perhaps, though, it wouldn’t be as necessary that day as
the next. That day, Scrap calculated, Mellersh would be provided for.
He would want to have a bath, and having a bath at San Salvatore was an
elaborate business, a real adventure if one had a hot one in the
bathroom, and it took a lot of time. It involved the attendance of the
entire staff—Domenico and the boy Giuseppe coaxing the patent stove to
burn, restraining it when it burnt too fiercely, using the bellows to
it when it threatened to go out, relighting it when it did go out;
Francesca anxiously hovering over the tap regulating its trickle,
because if it were turned on too full the water instantly ran cold, and
if not full enough the stove blew up inside and mysteriously flooded
the house; and Costanza and Angela running up and down bringing pails
of hot water from the kitchen to eke out what the tap did.

This bath had been put in lately, and was at once the pride and the
terror of the servants. It was very patent. Nobody quite understood it.
There were long printed instructions as to its right treatment hanging
on the wall, in which the word _pericoloso_ recurred. When Mrs. Fisher,
proceeding on her arrival to the bathroom, saw this word, she went back
to her room again and ordered a sponge-bath instead; and when the
others found what using the bathroom meant, and how reluctant the
servants were to leave them alone with the stove, and how Francesca
positively refused to, and stayed with her back turned watching the
tap, and how the remaining servants waited anxiously outside the door
till the bather came safely out again, they too had sponge-baths
brought into their rooms instead.

Mr. Wilkins, however, was a man, and would be sure to want a big bath.
Having it, Scrap calculated, would keep him busy for a long while. Then
he would unpack, and then, after his night in the train, he would
probably sleep till the evening. So would he be provided for the whole
of that day, and not be let loose on them till dinner.

Therefore Scrap came to the conclusion she would be quite safe in the
garden that day, and got up as usual after breakfast, and dawdled as
usual through her dressing, listening with a slightly cocked ear to
the sounds of Mr. Wilkins’s arrival, of his luggage being carried into
Lotty’s room on the other side of the landing, of his educated voice
as he inquired of Lotty, first, “Do I give this fellow anything?” and
immediately afterwards, “Can I have a hot bath?”—of Lotty’s voice
cheerfully assuring him that he needn’t give the fellow anything
because he was the gardener, and that yes, he could have a hot bath;
and soon after this the landing was filled with the familiar noises of
wood being brought, of water being brought, of feet running, of tongues
vociferating—in fact, with the preparation of the bath.

Scrap finished dressing, and then loitered at her window, waiting till
she should hear Mr. Wilkins go into the bathroom. When he was safely
there she would slip out and settle herself in her garden and resume
her inquiries into the probable meaning of her life. She was getting on
with her inquiries. She dozed much less frequently, and was beginning
to be inclined to agree that tawdry was the word to apply to her past.
Also she was afraid that her future looked black.

There—she could hear Mr. Wilkins’s educated voice again. Lotty’s door
had opened, and he was coming out of it asking his way to the bathroom.

“It’s where you see the crowd,” Lotty’s voice answered—still a cheerful
voice, Scrap was glad to notice.

His steps went along the landing, and Lotty’s steps seemed to go
downstairs, and then there seemed to be a brief altercation at the
bathroom door—hardly so much an altercation as a chorus of
vociferations on one side and a wordless determination, Scrap judged, to
have a bath by oneself on the other.

Mr. Wilkins knew no Italian, and the expression _pericoloso_ left
him precisely as it found him—or would have if he had seen it, but
naturally he took no notice of the printed matter on the wall. He
firmly closed the door on the servants, resisting Domenico, who tried
to the last to press through, and locked himself in as a man should for
his bath, judicially considering, as he made his simple preparations
for getting in, the singular standard of behaviour of these foreigners
who, both male and female, apparently wished to stay with him while
he bathed. In Finland, he had heard, the female natives not only
were present on such occasions but actually washed the bath-taking
traveller. He had not heard, however, that this was true too of Italy,
which somehow seemed much nearer civilisation—perhaps because one went
there, and did not go to Finland.

Impartially examining this reflection, and carefully balancing the
claims to civilisation of Italy and Finland, Mr. Wilkins got into the
bath and turned off the tap. Naturally he turned off the tap. It was
what one did. But on the instructions, printed in red letters, was a
paragraph saying that the tap should not be turned off as long as there
was still fire in the stove. It should be left on—not much on, but
on—until the fire was quite out; otherwise, and here again was the word
_pericoloso_, the stove would blow up.

Mr. Wilkins got into the bath, turned off the tap, and the stove blew
up, exactly as the printed instructions said it would. It blew up,
fortunately, only in its inside, but it blew up with a terrific noise,
and Mr. Wilkins leapt out of the bath and rushed to the door, and only
the instinct born of years of training made him snatch up a towel as he
rushed.

Scrap, half-way across the landing on her way out of doors, heard the
explosion.

“Good heavens,” she thought, remembering the instructions, “there goes
Mr. Wilkins!”

And she ran toward the head of the stairs to call the servants, and as
she ran, out ran Mr. Wilkins clutching his towel, and they ran into
each other.

“That damned bath!” cried Mr. Wilkins, perhaps for the only time in his
life forgetting himself; but he was upset.

Here was an introduction. Mr Wilkins, imperfectly concealed in his
towel, his shoulders exposed at one end and his legs at the other, and
Lady Caroline Dester, to meet whom he had swallowed all his anger with
his wife and come out to Italy.

For Lotty in her letter had told him who was at San Salvatore besides
herself and Mrs. Arbuthnot, and Mr. Wilkins at once had perceived that
this was an opportunity which might never recur. Lotty had merely said,
“There are two other women here, Mrs. Fisher and Lady Caroline Dester,”
but that was enough. He knew all about the Droitwiches, their wealth,
their connections, their place in history, and the power they had,
should they choose to exert it, of making yet another solicitor happy
by adding him to those they already employed. Some people employed one
solicitor for one branch of their affairs, and another for another. The
affairs of the Droitwiches must have many branches. He had also
heard—for it was, he considered, part of his business to hear, and
having heard to remember—of the beauty of their only daughter. Even if
the Droitwiches themselves did not need his services, their daughter
might. Beauty led one into strange situations; advice could never come
amiss. And should none of them, neither parents nor daughter nor any of
their brilliant sons, need him in his professional capacity, it yet was
obviously a most valuable acquaintance to make. It opened up vistas. It
swelled with possibilities. He might go on living in Hampstead for
years, and not again come across such another chance.

Directly his wife’s letter reached him he telegraphed and packed. This
was business. He was not a man to lose time when it came to business;
nor was he a man to jeopardise a chance by neglecting to be amiable. He
met his wife perfectly amiably, aware that amiability under such
circumstances was wisdom. Besides, he actually felt amiable—very. For
once, Lotty was really helping him. He kissed her affectionately on
getting out of Beppo’s fly, and was afraid she must have got up
extremely early; he made no complaints of the steepness of the walk up;
he told her pleasantly of his journey, and when called upon, obediently
admired the views. It was all neatly mapped out in his mind, what he
was going to do that first day—have a shave, have a bath, put on clean
clothes, sleep a while, and then would come lunch and the introduction
to Lady Caroline.

In the train he had selected the words of his greeting, going over them
with care—some slight expression of his gratification in meeting one of
whom he, in common with the whole world, had heard—but of course put
delicately, very delicately; some slight reference to her distinguished
parents and the part her family had played in the history of
England—made, of course, with proper tact; a sentence or two about her
eldest brother Lord Winchcombe, who had won his V.C. in the late war
under circumstances which could only cause—he might or might not add
this—every Englishman’s heart to beat higher than ever with pride, and
the first steps towards what might well be the turning-point in his
career would have been taken.

And here he was . . . no, it was too terrible, what could be more
terrible? Only a towel on, water running off his legs, and that
exclamation. He knew at once the lady was Lady Caroline—the minute the
exclamation was out he knew it. Rarely did Mr. Wilkins use that word,
and never, never in the presence of a lady or a client. While as for
the towel—why had he come? Why had he not stayed in Hampstead? It would
be impossible to live this down.

But Mr. Wilkins was reckoning without Scrap. She, indeed, screwed up
her face at the first flash of him on her astonished sight in an
enormous effort not to laugh, and having choked the laughter down and
got her face serious again, she said as composedly as if he had had all
his clothes on, “How do you do.”

What perfect tact. Mr. Wilkins could have worshipped her. This
exquisite ignoring. Blue blood, of course, coming out.

Overwhelmed with gratitude he took her offered hand and said “How do
you do,” in his turn, and merely to repeat the ordinary words seemed
magically to restore the situation to the normal. Indeed, he was so
much relieved, and it was so natural to be shaking hands, to be
conventionally greeting, that he forgot he had only a towel on and his
professional manner came back to him. He forgot what he was looking
like, but he did not forget that this was Lady Caroline Dester, the
lady he had come all the way to Italy to see, and he did not forget
that it was in her face, her lovely and important face, that he had
flung his terrible exclamation. He must at once entreat her
forgiveness. To say such a word to a lady—to any lady, but of all
ladies to just this one . . .

“I’m afraid I used unpardonable language,” began Mr. Wilkins very
earnestly, as earnestly and ceremoniously as if he had had his clothes
on.

“I thought it most appropriate,” said Scrap, who was used to damns.

Mr. Wilkins was incredibly relieved and soothed by this answer. No
offence, then, taken. Blue blood again. Only blue blood could afford
such a liberal, such an understanding attitude.

“It is Lady Caroline Dester, is it not, to whom I am speaking?” he
asked, his voice sounding even more carefully cultivated than usual,
for he had to restrain too much pleasure, too much relief, too much of
the joy of the pardoned and the shriven from getting into it.

“Yes,” said Scrap; and for the life of her she couldn’t help smiling.
She couldn’t help it. She hadn’t meant to smile at Mr. Wilkins, not
ever; but really he looked—and then his voice on the top of the rest
of him, oblivious of the towel and his legs, and talking just like a
church.

“Allow me to introduce myself,” said Mr. Wilkins, with the ceremony of
the drawing-room. “My name is Mellersh-Wilkins.”

And he instinctively held out his hand a second time at the words.

“I thought perhaps it was,” said Scrap, a second time having hers
shaken and a second time unable not to smile.

He was about to proceed to the first of the graceful tributes he had
prepared in the train, oblivious, as he could not see himself, that he
was without his clothes, when the servants came running up the stairs
and, simultaneously, Mrs. Fisher appeared in the doorway of her
sitting-room. For all this had happened very quickly, and the servants
away in the kitchen, and Mrs. Fisher pacing her battlements, had not
had time on hearing the noise to appear before the second handshake.

The servants when they heard the dreaded noise knew at once what had
happened, and rushed straight into the bathroom to try and staunch the
flood, taking no notice of the figure on the landing in the towel, but
Mrs. Fisher did not know what the noise could be, and coming out of her
room to inquire stood rooted on the door-sill.

It was enough to root anybody. Lady Caroline shaking hands with what
evidently, if he had had clothes on, would have been Mrs. Wilkins’s
husband, and both of them conversing just as if—

Then Scrap became aware of Mrs. Fisher. She turned to her at once. “Do
let me,” she said gracefully, “introduce Mr. Mellersh-Wilkins. He has
just come. This,” she added, turning to Mr. Wilkins, “is Mrs. Fisher.”

And Mr. Wilkins, nothing if not courteous, reacted at once to the
conventional formula. First he bowed to the elderly lady in the
doorway, then he crossed over to her, his wet feet leaving footprints
as he went, and having got to her he politely held out his hand.

“It is a pleasure,” said Mr. Wilkins in his carefully modulated voice,
“to meet a friend of my wife’s.”

Scrap melted away down into the garden.




Chapter 15


The strange effect of this incident was that when they met that evening
at dinner both Mrs. Fisher and Lady Caroline had a singular feeling of
secret understanding with Mr. Wilkins. He could not be to them as other
men. He could not be to them as he would have been if they had met him
in his clothes. There was a sense of broken ice; they felt at once
intimate and indulgent; almost they felt to him as nurses do—as those
feel who have assisted either patients or young children at their
baths. They were acquainted with Mr. Wilkins’s legs.

What Mrs. Fisher said to him that morning in her first shock will never
be known, but what Mr. Wilkins said to her in reply, when reminded by
what she was saying of his condition, was so handsome in its apology,
so proper in its confusion, that she had ended by being quite sorry for
him and completely placated. After all, it was an accident, and nobody
could help accidents. And when she saw him next at dinner, dressed,
polished, spotless as to linen and sleek as to hair, she felt this
singular sensation of a secret understanding with him and, added to it,
of a kind of almost personal pride in his appearance, now that he was
dressed, which presently extended in some subtle way to an almost
personal pride in everything he said.

There was no doubt whatever in Mrs. Fisher’s mind that a man was
infinitely preferable as a companion to a woman. Mr. Wilkins’s presence
and conversation at once raised the standard of the dinner-table from
that of a bear garden—yes, a bear garden—to that of a civilised social
gathering. He talked as men talk, about interesting subjects, and,
though most courteous to Lady Caroline, showed no traces of dissolving
into simpers and idiocy whenever he addressed her. He was, indeed,
precisely as courteous to Mrs. Fisher herself; and when for the first
time at that table politics were introduced, he listened to her with
the proper seriousness on her exhibiting a desire to speak, and treated
her opinions with the attention they deserved. He appeared to think
much as she did about Lloyd George, and in regard to literature he was
equally sound. In fact there was real conversation, and he liked nuts.
How he could have married Mrs. Wilkins was a mystery.

Lotty, for her part, looked on with round eyes. She had expected
Mellersh to take at least two days before he got to this stage, but the
San Salvatore spell had worked instantly. It was not only that he was
pleasant at dinner, for she had always seen him pleasant at dinners
with other people, but he had been pleasant all day privately—so
pleasant that he had complimented her on her looks while she was
brushing out her hair, and kissed her. Kissed her! And it was neither
good-morning nor good-night.

Well, this being so, she would put off telling him the truth about her
nest-egg, and about Rose not being his hostess after all, till next
day. Pity to spoil things. She had been going to blurt it out as soon
as he had had a rest, but it did seem a pity to disturb such a very
beautiful frame of mind as that of Mellersh this first day. Let him too
get more firmly fixed in heaven. Once fixed he wouldn’t mind anything.

Her face sparkled with delight at the instantaneous effect of San
Salvatore. Even the catastrophe of the bath, of which she had been told
when she came in from the garden, had not shaken him. Of course all
that he had needed was a holiday. What a brute she had been to him when
he wanted to take her himself to Italy. But this arrangement, as it
happened, was ever so much better, though not through any merit of
hers. She talked and laughed gaily, not a shred of fear of him left in
her, and even when she said, struck by his spotlessness, that he looked
so clean that one could eat one’s dinner off him, and Scrap laughed,
Mellersh laughed too. He would have minded that at home, supposing that
at home she had had the spirit to say it.

It was a successful evening. Scrap, whenever she looked at Mr. Wilkins,
saw him in his towel, dripping water, and felt indulgent. Mrs. Fisher
was delighted with him. Rose was a dignified hostess in Mr. Wilkins’s
eyes, quiet and dignified, and he admired the way she waived her right
to preside at the head of the table—as a graceful compliment, of
course, to Mrs. Fisher’s age. Mrs. Arbuthnot was, opined Mr. Wilkins,
naturally retiring. She was the most retiring of the three ladies. He
had met her before dinner alone for a moment in the drawing-room, and
had expressed in appropriate language his sense of her kindness in
wishing him to join her party, and she had been retiring. Was she shy?
Probably. She had blushed, and murmured as if in deprecation, and then
the others had come in. At dinner she talked least. He would, of
course, become better acquainted with her during the next few days, and
it would be a pleasure, he was sure.

Meanwhile Lady Caroline was all and more than all Mr. Wilkins had
imagined, and had received his speeches, worked in skilfully between
the courses, graciously; Mrs. Fisher was the exact old lady he had been
hoping to come across all his professional life; and Lotty had not only
immensely improved, but was obviously _au mieux_—Mr. Wilkins knew what
was necessary in French—with Lady Caroline. He had been much tormented
during the day by the thought of how he had stood conversing with Lady
Caroline forgetful of his not being dressed, and had at last written
her a note most deeply apologising, and beseeching her to overlook his
amazing, his incomprehensible obliviousness, to which she had replied
in pencil on the back of the envelope, “Don’t worry.” And he had obeyed
her commands, and had put it from him. The result was he was now in
great contentment. Before going to sleep that night he pinched his
wife’s ear. She was amazed. These endearments . . .

What is more, the morning brought no relapse in Mr. Wilkins, and he
kept up to this high level throughout the day, in spite of its being
the first day of the second week, and therefore pay day.

Its being pay day precipitated Lotty’s confession, which she had, when
it came to the point, been inclined to put off a little longer. She was
not afraid, she dared anything, but Mellersh was in such an admirable
humour—why risk clouding it just yet? When, however, soon after
breakfast Costanza appeared with a pile of very dirty little bits of
paper covered with sums in pencil, and having knocked at Mrs. Fisher’s
door and been sent away, and at Lady Caroline’s door and been sent
away, and at Rose’s door and had no answer because Rose had gone out,
she waylaid Lotty, who was showing Mellersh over the house, and pointed
to the bits of paper and talked very rapidly and loud, and shrugged her
shoulders a great deal, and kept on pointing at the bits of paper,
Lotty remembered that a week had passed without anybody paying anything
to anyone, and that the moment had come to settle up.

“Does this good lady want something?” inquired Mr. Wilkins
mellifluously.

“Money,” said Lotty.

“Money?”

“It’s the housekeeping bills.”

“Well, you have nothing to do with those,” said Mr. Wilkins serenely.

“Oh yes, I have—”

And the confession was precipitated.

It was wonderful how Mellersh took it. One would have imagined that his
sole idea about the nest-egg had always been that it should be lavished
on just this. He did not, as he would have done at home, cross-examine
her; he accepted everything as it came pouring out, about her fibs and
all, and when she had finished and said, “You have every right to be
angry, I think, but I hope you won’t be and will forgive me instead,”
he merely asked, “What can be more beneficial than such a holiday?”

Whereupon she put her arm through his and held it tight and said, “Oh,
Mellersh, you really are too sweet!”—her face red with pride in him.

That he should so quickly assimilate the atmosphere, that he should at
once become nothing but kindness, showed surely what a real affinity he
had with good and beautiful things. He belonged quite naturally in this
place of heavenly calm. He was—extraordinary how she had misjudged
him—by nature a child of light. Fancy not minding the dreadful fibs she
had gone in for before leaving home; fancy passing even those over
without comment. Wonderful. Yet not wonderful, for wasn’t he in heaven?
In heaven nobody minded any of those done-with things, one didn’t even
trouble to forgive and forget, one was much too happy. She pressed his
arm tight in her gratitude and appreciation; and though he did not
withdraw his, neither did he respond to her pressure. Mr. Wilkins was
of a cool habit, and rarely had any real wish to press.

Meanwhile, Costanza, perceiving that she had lost the Wilkinses’ ear
had gone back to Mrs. Fisher, who at least understood Italian, besides
being clearly in the servants’ eyes the one of the party marked down by
age and appearance to pay the bills; and to her, while Mrs. Fisher put
the final touches to her toilette, for she was preparing, by means of
putting on a hat and veil and feather boa and gloves, to go for her
first stroll in the lower garden—positively her first since her
arrival—she explained that unless she was given money to pay the last
week’s bills the shops of Castagneto would refuse credit for the
current week’s food. Not even credit would they give, affirmed
Costanza, who had been spending a great deal and was anxious to pay all
her relations what was owed them and also to find out how her
mistresses took it, for that day’s meals. Soon it would be the hour of
_colazione_, and how could there be _colazione_ without meat, without
fish, without eggs, without—

Mrs. Fisher took the bills out of her hand and looked at the total; and
she was so much astonished by its size, so much horrified by the
extravagance to which it testified, that she sat down at her
writing-table to go into the thing thoroughly.

Costanza had a very bad half-hour. She had not supposed it was in the
English to be so mercenary. And then _la Vecchia_, as she was called in
the kitchen, knew so much Italian, and with a doggedness that filled
Costanza with shame on her behalf, for such conduct was the last one
expected from the noble English, she went through item after item,
requiring and persisting till she got them, explanations.

There were no explanations, except that Costanza had had one glorious
week of doing exactly as she chose, of splendid unbridled licence, and
that this was the result.

Costanza, having no explanations, wept. It was miserable to think she
would have to cook from now on under watchfulness, under suspicion; and
what would her relations say when they found the orders they received
were whittled down? They would say she had no influence; they would
despise her.

Costanza wept, but Mrs. Fisher was unmoved. In slow and splendid
Italian, with the roll of the cantos of the _Inferno_, she informed her
that she would pay no bills till the following week, and that meanwhile
the food was to be precisely as good as ever, and at a quarter the
cost.

Costanza threw up her hands.

Next week, proceeded Mrs. Fisher unmoved, if she found this had been so
she would pay the whole. Otherwise—she paused; for what she would do
otherwise she did not know herself. But she paused and looked
impenetrable, majestic and menacing, and Costanza was cowed.

Then Mrs. Fisher, having dismissed her with a gesture, went in search
of Lady Caroline to complain. She had been under the impression that
Lady Caroline ordered the meals and therefore was responsible for the
prices, but now it appeared that the cook had been left to do exactly
as she pleased ever since they got there, which of course was simply
disgraceful.

Scrap was not in her bedroom, but the room, on Mrs. Fisher’s opening
the door, for she suspected her of being in it and only pretending not
to hear the knock, was still flowerlike from her presence.

“Scent,” sniffed Mrs. Fisher, shutting it again; and she wished Carlyle
could have had five minutes’ straight talk with this young woman. And
yet—perhaps even he—

She went downstairs to go into the garden in search of her, and in the
hall encountered Mr. Wilkins. He had his hat on, and was lighting a
cigar.

Indulgent as Mrs. Fisher felt towards Mr. Wilkins, and peculiarly and
even mystically related after the previous morning’s encounter, she yet
could not like a cigar in the house. Out of doors she endured it, but
it was not necessary, when out of doors was such a big place, to
indulge the habit indoors. Even Mr. Fisher, who had been, she should
say, a man originally tenacious of habits, had quite soon after
marriage got out of this one.

However, Mr. Wilkins, snatching off his hat on seeing her, instantly
threw the cigar away. He threw it into the water a great jar of arum
lilies presumably contained, and Mrs. Fisher, aware of the value men
attach to their newly-lit cigars, could not but be impressed by this
immediate and magnificent _amende honorable_.

But the cigar did not reach the water. It got caught in the lilies, and
smoked on by itself among them, a strange and depraved-looking object.

“Where are you going to, my prett—” began Mr. Wilkins, advancing
towards Mrs. Fisher; but he broke off just in time.

Was it morning spirits impelling him to address Mrs. Fisher in the
terms of a nursery rhyme? He wasn’t even aware that he knew the thing.
Most strange. What could have put it, at such a moment, into his
self-possessed head? He felt great respect for Mrs. Fisher, and would
not for the world have insulted her by addressing her as a maid, pretty
or otherwise. He wished to stand well with her. She was a woman of
parts, and also, he suspected, of property. At breakfast they had been
most pleasant together, and he had been struck by her apparent intimacy
with well-known persons. Victorians, of course; but it was restful to
talk about them after the strain of his brother-in-law’s Georgian
parties on Hampstead Heath. He and she were getting on famously, he
felt. She already showed all the symptoms of presently wishing to
become a client. Not for the world would he offend her. He turned a
little cold at the narrowness of his escape.

She had not, however, noticed.

“You are going out,” he said very politely, all readiness should she
confirm his assumption to accompany her.

“I want to find Lady Caroline,” said Mrs. Fisher, going towards the
glass door leading into the top garden.

“An agreeable quest,” remarked Mr. Wilkins. “May I assist in the
search? Allow me—” he added, opening the door for her.

“She usually sits over in that corner behind the bushes,” said Mrs.
Fisher. “And I don’t know about it being an agreeable quest. She has
been letting the bills run up in the most terrible fashion, and needs a
good scolding.”

“Lady Caroline?” said Mr. Wilkins, unable to follow such an attitude.
“What has Lady Caroline, if I may inquire, to do with the bills here?”

“The housekeeping was left to her, and as we all share alike it ought
to have been a matter of honour with her—”

“But—Lady Caroline housekeeping for the party here? A party which
includes my wife? My dear lady, you render me speechless. Do you not
know she is the daughter of the Droitwiches?”

“Oh, is that who she is,” said Mrs. Fisher, scrunching heavily over the
pebbles towards the hidden corner. “Well, that accounts for it. The
muddle that man Droitwich made in his department in the war was a
national scandal. It amounted to misappropriation of the public funds.”

“But it is impossible, I assure you, to expect the daughter of the
Droitwiches—” began Mr. Wilkins earnestly.

“The Droitwiches,” interrupted Mrs. Fisher, “are neither here nor
there. Duties undertaken should be performed. I don’t intend my money
to be squandered for the sake of any Droitwiches.”

A headstrong old lady. Perhaps not so easy to deal with as he had
hoped. But how wealthy. Only the consciousness of great wealth would
make her snap her fingers in this manner at the Droitwiches. Lotty, on
being questioned, had been vague about her circumstances, and had
described her house as a mausoleum with gold-fish swimming about in it;
but now he was sure she was more than very well off. Still, he wished
he had not joined her at this moment, for he had no sort of desire to
be present at such a spectacle as the scolding of Lady Caroline Dester.

Again, however, he was reckoning without Scrap. Whatever she felt when
she looked up and beheld Mr. Wilkins discovering her corner on the very
first morning, nothing but angelicness appeared on her face. She took
her feet off the parapet on Mrs. Fisher’s sitting down on it, and
listening gravely to her opening remarks as to her not having any money
to fling about in reckless and uncontrolled household expenditure,
interrupted her flow by pulling one of the cushions from behind her
head and offering it to her.

“Sit on this,” said Scrap, holding it out. “You’ll be more
comfortable.”

Mr. Wilkins leapt to relieve her of it.

“Oh, thanks,” said Mrs. Fisher, interrupted.

It was difficult to get into the swing again. Mr. Wilkins inserted the
cushion solicitously between the slightly raised Mrs. Fisher and the
stone of the parapet, and again she had to say “Thanks.” It was
interrupted. Besides, Lady Caroline said nothing in her defence; she
only looked at her, and listened with the face of an attentive angel.

It seemed to Mr. Wilkins that it must be difficult to scold a Dester
who looked like that and so exquisitely said nothing. Mrs. Fisher, he
was glad to see, gradually found it difficult herself, for her severity
slackened, and she ended by saying lamely, “You ought to have told me
you were not doing it.”

“I didn’t know you thought I was,” said the lovely voice.

“I would now like to know,” said Mrs. Fisher, “what you propose to do
for the rest of the time here.”

“Nothing,” said Scrap, smiling.

“Nothing? Do you mean to say—”

“If I may be allowed, ladies,” interposed Mr. Wilkins in his suavest
professional manner, “to make a suggestion”—they both looked at him,
and remembering him as they first saw him felt indulgent—“I would
advise you not to spoil a delightful holiday with worries over
housekeeping.”

“Exactly,” said Mrs. Fisher. “It is what I intend to avoid.”

“Most sensible,” said Mr. Wilkins. “Why not, then,” he continued,
“allow the cook—an excellent cook, by the way—so much a head _per
diem_”—Mr. Wilkins knew what was necessary in Latin—“and tell her that
for this sum she must cater for you, and not only cater but cater as
well as ever? One could easily reckon it out. The charges of a moderate
hotel, for instance, would do as a basis, halved, or perhaps even
quartered.”

“And this week that has just passed?” asked Mrs. Fisher. “The terrible
bills of this first week? What about them?”

“They shall be my present to San Salvatore,” said Scrap, who didn’t
like the idea of Lotty’s nest-egg being reduced so much beyond what she
was prepared for.

There was a silence. The ground was cut from under Mrs. Fisher’s feet.

“Of course if you choose to throw your money about—” she said at last,
disapproving but immensely relieved, while Mr. Wilkins was rapt in the
contemplation of the precious qualities of blue blood. This readiness,
for instance, not to trouble about money, this free-handedness—it was
not only what one admired in others, admired in others perhaps more
than anything else, but it was extraordinarily useful to the
professional classes. When met with it should be encouraged by warmth
of reception. Mrs. Fisher was not warm. She accepted—from which he
deduced that with her wealth went closeness—but she accepted
grudgingly. Presents were presents, and one did not look them in this
manner in the mouth, he felt; and if Lady Caroline found her pleasure
in presenting his wife and Mrs. Fisher with their entire food for a
week, it was their part to accept gracefully. One should not discourage
gifts.

On behalf of his wife, then, Mr. Wilkins expressed what she would wish
to express, and remarking to Lady Caroline—with a touch of lightness,
for so should gifts be accepted in order to avoid embarrassing the
donor—that she had in that case been his wife’s hostess since her
arrival, he turned almost gaily to Mrs. Fisher and pointed out that she
and his wife must now jointly write Lady Caroline the customary letter
of thanks for hospitality. “A Collins,” said Mr. Wilkins, who knew what
was necessary in literature. “I prefer the name Collins for such a
letter to either that of Board and Lodging or Bread and Butter. Let us
call it a Collins.”

Scrap smiled, and held out her cigarette case. Mrs. Fisher could not
help being mollified. A way out of waste was going to be found, thanks
to Mr. Wilkins, and she hated waste quite as much as having to pay for
it; also a way was found out of housekeeping. For a moment she had
thought that if everybody tried to force her into housekeeping on her
brief holiday by their own indifference (Lady Caroline), or inability
to speak Italian (the other two), she would have to send for Kate
Lumley after all. Kate could do it. Kate and she had learnt Italian
together. Kate would only be allowed to come on condition that she did
do it.

But this was much better, this way of Mr. Wilkins’s. Really a most
superior man. There was nothing like an intelligent, not too young man
for profitable and pleasurable companionship. And when she got up, the
business for which she had come being settled, and said she now
intended to take a little stroll before lunch, Mr. Wilkins did not stay
with Lady Caroline, as most of the men she had known would, she was
afraid, have wanted to—he asked to be permitted to go and stroll with
her; so that he evidently definitely preferred conversation to faces. A
sensible, companionable man. A clever, well-read man. A man of the
world. A man. She was very glad indeed she had not written to Kate the
other day. What did she want with Kate? She had found a better
companion.

But Mr. Wilkins did not go with Mrs. Fisher because of her
conversation, but because, when she got up and he got up because she
got up, intending merely to bow her out of the recess, Lady Caroline
had put her feet up on the parapet again, and arranging her head
sideways in the cushions had shut her eyes.

The daughter of the Droitwiches desired to go to sleep.

It was not for him, by remaining, to prevent her.




Chapter 16


And so the second week began, and all was harmony. The arrival of Mr.
Wilkins, instead of, as three of the party had feared and the fourth
had only been protected from fearing by her burning faith in the effect
on him of San Salvatore, disturbing such harmony as there was,
increased it. He fitted in. He was determined to please, and he did
please. He was most amiable to his wife—not only in public, which she
was used to, but in private, when he certainly wouldn’t have been if he
hadn’t wanted to. He did want to. He was so much obliged to her, so
much pleased with her, for making him acquainted with Lady Caroline,
that he felt really fond of her. Also proud; for there must be, he
reflected, a good deal more in her than he had supposed, for Lady
Caroline to have become so intimate with her and so affectionate. And
the more he treated her as though she were really very nice, the more
Lotty expanded and became really very nice, and the more he, affected
in his turn, became really very nice himself; so that they went round
and round, not in a vicious but in a highly virtuous circle.

Positively, for him, Mellersh petted her. There was at no time much pet
in Mellersh, because he was by nature a cool man; yet such was the
influence on him of, as Lotty supposed, San Salvatore, that in this
second week he sometimes pinched both her ears, one after the other,
instead of only one; and Lotty, marvelling at such rapidly developing
affectionateness, wondered what he would do, should he continue at this
rate, in the third week, when her supply of ears would have come to an
end.

He was particularly nice about the washstand, and genuinely desirous of
not taking up too much of the space in the small bedroom. Quick to
respond, Lotty was even more desirous not to be in his way; and the
room became the scene of many an affectionate _combat de générosité_,
each of which left them more pleased with each other than ever. He did
not again have a bath in the bathroom, though it was mended and ready
for him, but got up and went down every morning to the sea, and in
spite of the cool nights making the water cold early had his dip as a
man should, and came up to breakfast rubbing his hands and feeling, as
he told Mrs. Fisher, prepared for anything.

Lotty’s belief in the irresistible influence of the heavenly atmosphere
of San Salvatore being thus obviously justified, and Mr. Wilkins, whom
Rose knew as alarming and Scrap had pictured as icily unkind, being so
evidently a changed man, both Rose and Scrap began to think there might
after all be something in what Lotty insisted on, and that San
Salvatore did work purgingly on the character.

They were the more inclined to think so in that they too felt a working
going on inside themselves: they felt more cleared, both of them, that
second week—Scrap in her thoughts, many of which were now quite nice
thoughts, real amiable ones about her parents and relations, with a
glimmer in them of recognition of the extraordinary benefits she had
received at the hands of—what? Fate? Providence?—anyhow of something,
and of how, having received them, she had misused them by failing to be
happy; and Rose in her bosom, which though it still yearned, yearned to
some purpose, for she was reaching the conclusion that merely
inactively to yearn was no use at all, and that she must either by some
means stop her yearning or give it at least a chance—remote, but still
a chance—of being quieted by writing to Frederick and asking him to
come out.

If Mr. Wilkins could be changed, thought Rose, why not Frederick? How
wonderful it would be, how too wonderful, if the place worked on him
too and were able to make them even a little understand each other,
even a little be friends. Rose, so far had loosening and disintegration
gone on in her character, now was beginning to think her obstinate
strait-lacedness about his books and her austere absorption in good
works had been foolish and perhaps even wrong. He was her husband, and
she had frightened him away. She had frightened love away, precious
love, and that couldn’t be good. Was not Lotty right when she said the
other day that nothing at all except love mattered? Nothing certainly
seemed much use unless it was built up on love. But once frightened
away, could it ever come back? Yes, it might in that beauty, it might
in the atmosphere of happiness Lotty and San Salvatore seemed between
them to spread round like some divine infection.

She had, however, to get him there first, and he certainly couldn’t be
got there if she didn’t write and tell him where she was.

She would write. She must write; for if she did there was at least a
chance of his coming, and if she didn’t there was manifestly none. And
then, once here in this loveliness, with everything so soft and kind
and sweet all round, it would be easier to tell him, to try and
explain, to ask for something different, for at least an attempt at
something different in their lives in the future, instead of the
blankness of separation, the cold—oh, the cold—of nothing at all but
the great windiness of faith, the great bleakness of works. Why, one
person in the world, one single person belonging to one, of one’s very
own, to talk to, to take care of, to love, to be interested in, was
worth more than all the speeches on platforms and the compliments of
chairmen in the world. It was also worth more—Rose couldn’t help it,
the thought would come—than all the prayers.

These thoughts were not head thoughts, like Scrap’s, who was altogether
free from yearnings, but bosom thoughts. They lodged in the bosom; it
was in the bosom that Rose ached, and felt so dreadfully lonely. And
when her courage failed her, as it did on most days, and it seemed
impossible to write to Frederick, she would look at Mr. Wilkins and
revive.

There he was, a changed man. There he was, going into that small,
uncomfortable room every night, that room whose proximities had been
Lotty’s only misgiving, and coming out of it in the morning, and Lotty
coming out of it too, both of them as unclouded and as nice to each
other as when they went in. And hadn’t he, so critical at home, Lotty
had told her, of the least thing going wrong, emerged from the bath
catastrophe as untouched in spirit as Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego
were untouched in body when they emerged from the fire? Miracles were
happening in this place. If they could happen to Mr. Wilkins, why not
to Frederick?

She got up quickly. Yes, she would write. She would go and write to him
at once.

But suppose—

She paused. Suppose he didn’t answer. Suppose he didn’t even answer.

And she sat down again to think a little longer.

In these hesitations did Rose spend most of the second week.

Then there was Mrs. Fisher. Her restlessness increased that second
week. It increased to such an extent that she might just as well not
have had her private sitting-room at all, for she could no longer sit.
Not for ten minutes together could Mrs. Fisher sit. And added to the
restlessness, as the days of the second week proceeded on their way,
she had a curious sensation, which worried her, of rising sap. She knew
the feeling, because she had sometimes had it in childhood in specially
swift springs, when the lilacs and the syringas seemed to rush out into
blossom in a single night, but it was strange to have it again after
over fifty years. She would have liked to remark on the sensation to
some one, but she was ashamed. It was such an absurd sensation at her
age. Yet oftener and oftener, and every day more and more, did Mrs.
Fisher have a ridiculous feeling as if she were presently going to
burgeon.

Sternly she tried to frown the unseemly sensation down. Burgeon,
indeed. She had heard of dried staffs, pieces of mere dead wood,
suddenly putting forth fresh leaves, but only in legend. She was not in
legend. She knew perfectly what was due to herself. Dignity demanded
that she should have nothing to do with fresh leaves at her age; and
yet there it was—the feeling that presently, that at any moment now,
she might crop out all green.

Mrs. Fisher was upset. There were many things she disliked more than
anything else, and one was when the elderly imagined they felt young
and behaved accordingly. Of course they only imagined it, they were
only deceiving themselves; but how deplorable were the results. She
herself had grown old as people should grow old—steadily and firmly. No
interruptions, no belated after-glows and spasmodic returns. If, after
all these years, she were now going to be deluded into some sort of
unsuitable breaking-out, how humiliating.

Indeed she was thankful, that second week, that Kate Lumley was not
there. It would be most unpleasant, should anything different occur in
her behaviour, to have Kate looking on. Kate had known her all her
life. She felt she could let herself go—here Mrs. Fisher frowned at the
book she was vainly trying to concentrate on, for where did that
expression come from?—much less painfully before strangers than before
an old friend. Old friends, reflected Mrs. Fisher, who hoped she was
reading, compare one constantly with what one used to be. They are
always doing it if one develops. They are surprised at development.
They hark back; they expect motionlessness after, say, fifty, to the
end of one’s days.

That, thought Mrs. Fisher, her eyes going steadily line by line down
the page and not a word of it getting through into her consciousness,
is foolish of friends. It is condemning one to a premature death. One
should continue (of course with dignity) to develop, however old one
may be. She had nothing against developing, against further ripeness,
because as long as one was alive one was not dead—obviously, decided
Mrs. Fisher, and development, change, ripening, were life. What she
would dislike would be unripening, going back to something green. She
would dislike it intensely; and this is what she felt she was on the
brink of doing.

Naturally it made her very uneasy, and only in constant movement could
she find distraction. Increasingly restless and no longer able to
confine herself to her battlements, she wandered more and more
frequently, and also aimlessly, in and out of the top garden, to the
growing surprise of Scrap, especially when she found that all Mrs.
Fisher did was to stare for a few minutes at the view, pick a few dead
leaves off the rose-bushes, and go away again.

In Mr. Wilkins’s conversation she found temporary relief, but though he
joined her whenever he could he was not always there, for he spread his
attentions judiciously among the three ladies, and when he was
somewhere else she had to face and manage her thoughts as best she
could by herself. Perhaps it was the excess of light and colour at San
Salvatore which made every other place seem dark and black; and Prince
of Wales Terrace did seem a very dark black spot to have to go back
to—a dark, narrow street, and her house dark and narrow as the street,
with nothing really living or young in it. The goldfish could hardly be
called living, or at most not more than half living, and were certainly
not young, and except for them there were only the maids, and they were
dusty old things.

Dusty old things. Mrs. Fisher paused in her thoughts, arrested by the
strange expression. Where had it come from? How was it possible for it
to come at all? It might have been one of Mrs. Wilkins’s, in its
levity, its almost slang. Perhaps it was one of hers, and she had heard
her say it and unconsciously caught it from her.

If so, this was both serious and disgusting. That the foolish creature
should penetrate into Mrs. Fisher’s very mind and establish her
personality there, the personality which was still, in spite of the
harmony apparently existing between her and her intelligent husband, so
alien to Mrs. Fisher’s own, so far removed from what she understood and
liked, and infect her with her undesirable phrases, was most
disturbing. Never in her life before had such a sentence come into Mrs.
Fisher’s head. Never in her life before had she thought of her maids,
or of anybody else, as dusty old things. Her maids were not dusty old
things; they were most respectable, neat women, who were allowed the
use of the bathroom every Saturday night. Elderly, certainly, but then
so was she, so was her house, so was her furniture, so were her
goldfish. They were all elderly, as they should be, together. But there
was a great difference between being elderly and being a dusty old
thing.

How true it was what Ruskin said, that evil communications corrupt good
manners. But did Ruskin say it? On second thoughts she was not sure,
but it was just the sort of thing he would have said if he had said it,
and in any case it was true. Merely hearing Mrs. Wilkins’s evil
communications at meals—she did not listen, she avoided listening, yet
it was evident she had heard—those communications which, in that they
so often were at once vulgar, indelicate and profane, and always, she
was sorry to say, laughed at by Lady Caroline, must be classed as evil,
was spoiling her own mental manners. Soon she might not only think but
say. How terrible that would be. If that were the form her breaking-out
was going to take, the form of unseemly speech, Mrs. Fisher was afraid
she would hardly with any degree of composure be able to bear it.

At this stage Mrs. Fisher wished more than ever that she were able to
talk over her strange feelings with some one who would understand.
There was, however, no one who would understand except Mrs. Wilkins
herself. She would. She would know at once, Mrs. Fisher was sure, what
she felt like. But this was impossible. It would be as abject as
begging the very microbe that was infecting one for protection against
its disease.

She continued, accordingly, to bear her sensations in silence, and was
driven by them into that frequent aimless appearing in the top garden
which presently roused even Scrap’s attention.

Scrap had noticed it, and vaguely wondered at it, for some time before
Mr. Wilkins inquired of her one morning as he arranged her cushions for
her—he had established the daily assisting of Lady Caroline into her
chair as his special privilege—whether there was anything the matter
with Mrs. Fisher.

At that moment Mrs. Fisher was standing by the eastern parapet, shading
her eyes and carefully scrutinising the distant white houses of
Mezzago. They could see her through the branches of the daphnes.

“I don’t know,” said Scrap.

“She is a lady, I take it,” said Mr. Wilkins, “who would be unlikely to
have anything on her mind?”

“I should imagine so,” said Scrap, smiling.

“If she has, and her restlessness appears to suggest it, I should be
more than glad to assist her with advice.”

“I am sure you would be most kind.”

“Of course she has her own legal adviser, but he is not on the spot. I
am. And a lawyer on the spot,” said Mr. Wilkins, who endeavoured to
make his conversation when he talked to Lady Caroline light, aware that
one must be light with young ladies, “is worth two in—we won’t be
ordinary and complete the proverb, but say London.”

“You should ask her.”

“Ask her if she needs assistance? Would you advise it? Would it not be
a little—a little delicate to touch on such a question, the question
whether or no a lady has something on her mind?”

“Perhaps she will tell you if you go and talk to her. I think it must
be lonely to be Mrs. Fisher.”

“You are all thoughtfulness and consideration,” declared Mr. Wilkins,
wishing, for the first time in his life, that he were a foreigner so
that he might respectfully kiss her hand on withdrawing to go
obediently and relieve Mrs. Fisher’s loneliness.

It was wonderful what a variety of exits from her corner Scrap
contrived for Mr. Wilkins. Each morning she found a different one,
which sent him off pleased after he had arranged her cushions for her.
She allowed him to arrange the cushions because she instantly had
discovered, the very first five minutes of the very first evening, that
her fears lest he should cling to her and stare in dreadful admiration
were baseless. Mr. Wilkins did not admire like that. It was not only,
she instinctively felt, not in him, but if it had been he would not
have dared to in her case. He was all respectfulness. She could direct
his movements in regard to herself with the raising of an eyelash. His
one concern was to obey. She had been prepared to like him if he would
only be so obliging as not to admire her, and she did like him. She did
not forget his moving defencelessness the first morning in his towel,
and he amused her, and he was kind to Lotty. It is true she liked him
most when he wasn’t there, but then she usually liked everybody most
when they weren’t there. Certainly he did seem to be one of those men,
rare in her experience, who never looked at a woman from the predatory
angle. The comfort of this, the simplification it brought into the
relations of the party, was immense. From this point of view Mr.
Wilkins was simply ideal; he was unique and precious. Whenever she
thought of him, and was perhaps inclined to dwell on the aspects of him
that were a little boring, she remembered this and murmured, “But what
a treasure.”

Indeed it was Mr. Wilkins’s one aim during his stay at San Salvatore to
be a treasure. At all costs the three ladies who were not his wife must
like him and trust him. Then presently when trouble arose in their
lives—and in what lives did not trouble sooner or later arise?—they
would recollect how reliable he was and how sympathetic, and turn to
him for advice. Ladies with something on their minds were exactly what
he wanted. Lady Caroline, he judged, had nothing on hers at the moment,
but so much beauty—for he could not but see what was evident—must have
had its difficulties in the past and would have more of them before it
had done. In the past he had not been at hand; in the future he hoped
to be. And meanwhile the behaviour of Mrs. Fisher, the next in
importance of the ladies from the professional point of view, showed
definite promise. It was almost certain that Mrs. Fisher had something
on her mind. He had been observing her attentively, and it was almost
certain.

With the third, with Mrs. Arbuthnot, he had up to this made least
headway, for she was so very retiring and quiet. But might not this
very retiringness, this tendency to avoid the others and spend her time
alone, indicate that she too was troubled? If so, he was her man. He
would cultivate her. He would follow her and sit with her, and
encourage her to tell him about herself. Arbuthnot, he understood from
Lotty, was a British Museum official—nothing specially important at
present, but Mr. Wilkins regarded it as his business to know all sorts
and kinds. Besides, there was promotion. Arbuthnot, promoted, might
become very much worth while.

As for Lotty, she was charming. She really had all the qualities he had
credited her with during his courtship, and they had been, it appeared,
merely in abeyance since. His early impressions of her were now being
endorsed by the affection and even admiration Lady Caroline showed for
her. Lady Caroline Dester was the last person, he was sure, to be
mistaken on such a subject. Her knowledge of the world, her constant
association with only the best, must make her quite unerring. Lotty was
evidently, then, that which before marriage he had believed her to
be—she was valuable. She certainly had been most valuable in
introducing him to Lady Caroline and Mrs. Fisher. A man in his
profession could be immensely helped by a clever and attractive wife.
Why had she not been attractive sooner? Why this sudden flowering?

Mr. Wilkins began too to believe there was something peculiar, as Lotty
had almost at once informed him, in the atmosphere of San Salvatore. It
promoted expansion. It brought out dormant qualities. And feeling more
and more pleased, and even charmed, by his wife, and very content with
the progress he was making with the two others, and hopeful of progress
to be made with the retiring third, Mr. Wilkins could not remember ever
having had such an agreeable holiday. The only thing that might perhaps
be bettered was the way they would call him Mr. Wilkins. Nobody said
Mr. Mellersh-Wilkins. Yet he had introduced himself to Lady Caroline—he
flinched a little on remembering the circumstances—as Mellersh-Wilkins.

Still, this was a small matter, not enough to worry about. He would be
foolish if in such a place and such society he worried about anything.
He was not even worrying about what the holiday was costing, and had
made up his mind to pay not only his own expenses but his wife’s as
well, and surprise her at the end by presenting her with her nest-egg
as intact as when she started; and just the knowledge that he was
preparing a happy surprise for her made him feel warmer than ever
towards her.

In fact Mr. Wilkins, who had begun by being consciously and according
to plan on his best behaviour, remained on it unconsciously, and with
no effort at all.

And meanwhile the beautiful golden days were dropping gently from the
second week one by one, equal in beauty with those of the first, and
the scent of beanfields in flower on the hillside behind the village
came across to San Salvatore whenever the air moved. In the garden that
second week the poet’s eyed narcissus disappeared out the long grass at
the edge of the zigzag path, and wild gladiolus, slender and
rose-coloured, came in their stead, white pinks bloomed in the borders,
filling the whole place with their smoky-sweet smell, and a bush nobody
had noticed burst into glory and fragrance, and it was a purple lilac
bush. Such a jumble of spring and summer was not to be believed in,
except by those who dwelt in those gardens. Everything seemed to be out
together—all the things crowded into one month which in England are
spread penuriously over six. Even primroses were found one day by Mrs.
Wilkins in a cold corner up in the hills; and when she brought them
down to the geraniums and heliotrope of San Salvatore they looked quite
shy.




Chapter 17


On the first day of the third week Rose wrote to Frederick.

In case she should again hesitate and not post the letter, she gave it
to Domenico to post; for if she did not write now there would be no
time left at all. Half the month at San Salvatore was over. Even if
Frederick started directly he got the letter, which of course he
wouldn’t be able to do, what with packing and passport, besides not
being in a hurry to come, he couldn’t arrive for five days.

Having done it, Rose wished she hadn’t. He wouldn’t come. He wouldn’t
bother to answer. And if he did answer, it would just be giving some
reason which was not true, and about being too busy to get away; and
all that had been got by writing to him would be that she would be more
unhappy than before.

What things one did when one was idle. This resurrection of Frederick,
or rather this attempt to resurrect him, what was it but the result of
having nothing whatever to do? She wished she had never come away on a
holiday. What did she want with holidays? Work was her salvation; work
was the only thing that protected one, that kept one steady and one’s
values true. At home in Hampstead, absorbed and busy, she had managed
to get over Frederick, thinking of him latterly only with the gentle
melancholy with which one thinks of some one once loved but long since
dead; and now this place, idleness in this soft place, had thrown her
back to the wretched state she had climbed so carefully out of years
ago. Why, if Frederick did come she would only bore him. Hadn’t she
seen in a flash quite soon after getting to San Salvatore that that was
really what kept him away from her? And why should she suppose that
now, after such a long estrangement, she would be able not to bore him,
be able to do anything but stand before him like a tongue-tied idiot,
with all the fingers of her spirit turned into thumbs? Besides, what a
hopeless position, to have as it were to beseech: Please wait a
little—please don’t be impatient—I think perhaps I shan’t be a bore
presently.

A thousand times a day Rose wished she had let Frederick alone. Lotty,
who asked her every evening whether she had sent her letter yet,
exclaimed with delight when the answer at last was yes, and threw her
arms round her. “Now we shall be _completely_ happy!” cried the
enthusiastic Lotty.

But nothing seemed less certain to Rose, and her expression became more
and more the expression of one who has something on her mind.

Mr. Wilkins, wanting to find out what it was, strolled in the sun in
his Panama hat, and began to meet her accidentally.

“I did not know,” said Mr. Wilkins the first time, courteously raising
his hat, “that you too liked this particular spot.” And he sat down
beside her.

In the afternoon she chose another spot; and she had not been in it
half an hour before Mr. Wilkins, lightly swinging his cane, came round
the corner.

“We are destined to meet in our rambles,” said Mr. Wilkins pleasantly.
And he sat down beside her.

Mr. Wilkins was very kind, and she had, she saw, misjudged him in
Hampstead, and this was the real man, ripened like fruit by the
beneficent sun of San Salvatore, but Rose did want to be alone. Still,
she was grateful to him for proving to her that though she might bore
Frederick she did not bore everybody; if she had, he would not have sat
talking to her on each occasion till it was time to go in. True he
bored her, but that wasn’t anything like so dreadful as if she bored
him. Then indeed her vanity would have been sadly ruffled. For now that
Rose was not able to say her prayers she was being assailed by every
sort of weakness: vanity, sensitiveness, irritability,
pugnacity—strange, unfamiliar devils to have coming crowding on one and
taking possession of one’s swept and empty heart. She had never been
vain or irritable or pugnacious in her life before. Could it be that
San Salvatore was capable of opposite effects, and the same sun that
ripened Mr. Wilkins made her go acid?

The next morning, so as to be sure of being alone, she went down, while
Mr. Wilkins was still lingering pleasantly with Mrs. Fisher over
breakfast, to the rocks by the water’s edge where she and Lotty had sat
the first day. Frederick by now had got her letter. To-day, if he were
like Mr. Wilkins, she might get a telegram from him.

She tried to silence the absurd hope by jeering at it. Yet—if Mr.
Wilkins had telegraphed, why not Frederick? The spell of San Salvatore
lurked even, it seemed, in notepaper. Lotty had not dreamed of getting
a telegram, and when she came in at lunch-time there it was. It would
be too wonderful if when she went back at lunch-time she found one
there for her too. . .

Rose clasped her hands tight round her knees. How passionately she
longed to be important to somebody again—not important on platforms,
not important as an asset in an organisation, but privately important,
just to one other person, quite privately, nobody else to know or
notice. It didn’t seem much to ask in a world so crowded with people,
just to have one of them, only one out of all the millions, to oneself.
Somebody who needed one, who thought of one, who was eager to come to
one—oh, _oh_ how dreadfully one wanted to be precious!

All the morning she sat beneath the pine-tree by the sea. Nobody came
near her. The great hours passed slowly; they seemed enormous. But she
wouldn’t go up before lunch, she would give the telegram time to
arrive. . .

That day Scrap, egged on by Lotty’s persuasions and also thinking that
perhaps she had sat long enough, had arisen from her chair and cushions
and gone off with Lotty and sandwiches up into the hills till evening.
Mr. Wilkins, who wished to go with them, stayed on Lady Caroline’s
advice with Mrs. Fisher in order to cheer her solitude, and though he
left off cheering her about eleven to go and look for Mrs. Arbuthnot,
so as for a space to cheer her too, thus dividing himself impartially
between these solitary ladies, he came back again presently mopping his
forehead and continued with Mrs. Fisher where he had left off, for this
time Mrs. Arbuthnot had hidden successfully. There was a telegram, too,
for her he noticed when he came in. Pity he did not know where she was.

“Ought we to open it?” he said to Mrs. Fisher.

“No,” said Mrs. Fisher.

“It may require an answer.”

“I don’t approve of tampering with other people’s correspondence.”

“Tampering! My dear lady—”

Mr. Wilkins was shocked. Such a word. Tampering. He had the greatest
possible esteem for Mrs. Fisher, but he did at times find her a little
difficult. She liked him, he was sure, and she was in a fair way, he
felt, to become a client, but he feared she would be a headstrong and
secretive client. She was certainly secretive, for though he had been
skilful and sympathetic for a whole week, she had as yet given him no
inkling of what was so evidently worrying her.

“Poor old thing,” said Lotty, on his asking her if she perhaps could
throw light on Mrs. Fisher’s troubles. “She hasn’t got love.”

“Love?” Mr. Wilkins could only echo, genuinely scandalised. “But
surely, my dear—at her age—”

“_Any_ love,” said Lotty.

That very morning he had asked his wife, for he now sought and
respected her opinion, if she could tell him what was the matter with
Mrs. Arbuthnot, for she too, though he had done his best to thaw her
into confidences, had remained persistently retiring.

“She wants her husband,” said Lotty.

“Ah,” said Mr. Wilkins, a new light shed on Mrs. Arbuthnot’s shy and
modest melancholy. And he added, “Very proper.”

And Lotty said, smiling at him, “One does.”

And Mr. Wilkins said, smiling at her, “Does one?”

And Lotty said, smiling at him, “Of course.”

And Mr. Wilkins, much pleased with her, though it was still quite early
in the day, a time when caresses are sluggish, pinched her ear.

Just before half-past twelve Rose came slowly up through the pergola
and between the camellias ranged on either side of the old stone steps.
The rivulets of periwinkles that flowed down them when first she
arrived were gone, and now there were these bushes, incredibly
rosetted. Pink, white, red, striped—she fingered and smelt them one
after the other, so as not to get to her disappointment too quickly. As
long as she hadn’t seen for herself, seen the table in the hall quite
empty except for its bowl of flowers, she still could hope, she still
could have the joy of imagining the telegram lying on it waiting for
her. But there is no smell in a camellia, as Mr. Wilkins, who was
standing in the doorway on the look-out for her and knew what was
necessary in horticulture, reminded her.

She started at his voice and looked up.

“A telegram has come for you,” said Mr. Wilkins.

She stared at him, her mouth open.

“I searched for you everywhere, but failed—”

Of course. She knew it. She had been sure of it all the time. Bright
and burning, Youth in that instant flashed down again on Rose. She flew
up the steps, red as the camellia she had just been fingering, and was
in the hall and tearing open the telegram before Mr. Wilkins had
finished his sentence. Why, but if things could happen like this—why,
but there was no end to—why, she and Frederick—they were going to
be—again—at last—

“No bad news, I trust?” said Mr. Wilkins who had followed her, for when
she had read the telegram she stood staring at it and her face went
slowly white. Curious to watch how her face went slowly white.

She turned and looked at Mr. Wilkins as if trying to remember him.

“Oh no. On the contrary—”

She managed to smile. “I’m going to have a visitor,” she said, holding
out the telegram; and when he had taken it she walked away towards the
dining-room, murmuring something about lunch being ready.

Mr. Wilkins read the telegram. It had been sent that morning from
Mezzago, and was:

Am passing through on way to Rome. May I pay my respects this
afternoon?


Thomas Briggs.


Why should such a telegram make the interesting lady turn pale? For her
pallor on reading it had been so striking as to convince Mr. Wilkins
she was receiving a blow.

“Who is Thomas Briggs?” he asked, following her into the dining-room.

She looked at him vaguely. “Who is—?” she repeated, getting her
thoughts together again.

“Thomas Briggs.”

“Oh. Yes. He is the owner. This is his house. He is very nice. He is
coming this afternoon.”

Thomas Briggs was at that very moment coming. He was jogging along the
road between Mezzago and Castagneto in a fly, sincerely hoping that the
dark-eyed lady would grasp that all he wanted was to see her, and not
at all to see if his house were still there. He felt that an owner of
delicacy did not intrude on a tenant. But—he had been thinking so much
of her since that day. Rose Arbuthnot. Such a pretty name. And such a
pretty creature—mild, milky, mothery in the best sense; the best sense
being that she wasn’t his mother and couldn’t have been if she had
tried, for parents were the only things impossible to have younger than
oneself. Also, he was passing so near. It seemed absurd not just to
look in and see if she were comfortable. He longed to see her in his
house. He longed to see it as her background, to see her sitting in his
chairs, drinking out of his cups, using all his things. Did she put the
big crimson brocade cushion in the drawing-room behind her little dark
head? Her hair and the whiteness of her skin would look lovely against
it. Had she seen the portrait of herself on the stairs? He wondered if
she liked it. He would explain it to her. If she didn’t paint, and she
had said nothing to suggest it, she wouldn’t perhaps notice how exactly
the moulding of the eyebrows and the slight hollow of the cheek—

He told the fly to wait in Castagneto, and crossed the piazza, hailed
by children and dogs, who all knew him and sprang up suddenly from
nowhere, and walking quickly up the zigzag path, for he was an active
young man not much more than thirty, he pulled the ancient chain that
rang the bell, and waited decorously on the proper side of the open
door to be allowed to come in.

At the sight of him Francesca flung up every bit of her that would
fling up—eyebrows, eyelids, and hands, and volubly assured him that all
was in perfect order and that she was doing her duty.

“Of course, of course,” said Briggs, cutting her short. “No one doubts
it.”

And he asked her to take in his card to her mistress.

“Which mistress?” asked Francesca.

“Which mistress?”

“There are four,” said Francesca, scenting an irregularity on the part
of the tenants, for her master looked surprised; and she felt pleased,
for life was dull and irregularities helped it along at least a little.

“Four?” he repeated surprised. “Well, take it to the lot then,” he
said, recovering himself, for he noticed her expression.

Coffee was being drunk in the top garden in the shade of the umbrella
pine. Only Mrs. Fisher and Mr. Wilkins were drinking it, for Mrs.
Arbuthnot, after eating nothing and being completely silent during
lunch, had disappeared immediately afterwards.

While Francesca went away into the garden with his card, her master
stood examining the picture on the staircase of that Madonna by an
early Italian painter, name unknown, picked up by him at Orvieto, who
was so much like his tenant. It really was remarkable, the likeness. Of
course his tenant that day in London had had her hat on, but he was
pretty sure her hair grew just like that off her forehead. The
expression of the eyes, grave and sweet, was exactly the same. He
rejoiced to think that he would always have her portrait.

He looked up at the sound of footsteps, and there she was, coming down
the stairs just as he had imagined her in that place, dressed in white.

She was astonished to see him so soon. She had supposed he would come
about tea-time, and till then she had meant to sit somewhere out of
doors where she could be by herself.

He watched her coming down the stairs with the utmost eager interest.
In a moment she would be level with her portrait.

“It really is extraordinary,” said Briggs.

“How do you do,” said Rose, intent only on a decent show of welcome.

She did not welcome him. He was here, she felt, the telegram bitter in
her heart, instead of Frederick, doing what she had longed Frederick
would do, taking his place.

“Just stand still a moment—”

She obeyed automatically.

“Yes—quite astonishing. Do you mind taking off your hat?”

Rose, surprised, took it off obediently.

“Yes—I thought so—I just wanted to make sure. And look—have you
noticed—”

He began to make odd swift passes with his hand over the face in the
picture, measuring it, looking from it to her.

Rose’s surprise became amusement, and she could not help smiling. “Have
you come to compare me with my original?” she asked.

“You do see how extraordinarily alike—”

“I didn’t know I looked so solemn.”

“You don’t. Not now. You did a minute ago, quite as solemn. Oh yes—how
do you do,” he finished suddenly, noticing her outstretched hand. And
he laughed and shook it, flushing—a trick of his—to the roots of his
fair hair.

Francesca came back. “The Signora Fisher,” she said, “will be pleased
to see him.”

“Who is the Signora Fisher?” he asked Rose.

“One of the four who are sharing your house.”

“Then there are four of you?”

“Yes. My friend and I found we couldn’t afford it by ourselves.”

“Oh, I say—” began Briggs in confusion, for he would best have liked
Rose Arbuthnot—pretty name—not to have to afford anything, but to stay
at San Salvatore as long as she liked as his guest.

“Mrs. Fisher is having coffee in the top garden,” said Rose. “I’ll take
you to her and introduce you.”

“I don’t want to go. You’ve got your hat on, so you were going for a
walk. Mayn’t I come too? I’d immensely like being shown round by you.”

“But Mrs. Fisher is waiting for you.”

“Won’t she keep?”

“Yes,” said Rose, with the smile that had so much attracted him the
first day. “I think she will keep quite well till tea.”

“Do you speak Italian?”

“No,” said Rose. “Why?”

On that he turned to Francesca, and told her at a great rate, for in
Italian he was glib, to go back to the Signora in the top garden and
tell her he had encountered his old friend the Signora Arbuthnot, and
was going for a walk with her and would present himself to her later.

“Do you invite me to tea?” he asked Rose, when Francesca had gone.

“Of course. It’s your house.”

“It isn’t. It’s yours.”

“Till Monday week,” she smiled.

“Come and show me all the views,” he said eagerly; and it was plain,
even to the self-depreciatory Rose, that she did not bore Mr. Briggs.




Chapter 18


They had a very pleasant walk, with a great deal of sitting down in
warm, thyme-fragrant corners, and if anything could have helped Rose to
recover from the bitter disappointment of the morning it would have
been the company and conversation of Mr. Briggs. He did help her to
recover, and the same process took place as that which Lotty had
undergone with her husband, and the more Mr. Briggs thought Rose
charming the more charming she became.

Briggs was a man incapable of concealments, who never lost time if he
could help it. They had not got to the end of the headland where the
lighthouse is—Briggs asked her to show him the lighthouse, because the
path to it, he knew, was wide enough for two to walk abreast and fairly
level—before he had told her of the impression she had made on him in
London.

Since even the most religious, sober women like to know they have made
an impression, particularly the kind that has nothing to do with
character or merits, Rose was pleased. Being pleased, she smiled.
Smiling, she was more attractive than ever. Colour came into her
cheeks, and brightness into her eyes. She heard herself saying things
that really sounded quite interesting and even amusing. If Frederick
were listening now, she thought, perhaps he would see that she couldn’t
after all be such a hopeless bore; for here was a man, nice-looking,
young, and surely clever—he seemed clever, and she hoped he was, for
then the compliment would be still greater—who was evidently quite
happy to spend the afternoon just talking to her.

And indeed Mr. Briggs seemed very much interested. He wanted to hear
all about everything she had been doing from the moment she got there.
He asked her if she had seen this, that, and the other in the house,
what she liked best, which room she had, if she were comfortable, if
Francesca was behaving, if Domenico took care of her, and whether she
didn’t enjoy using the yellow sitting-room—the one that got all the sun
and looked out towards Genoa.

Rose was ashamed how little she had noticed in the house, and how few
of the things he spoke of as curious or beautiful in it she had even
seen. Swamped in thoughts of Frederick, she appeared to have lived in
San Salvatore blindly, and more than half the time had gone, and what
had been the good of it? She might just as well have been sitting
hankering on Hampstead Heath. No, she mightn’t; through all her
hankerings she had been conscious that she was at least in the very
heart of beauty; and indeed it was this beauty, this longing to share
it, that had first started her off hankering.

Mr. Briggs, however, was too much alive for her to be able to spare any
attention at this moment for Frederick, and she praised the servants in
answer to his questions, and praised the yellow sitting-room without
telling him she had only been in it once and then was ignominiously
ejected, and she told him she knew hardly anything about art and
curiosities, but thought perhaps if somebody would tell her about them
she would know more, and she said she had spent every day since her
arrival out-of-doors, because out-of-doors there was so very wonderful
and different from anything she had ever seen.

Briggs walked by her side along his paths that were yet so happily for
the moment her paths, and felt all the innocent glows of family life.
He was an orphan and an only child, and had a warm, domestic
disposition. He would have adored a sister and spoilt a mother, and was
beginning at this time to think of marrying; for though he had been
very happy with his various loves, each of whom, contrary to the usual
experience, turned ultimately into his devoted friend, he was fond of
children and thought he had perhaps now got to the age of settling if
he did not wish to be too old by the time his eldest son was twenty.
San Salvatore had latterly seemed a little forlorn. He fancied it
echoed when he walked about it. He had felt lonely there; so lonely
that he had preferred this year to miss out a spring and let it. It
wanted a wife in it. It wanted that final touch of warmth and beauty,
for he never thought of his wife except in terms of warmth and
beauty—she would of course be beautiful and kind. It amused him how
much in love with this vague wife he was already.

At such a rate was he making friends with the lady with the sweet name
as he walked along the path towards the lighthouse, that he was sure
presently he would be telling her everything about himself and his past
doings and his future hopes; and the thought of such a swiftly
developing confidence made him laugh.

“Why are you laughing?” she asked, looking at him and smiling.

“It’s so like coming home,” he said.

“But it is coming home for you to come here.”

“I mean _really_ like coming home. To one’s—one’s family. I never had a
family. I’m an orphan.”

“Oh, are you?” said Rose with the proper sympathy. “I hope you’ve not
been one very long. No—I mean I hope you have been one very long. No—I
don’t know what I mean, except that I’m sorry.”

He laughed again. “Oh I’m used to it. I haven’t anybody. No sisters or
brothers.”

“Then you’re an only child,” she observed intelligently.

“Yes. And there’s something about you that’s exactly my idea of a—of a
family.”

She was amused.

“So—cosy,” he said, looking at her and searching for a word.

“You wouldn’t think so if you saw my house in Hampstead,” she said, a
vision of that austere and hard-seated dwelling presenting itself to
her mind, with nothing soft in it except the shunned and neglected Du
Barri sofa. No wonder, she thought, for a moment clear-brained, that
Frederick avoided it. There was nothing cosy about _his_ family.

“I don’t believe any place you lived in could be anything but exactly
like you,” he said.

“You’re not going to pretend San Salvatore is like me?”

“Indeed I do pretend it. Surely you admit that it is beautiful?”

He said several things like that. She enjoyed her walk. She could not
recollect any walk so pleasant since her courting days.

She came back to tea, bringing Mr. Briggs, and looking quite different,
Mr. Wilkins noticed, from what she had looked till then. Trouble here,
trouble here, thought Mr. Wilkins, mentally rubbing his professional
hands. He could see himself being called in presently to advise. On the
one hand there was Arbuthnot, on the other hand here was Briggs.
Trouble brewing, trouble sooner or later. But why had Briggs’s telegram
acted on the lady like a blow? If she had turned pale from excess of
joy, then trouble was nearer than he had supposed. She was not pale
now; she was more like her name than he had yet seen her. Well, he was
the man for trouble. He regretted, of course, that people should get
into it, but being in he was their man.

And Mr. Wilkins, invigorated by these thoughts, his career being very
precious to him, proceeded to assist in doing the honours to Mr.
Briggs, both in his quality of sharer in the temporary ownership of San
Salvatore and of probable helper out of difficulties, with great
hospitality, and pointed out the various features of the place to him,
and led him to the parapet and showed him Mezzago across the bay.

Mrs. Fisher too was gracious. This was this young man’s house. He was a
man of property. She liked property, and she liked men of property.
Also there seemed a peculiar merit in being a man of property so young.
Inheritance, of course; and inheritance was more respectable than
acquisition. It did indicate fathers; and in an age where most people
appeared neither to have them nor to want them she liked this too.

Accordingly it was a pleasant meal, with everybody amiable and pleased.
Briggs thought Mrs. Fisher a dear old lady, and showed he thought so;
and again the magic worked, and she became a dear old lady. She
developed benignity with him, and a kind of benignity which was almost
playful—actually before tea was over including in some observation she
made him the words “My dear boy.”

Strange words in Mrs. Fisher’s mouth. It is doubtful whether in her
life she had used them before. Rose was astonished. How nice people
really were. When would she leave off making mistakes about them? She
hadn’t suspected this side of Mrs. Fisher, and she began to wonder
whether those other sides of her with which alone she was acquainted
had not perhaps after all been the effect of her own militant and
irritating behaviour. Probably they were. How horrid, then, she must
have been. She felt very penitent when she saw Mrs. Fisher beneath her
eyes blossoming out into real amiability the moment some one came along
who was charming to her, and she could have sunk into the ground with
shame when Mrs. Fisher presently laughed, and she realised by the shock
it gave her that the sound was entirely new. Not once before had she or
any one else there heard Mrs. Fisher laugh. What an indictment of the
lot of them! For they had all laughed, the others, some more and some
less, at one time or another since their arrival, and only Mrs. Fisher
had not. Clearly, since she could enjoy herself as she was now enjoying
herself, she had not enjoyed herself before. Nobody had cared whether
she did or not, except perhaps Lotty. Yes; Lotty had cared, and had
wanted her to be happy; but Lotty seemed to produce a bad effect on
Mrs. Fisher, while as for Rose herself she had never been with her for
five minutes without wanting, really wanting, to provoke and oppose
her.

How very horrid she had been. She had behaved unpardonably. Her
penitence showed itself in a shy and deferential solicitude towards
Mrs. Fisher which made the observant Briggs think her still more
angelic, and wish for a moment that he were an old lady himself in
order to be behaved to by Rose Arbuthnot just like that. There was
evidently no end, he thought, to the things she could do sweetly. He
would even not mind taking medicine, really nasty medicine, if it were
Rose Arbuthnot bending over him with the dose.

She felt his bright blue eyes, the brighter because he was so sunburnt,
fixed on her with a twinkle in them, and smiling asked him what he was
thinking about.

But he couldn’t very well tell her that, he said; and added, “Some
day.”

“Trouble, trouble,” thought Mr. Wilkins at this, again mentally rubbing
his hands. “Well, I’m their man.”

“I’m sure,” said Mrs. Fisher benignly, “you have no thoughts we may not
hear.”

“I’m sure,” said Briggs, “I would be telling you every one of my
secrets in a week.”

“You would be telling somebody very safe, then,” said Mrs. Fisher
benevolently—just such a son would she have liked to have had. “And in
return,” she went on, “I daresay I would tell you mine.”

“Ah no,” said Mr. Wilkins, adapting himself to this tone of easy
_badinage_, “I must protest. I really must. I have a prior claim, I am
the older friend. I have known Mrs. Fisher ten days, and you, Briggs,
have not yet known her one. I assert my right to be told her secrets
first. That is,” he added, bowing gallantly, “if she has any—which I
beg leave to doubt.”

“Oh, haven’t I!” exclaimed Mrs. Fisher, thinking of those green leaves.
That she should exclaim at all was surprising, but that she should do
it with gaiety was miraculous. Rose could only watch her in wonder.

“Then I shall worm them out,” said Briggs with equal gaiety.

“They won’t need much worming out,” said Mrs. Fisher. “My difficulty is
to keep them from bursting out.”

It might have been Lotty talking. Mr. Wilkins adjusted the single
eyeglass he carried with him for occasions like this, and examined Mrs.
Fisher carefully. Rose looked on, unable not to smile too since Mrs.
Fisher seemed so much amused, though Rose did not quite know why, and
her smile was a little uncertain, for Mrs. Fisher amused was a new
sight, not without its awe-inspiring aspects, and had to be got
accustomed to.

What Mrs. Fisher was thinking was how much surprised they would be if
she told them of her very odd and exciting sensation of going to come
out all over buds. They would think she was an extremely silly old
woman, and so would she have thought as lately as two days ago; but the
bud idea was becoming familiar to her, she was more _apprivoisée_ now,
as dear Matthew Arnold used to say, and though it would undoubtedly be
best if one’s appearance and sensations matched, yet supposing they did
not—and one couldn’t have everything—was it not better to feel young
somewhere rather than old everywhere? Time enough to be old everywhere
again, inside as well as out, when she got back to her sarcophagus in
Prince of Wales Terrace.

Yet it is probable that without the arrival of Briggs Mrs. Fisher would
have gone on secretly fermenting in her shell. The others only knew her
as severe. It would have been more than her dignity could bear suddenly
to relax—especially towards the three young women. But now came the
stranger Briggs, a stranger who at once took to her as no young man had
taken to her in her life, and it was the coming of Briggs and his real
and manifest appreciation—for just such a grandmother, thought Briggs,
hungry for home life and its concomitants, would he have liked to
have—that released Mrs. Fisher from her shell; and here she was at
last, as Lotty had predicted, pleased, good-humoured and benevolent.

Lotty, coming back half an hour later from her picnic, and following
the sound of voices into the top garden in the hope of still finding
tea, saw at once what had happened, for Mrs. Fisher at that very moment
was laughing.

“She’s burst her cocoon,” thought Lotty; and swift as she was in all
her movements, and impulsive, and also without any sense of propriety
to worry and delay her, she bent over the back of Mrs. Fisher’s chair
and kissed her.

“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Fisher, starting violently, for such a
thing had not happened to her since Mr. Fisher’s earlier days, and then
only gingerly. This kiss was a real kiss, and rested on Mrs. Fisher’s
cheek a moment with a strange, soft sweetness.

When she saw whose it was, a deep flush spread over her face. Mrs.
Wilkins kissing her and the kiss feeling so affectionate. . . Even if
she had wanted to she could not in the presence of the appreciative Mr.
Briggs resume her cast-off severity and begin rebuking again; but she
did not want to. Was it possible Mrs. Wilkins liked her—had liked her
all this time, while she had been so much disliking her herself? A
queer little trickle of warmth filtered through the frozen defences of
Mrs. Fisher’s heart. Somebody young kissing her—somebody young
_wanting_ to kiss her. . . Very much flushed, she watched the strange
creature, apparently quite unconscious she had done anything
extraordinary, shaking hands with Mr. Briggs, on her husband’s
introducing him, and immediately embarking on the friendliest
conversation with him, exactly as if she had known him all her life.
What a strange creature; what a very strange creature. It was natural,
she being so strange, that one should have, perhaps, misjudged her. . .

“I’m sure you want some tea,” said Briggs with eager hospitality to
Lotty. He thought her delightful,—freckles, picnic-untidiness and all.
Just such a sister would he—

“This is cold,” he said, feeling the teapot. “I’ll tell Francesca to
make you some fresh—”

He broke off and blushed. “Aren’t I forgetting myself,” he said,
laughing and looking round at them.

“Very natural, very natural,” Mr. Wilkins reassured him.

“I’ll go and tell Francesca,” said Rose, getting up.

“No, no,” said Briggs. “Don’t go away.” And he put his hands to his
mouth and shouted.

“Francesca!” shouted Briggs.

She came running. No summons in their experience had been answered by
her with such celerity.

“‘Her Master’s voice,’” remarked Mr. Wilkins; aptly, he considered.

“Make fresh tea,” ordered Briggs in Italian. “Quick—quick—” And then
remembering himself he blushed again, and begged everybody’s pardon.

“Very natural, very natural,” Mr. Wilkins reassured him.

Briggs then explained to Lotty what he had explained twice already,
once to Rose and once to the other two, that he was on his way to Rome
and thought he would get out at Mezzago and just look in to see if they
were comfortable and continue his journey the next day, staying the
night in an hotel at Mezzago.

“But how ridiculous,” said Lotty. “Of course you must stay here. It’s
your house. There’s Kate Lumley’s room,” she added, turning to Mrs.
Fisher. “You wouldn’t mind Mr. Briggs having it for one night? Kate
Lumley isn’t in it, you know,” she said turning to Briggs again and
laughing.

And Mrs. Fisher to her immense surprise laughed too. She knew that
at any other time this remark would have struck her as excessively
unseemly, and yet now she only thought it funny.

No indeed, she assured Briggs, Kate Lumley was not in that room. Very
fortunately, for she was an excessively wide person and the room was
excessively narrow. Kate Lumley might get into it, but that was about
all. Once in, she would fit it so tightly that probably she would never
be able to get out again. It was entirely at Mr. Briggs’s disposal, and
she hoped he would do nothing so absurd as go to an hotel—he, the owner
of the whole place.

Rose listened to this speech wide-eyed with amazement. Mrs. Fisher
laughed very much as she made it. Lotty laughed very much too, and at
the end of it bent down and kissed her again—kissed her several times.

“So you see, my dear boy,” said Mrs. Fisher, “you must stay here and
give us all a great deal of pleasure.”

“A great deal indeed,” corroborated Mr. Wilkins heartily.

“A very great deal,” repeated Mrs. Fisher, looking exactly like a
pleased mother.

“Do,” said Rose, on Briggs’s turning inquiringly to her.

“How kind of you all,” he said, his face broad with smiles. “I’d love
to be a guest here. What a new sensation. And with three such—”

He broke off and looked round. “I say,” he asked, “oughtn’t I to have a
fourth hostess? Francesca said she had four mistresses.”

“Yes. There’s Lady Caroline,” said Lotty.

“Then hadn’t we better find out first if she invites me too?”

“Oh, but she’s sure—” began Lotty.

“The daughter of the Droitwiches, Briggs,” said Mr. Wilkins, “is not
likely to be wanting in the proper hospitable impulses.”

“The daughter of the—” repeated Briggs; but he stopped dead, for there
in the doorway was the daughter of the Droitwiches herself; or rather,
coming towards him out of the dark doorway into the brightness of the
sunset, was that which he had not in his life yet seen but only dreamed
of, his ideal of absolute loveliness.




Chapter 19


And then when she spoke . . . what chance was there for poor Briggs? He
was undone. All Scrap said was, “How do you do,” on Mr. Wilkins
presenting him, but it was enough; it undid Briggs.

From a cheerful, chatty, happy young man, overflowing with life and
friendliness, he became silent, solemn, and with little beads on his
temples. Also he became clumsy, dropping the teaspoon as he handed her
her cup, mismanaging the macaroons, so that one rolled on the ground.
His eyes could not keep off the enchanting face for a moment; and when
Mr. Wilkins, elucidating him, for he failed to elucidate himself,
informed Lady Caroline that in Mr. Briggs she beheld the owner of San
Salvatore, who was on his way to Rome, but had got out at Mezzago, etc.
etc., and that the other three ladies had invited him to spend the
night in what was to all intents and purposes his own house rather than
an hotel, and Mr. Briggs was only waiting for the seal of her approval
to this invitation, she being the fourth hostess—when Mr. Wilkins,
balancing his sentences and being admirably clear and enjoying the
sound of his own cultured voice, explained the position in this manner
to Lady Caroline, Briggs sat and said never a word.

A deep melancholy invaded Scrap. The symptoms of the incipient grabber
were all there and only too familiar, and she knew that if Briggs
stayed her rest-cure might be regarded as over.

Then Kate Lumley occurred to her. She caught at Kate as at a straw.

“It would have been delightful,” she said, faintly smiling at
Briggs—she could not in decency not smile, at least a little, but even
a little betrayed the dimple, and Briggs’s eyes became more fixed than
ever—“I’m only wondering if there is room.”

“Yes, there is,” said Lotty. “There’s Kate Lumley’s room.”

“I thought,” said Scrap to Mrs. Fisher, and it seemed to Briggs that he
had never heard music till now, “your friend was expected immediately.”

“Oh, no,” said Mrs. Fisher—with an odd placidness, Scrap thought.

“Miss Lumley,” said Mr. Wilkins, “—or should I,” he inquired of Mrs.
Fisher, “say Mrs.?”

“Nobody has ever married Kate,” said Mrs. Fisher complacently.

“Quite so. Miss Lumley does not arrive to-day in any case, Lady
Caroline, and Mr. Briggs has—unfortunately, if I may say so—to continue
his journey to-morrow, so that his staying would in no way interfere
with Miss Lumley’s possible movements.”

“Then of course I join in the invitation,” said Scrap, with what was to
Briggs the most divine cordiality.

He stammered something, flushing scarlet, and Scrap thought, “Oh,” and
turned her head away; but that merely made Briggs acquainted with her
profile, and if there existed anything more lovely than Scrap’s full
face it was her profile.

Well, it was only for this one afternoon and evening. He would leave,
no doubt, the first thing in the morning. It took hours to get to Rome.
Awful if he hung on till the night train. She had a feeling that the
principal express to Rome passed through at night. Why hadn’t that
woman Kate Lumley arrived yet? She had forgotten all about her, but now
she remembered she was to have been invited a fortnight ago. What had
become of her? This man, once let in, would come and see her in London,
would haunt the places she was likely to go to. He had the makings, her
experienced eye could see, of a passionately persistent grabber.

“If,” thought Mr. Wilkins, observing Briggs’s face and sudden silence,
“any understanding existed between this young fellow and Mrs.
Arbuthnot, there is now going to be trouble. Trouble of a different
nature from the kind I feared, in which Arbuthnot would have played a
leading part, in fact the part of petitioner, but trouble that may need
help and advice none the less for its not being publicly scandalous.
Briggs, impelled by his passions and her beauty, will aspire to the
daughter of the Droitwiches. She, naturally and properly, will repel
him. Mrs. Arbuthnot, left in the cold, will be upset and show it.
Arbuthnot on his arrival will find his wife in enigmatic tears.
Inquiring into their cause, he will be met with an icy reserve. More
trouble may then be expected, and in me they will seek and find their
adviser. When Lotty said Mrs. Arbuthnot wanted her husband, she was
wrong. What Mrs. Arbuthnot wants is Briggs, and it looks uncommonly as
if she were not going to get him. Well, I’m their man.”

“Where are your things, Mr. Briggs?” asked Mrs. Fisher, her voice round
with motherliness. “Oughtn’t they to be fetched?” For the sun was
nearly in the sea now, and the sweet-smelling April dampness that
followed immediately on its disappearance was beginning to steal into
the garden.

Briggs started. “My things?” he repeated. “Oh yes—I must fetch them.
They’re in Mezzago. I’ll send Domenico. My fly is waiting in the
village. He can go back in it. I’ll go and tell him.”

He got up. To whom was he talking? To Mrs. Fisher, ostensibly, yet his
eyes were fixed on Scrap, who said nothing and looked at no one.

Then, recollecting himself, he stammered, “I’m awfully sorry—I keep on
forgetting—I’ll go down and fetch them myself.”

“We can easily send Domenico,” said Rose; and at her gentle voice he
turned his head.

Why, there was his friend, the sweet-named lady—but how had she not in
this short interval changed! Was it the failing light making her so
colourless, so vague-featured, so dim, so much like a ghost? A nice
good ghost, of course, and still with a pretty name, but only a ghost.

He turned from her to Scrap again, and forgot Rose Arbuthnot’s
existence. How was it possible for him to bother about anybody or
anything else in this first moment of being face to face with his dream
come true?

Briggs had not supposed or hoped that any one as beautiful as his dream
of beauty existed. He had never till now met even an approximation.
Pretty women, charming women by the score he had met and properly
appreciated, but never the real, the godlike thing itself. He used to
think, “If ever I saw a perfectly beautiful woman I should die”; and
though, having now met what to his ideas was a perfectly beautiful
woman, he did not die, he became very nearly as incapable of managing
his own affairs as if he had.

The others were obliged to arrange everything for him. By questions
they extracted from him that his luggage was in the station cloakroom
at Mezzago, and they sent for Domenico, and, urged and prompted by
everybody except Scrap, who sat in silence and looked at no one, Briggs
was induced to give him the necessary instructions for going back in
the fly and bringing out his things.

It was a sad sight to see the collapse of Briggs. Everybody noticed it,
even Rose.

“Upon my word,” thought Mrs. Fisher, “the way one pretty face can turn
a delightful man into an idiot is past all patience.”

And feeling the air getting chilly, and the sight of the enthralled
Briggs painful, she went in to order his room to be got ready,
regretting now that she had pressed the poor boy to stay. She had
forgotten Lady Caroline’s kill-joy face for the moment, and the more
completely owing to the absence of any ill effects produced by it on
Mr. Wilkins. Poor boy. Such a charming boy too, left to himself. It was
true she could not accuse Lady Caroline of not leaving him to himself,
for she was taking no notice of him at all, but that did not help.
Exactly like foolish moths did men, in other respects intelligent,
flutter round the impassive lighted candle of a pretty face. She had
seen them doing it. She had looked on only too often. Almost she laid a
motherly hand on Briggs’s fair head as she passed him. Poor boy.

Then Scrap, having finished her cigarette, got up and went indoors too.
She saw no reason why she should sit there in order to gratify Mr.
Briggs’s desire to stare. She would have liked to stay out longer, to
go to her corner behind the daphne bushes and look at the sunset sky
and watch the lights coming out one by one in the village below and
smell the sweet moistness of the evening, but if she did Mr. Briggs
would certainly follow her.

The old familiar tyranny had begun again. Her holiday of peace and
liberation was interrupted—perhaps over, for who knew if he would go
away, after all, to-morrow? He might leave the house, driven out of it
by Kate Lumley, but there was nothing to prevent his taking rooms in
the village and coming up every day. This tyranny of one person over
another! And she was so miserably constructed that she wouldn’t even be
able to frown him down without being misunderstood.

Scrap, who loved this time of the evening in her corner, felt indignant
with Mr. Briggs who was doing her out of it, and she turned her back on
the garden and him and went towards the house without a look or a word.
But Briggs, when he realised her intention, leapt to his feet, snatched
chairs which were not in her way out of it, kicked a footstool which
was not in her path on one side, hurried to the door, which stood wide
open, in order to hold it open, and followed her through it, walking by
her side along the hall.

What was to be done with Mr. Briggs? Well, it was his hall; she
couldn’t prevent his walking along it.

“I hope,” he said, not able while walking to take his eyes off her, so
that he knocked against several things he would otherwise have
avoided—the corner of a bookcase, an ancient carved cupboard, the table
with the flowers on it, shaking the water over—“that you are quite
comfortable here? If you’re not I’ll—I’ll flay them alive.”

His voice vibrated. What was to be done with Mr. Briggs? She could of
course stay in her room the whole time, say she was ill, not appear at
dinner; but again, the tyranny of this . . .

“I’m very comfortable indeed,” said Scrap.

“If I had dreamed you were coming—” he began.

“It’s a wonderful old place,” said Scrap, doing her utmost to sound
detached and forbidding, but with little hope of success.

The kitchen was on this floor, and passing its door, which was open a
crack, they were observed by the servants, whose thoughts, communicated
to each other by looks, may be roughly reproduced by such rude symbols
as Aha and Oho—symbols which represented and included their
appreciation of the inevitable, their foreknowledge of the inevitable,
and their complete understanding and approval.

“Are you going upstairs?” asked Briggs, as she paused at the foot of
them.

“Yes.”

“Which room do you sit in? The drawing-room, or the small yellow room?”

“In my own room.”

So then he couldn’t go up with her; so then all he could do was to wait
till she came out again.

He longed to ask her which was her own room—it thrilled him to hear her
call any room in his house her own room—that he might picture her in
it. He longed to know if by any happy chance it was his room, for ever
after to be filled with her wonder; but he didn’t dare. He would find
that out later from some one else—Francesca, anybody.

“Then I shan’t see you again till dinner?”

“Dinner is at eight,” was Scrap’s evasive answer as she went upstairs.

He watched her go.

She passed the Madonna, the portrait of Rose Arbuthnot, and the
dark-eyed figure he had thought so sweet seemed to turn pale, to
shrivel into insignificance as she passed.

She turned the bend of the stairs, and the setting sun, shining through
the west window a moment on her face, turned her to glory.

She disappeared, and the sun went out too, and the stairs were dark and
empty.

He listened till her footsteps were silent, trying to tell from the
sound of the shutting door which room she had gone into, then wandered
aimlessly away through the hall again, and found himself back in the
top garden.

Scrap from her window saw him there. She saw Lotty and Rose sitting on
the end parapet, where she would have liked to have been, and she saw
Mr. Wilkins buttonholing Briggs and evidently telling him the story of
the oleander tree in the middle of the garden.

Briggs was listening with a patience she thought rather nice, seeing
that it was his oleander and his own father’s story. She knew Mr.
Wilkins was telling him the story by his gestures. Domenico had told it
her soon after her arrival, and he had also told Mrs. Fisher, who had
told Mr. Wilkins. Mrs. Fisher thought highly of this story, and often
spoke of it. It was about a cherrywood walking-stick. Briggs’s father
had thrust this stick into the ground at that spot, and said to
Domenico’s father, who was then the gardener, “Here we will have an
oleander.” And Briggs’s father left the stick in the ground as a
reminder to Domenico’s father, and presently—how long afterwards nobody
remembered—the stick began to sprout, and it was an oleander.

There stood poor Mr. Briggs being told all about it, and listening to
the story he must have known from infancy with patience.

Probably he was thinking of something else. She was afraid he was. How
unfortunate, how extremely unfortunate, the determination that seized
people to get hold of and engulf other people. If only they could be
induced to stand more on their own feet. Why couldn’t Mr. Briggs be
more like Lotty, who never wanted anything of anybody, but was complete
in herself and respected other people’s completeness? One loved being
with Lotty. With her one was free, and yet befriended. Mr. Briggs
looked so really nice, too. She thought she might like him if only he
wouldn’t so excessively like her.

Scrap felt melancholy. Here she was shut up in her bedroom, which was
stuffy from the afternoon sun that had been pouring into it, instead of
out in the cool garden, and all because of Mr. Briggs.

Intolerable tyranny, she thought, flaring up. She wouldn’t endure it;
she would go out all the same; she would run downstairs while Mr.
Wilkins—really that man was a treasure—held Mr. Briggs down telling him
about the oleander, and get out of the house by the front door, and
take cover in the shadows of the zigzag path. Nobody could see her
there; nobody would think of looking for her there.

She snatched up a wrap, for she did not mean to come back for a long
while, perhaps not even to dinner—it would be all Mr. Briggs’s fault if
she went dinnerless and hungry—and with another glance out of the
window to see if she were still safe, she stole out and got away to the
sheltering trees of the zigzag path, and there sat down on one of the
seats placed at each bend to assist the upward journey of those who
were breathless.

Ah, this was lovely, thought Scrap with a sigh of relief. How cool. How
good it smelt. She could see the quiet water of the little harbour
through the pine trunks, and the lights coming out in the houses on the
other side, and all round her the green dusk was splashed by the
rose-pink of the gladioluses in the grass and the white of the crowding
daisies.

Ah, this was lovely. So still. Nothing moving—not a leaf, not a stalk.
The only sound was a dog barking, far away somewhere up on the hills,
or when the door of the little restaurant in the piazza below was
opened and there was a burst of voices, silenced again immediately by
the swinging to of the door.

She drew in a deep breath of pleasure. Ah, this was—

Her deep breath was arrested in the middle. What was that?

She leaned forward listening, her body tense.

Footsteps. On the zigzag path. Briggs. Finding her out.

Should she run?

No—the footsteps were coming up, not down. Some one from the village.
Perhaps Angelo, with provisions.

She relaxed again. But the steps were not the steps of Angelo, that
swift and springy youth; they were slow and considered, and they kept
on pausing.

“Some one who isn’t used to hills,” thought Scrap.

The idea of going back to the house did not occur to her. She was
afraid of nothing in life except love. Brigands or murderers as such
held no terrors for the daughter of the Droitwiches; she only would
have been afraid of them if they left off being brigands and murderers
and began instead to try and make love.

The next moment the footsteps turned the corner of her bit of path, and
stood still.

“Getting his wind,” thought Scrap, not looking round.

Then as he—from the sounds of the steps she took them to belong to a
man—did not move, she turned her head, and beheld with astonishment a
person she had seen a good deal of lately in London, the well-known
writer of amusing memoirs, Mr. Ferdinand Arundel.

She stared. Nothing in the way of being followed surprised her any
more, but that he should have discovered where she was surprised her.
Her mother had promised faithfully to tell no one.

“You?” she said, feeling betrayed. “Here?”

He came up to her and took off his hat. His forehead beneath the hat
was wet with the beads of unaccustomed climbing. He looked ashamed and
entreating, like a guilty but devoted dog.

“You must forgive me,” he said. “Lady Droitwich told me where you were,
and as I happened to be passing through on my way to Rome I thought I
would get out at Mezzago and just look in and see how you were.”

“But—didn’t my mother tell you I was doing a rest-cure?”

“Yes. She did. And that’s why I haven’t intruded on you earlier in the
day. I thought you would probably sleep all day, and wake up about now
so as to be fed.”

“But—”

“I know. I’ve got nothing to say in excuse. I couldn’t help myself.”

“This,” thought Scrap, “comes of mother insisting on having authors to
lunch, and me being so much more amiable in appearance than I really
am.”

She had been amiable to Ferdinand Arundel; she liked him—or rather she
did not dislike him. He seemed a jovial, simple man, and had the eyes
of a nice dog. Also, though it was evident that he admired her, he had
not in London grabbed. There he had merely been a good-natured,
harmless person of entertaining conversation, who helped to make
luncheons agreeable. Now it appeared that he too was a grabber. Fancy
following her out there—daring to. Nobody else had. Perhaps her mother
had given him the address because she considered him so absolutely
harmless, and thought he might be useful and see her home.

Well, whatever he was he couldn’t possibly give her the trouble an
active young man like Mr. Briggs might give her. Mr. Briggs,
infatuated, would be reckless, she felt, would stick at nothing, would
lose his head publicly. She could imagine Mr. Briggs doing things with
rope-ladders, and singing all night under her window—being really
difficult and uncomfortable. Mr. Arundel hadn’t the figure for any kind
of recklessness. He had lived too long and too well. She was sure he
couldn’t sing, and wouldn’t want to. He must be at least forty. How
many good dinners could not a man have eaten by the time he was forty?
And if during that time instead of taking exercise he had sat writing
books, he would quite naturally acquire the figure Mr. Arundel had in
fact acquired—the figure rather for conversation than adventure.

Scrap, who had become melancholy at the sight of Briggs, became
philosophical at the sight of Arundel. Here he was. She couldn’t send
him away till after dinner. He must be nourished.

This being so, she had better make the best of it, and do that with a
good grace which anyhow wasn’t to be avoided. Besides, he would be a
temporary shelter from Mr. Briggs. She was at least acquainted with
Ferdinand Arundel, and could hear news from him of her mother and her
friends, and such talk would put up a defensive barrier at dinner
between herself and the approaches of the other one. And it was only
for one dinner, and he couldn’t eat _her_.

She therefore prepared herself for friendliness. “I’m to be fed,” she
said, ignoring his last remark, “at eight, and you must come up and be
fed too. Sit down and get cool and tell me how everybody is.”

“May I really dine with you? In these travelling things?” he said,
wiping his forehead before sitting down beside her.

She was too lovely to be true, he thought. Just to look at her for an
hour, just to hear her voice, was enough reward for his journey and his
fears.

“Of course. I suppose you’ve left your fly in the village, and will be
going on from Mezzago by the night train.”

“Or stay in Mezzago in an hotel and go on to-morrow. But tell me,” he
said, gazing at the adorable profile, “about yourself. London has been
extraordinarily dull and empty. Lady Droitwich said you were with
people here she didn’t know. I hope they’ve been kind to you? You
look—well, as if your cure had done everything a cure should.”

“They’ve been very kind,” said Scrap. “I got them out of an
advertisement.”

“An advertisement?”

“It’s a good way, I find, to get friends. I’m fonder of one of these
than I’ve been of anybody in years.”

“Really? Who is it?”

“You shall guess which of them it is when you see them. Tell me about
mother. When did you see her last? We arranged not to write to each
other unless there was something special. I wanted to have a month that
was perfectly blank.”

“And now I’ve come and interrupted. I can’t tell you how ashamed I
am—both of having done it and of not having been able to help it.”

“Oh, but,” said Scrap quickly, for he could not have come on a better
day, when up there waiting and watching for her was, she knew, the
enamoured Briggs, “I’m really very glad indeed to see you. Tell me
about mother.”




Chapter 20


Scrap wanted to know so much about her mother that Arundel had
presently to invent. He would talk about anything she wished if only he
might be with her for a while and see her and hear her, but he knew
very little of the Droitwiches and their friends really—beyond meeting
them at those bigger functions where literature is also represented,
and amusing them at luncheons and dinners, he knew very little of them
really. To them he had always remained Mr. Arundel; no one called him
Ferdinand; and he only knew the gossip also available to the evening
papers and the frequenters of clubs. But he was, however, good at
inventing; and as soon as he had come to an end of first-hand
knowledge, in order to answer her inquiries and keep her there to
himself he proceeded to invent. It was quite easy to fasten some of the
entertaining things he was constantly thinking on to other people and
pretend they were theirs. Scrap, who had that affection for her parents
which warms in absence, was athirst for news, and became more and more
interested by the news he gradually imparted.

At first it was ordinary news. He had met her mother here, and seen her
there. She looked very well; she said so and so. But presently the
things Lady Droitwich had said took on an unusual quality: they became
amusing.

“Mother said _that?_” Scrap interrupted, surprised.

And presently Lady Droitwich began to do amusing things as well as say
them.

“_Mother_ did that?” Scrap inquired, wide-eyed.

Arundel warmed to his work. He fathered some of the most entertaining
ideas he had lately had on to Lady Droitwich, and also any charming
funny things that had been done—or might have been done, for he could
imagine almost anything.

Scrap’s eyes grew round with wonder and affectionate pride in her
mother. Why, but how funny—fancy mother. What an old darling. Did she
really do that? How perfectly adorable of her. And did she really
say—but how wonderful of her to think of it. What sort of a face did
Lloyd George make?

She laughed and laughed, and had a great longing to hug her mother, and
the time flew, and it grew quite dusk, and it grew nearly dark, and Mr.
Arundel still went on amusing her, and it was a quarter to eight before
she suddenly remembered dinner.

“Oh, good heavens!” she exclaimed, jumping up.

“Yes. It’s late,” said Arundel.

“I’ll go on quickly and send the maid to you. I must run, or I’ll never
be ready in time—”

And she was gone up the path with the swiftness of a young, slender
deer.

Arundel followed. He did not wish to arrive too hot, so had to go
slowly. Fortunately he was near the top, and Francesca came down the
pergola to pilot him indoors, and having shown him where he could wash
she put him in the empty drawing-room to cool himself by the crackling
wood fire.

He got as far away from the fire as he could, and stood in one of the
deep window-recesses looking out at the distant lights of Mezzago. The
drawing-room door was open, and the house was quiet with the hush that
precedes dinner, when the inhabitants are all shut up in their rooms
dressing. Briggs in his room was throwing away spoilt tie after spoilt
tie; Scrap in hers was hurrying into a black frock with a vague notion
that Mr. Briggs wouldn’t be able to see her so clearly in black; Mrs.
Fisher was fastening the lace shawl, which nightly transformed her day
dress into her evening dress, with the brooch Ruskin had given her on
her marriage, formed of two pearl lilies tied together by a blue enamel
ribbon on which was written in gold letters _Esto perpetua;_ Mr.
Wilkins was sitting on the edge of his bed brushing his wife’s
hair—thus far in this third week had he progressed in
demonstrativeness—while she, for her part, sitting on a chair in front
of him, put his studs in a clean shirt; and Rose, ready dressed, sat at
her window considering her day.

Rose was quite aware of what had happened to Mr. Briggs. If she had had
any difficulty about it, Lotty would have removed it by the frank
comments she made while she and Rose sat together after tea on the
wall. Lotty was delighted at more love being introduced into San
Salvatore, even if it were only one-sided, and said that when once
Rose’s husband was there she didn’t suppose, now that Mrs. Fisher too
had at last come unglued—Rose protested at the expression, and Lotty
retorted that it was in Keats—there would be another place in the world
more swarming with happiness than San Salvatore.

“Your husband,” said Lotty, swinging her feet, “might be here quite
soon, perhaps to-morrow evening if he starts at once, and there’ll be a
glorious final few days before we all go home refreshed for life. I
don’t believe any of us will ever be the same again—and I wouldn’t be a
bit surprised if Caroline doesn’t end by getting fond of the young man
Briggs. It’s in the air. You _have_ to get fond of people here.”

Rose sat at her window thinking of these things. Lotty’s optimism . . .
yet it had been justified by Mr. Wilkins; and look, too, at Mrs.
Fisher. If only it would come true as well about Frederick! For Rose,
who between lunch and tea had left off thinking about Frederick, was
now, between tea and dinner, thinking of him harder than ever.

It had been funny and delightful, that little interlude of admiration,
but of course it couldn’t go on once Caroline appeared. Rose knew her
place. She could see as well as any one the unusual, the unique
loveliness of Lady Caroline. How warm, though, things like admiration
and appreciation made one feel, how capable of really deserving them,
how different, how glowing. They seemed to quicken unsuspected
faculties into life. She was sure she had been a thoroughly amusing
woman between lunch and tea, and a pretty one too. She was quite
certain she had been pretty; she saw it in Mr. Briggs’s eyes as clearly
as in a looking-glass. For a brief space, she thought, she had been
like a torpid fly brought back to gay buzzing by the lighting of a fire
in a wintry room. She still buzzed, she still tingled, just at the
remembrance. What fun it had been, having an admirer even for that
little while. No wonder people liked admirers. They seemed, in some
strange way, to make one come alive.

Although it was all over she still glowed with it and felt more
exhilarated, more optimistic, more as Lotty probably constantly felt,
than she had done since she was a girl. She dressed with care, though
she knew Mr. Briggs would no longer see her, but it gave her pleasure
to see how pretty, while she was about it, she could make herself look;
and very nearly she stuck a crimson camellia in her hair down by her
ear. She did hold it there for a minute, and it looked almost sinfully
attractive and was exactly the colour of her mouth, but she took it out
again with a smile and a sigh and put it in the proper place for
flowers, which is water. She mustn’t be silly, she thought. Think of
the poor. Soon she would be back with them again, and what would a
camellia behind her ear seem like then? Simply fantastic.

But on one thing she was determined: the first thing she would do when
she got home would be to have it out with Frederick. If he didn’t come
to San Salvatore that is what she would do—the very first thing. Long
ago she ought to have done this, but always she had been handicapped,
when she tried to, by being so dreadfully fond of him and so much
afraid that fresh wounds were going to be given her wretched, soft
heart. But now let him wound her as much as he chose, as much as he
possibly could, she would still have it out with him. Not that he ever
intentionally wounded her; she knew he never meant to, she knew he
often had no idea of having done it. For a person who wrote books,
thought Rose, Frederick didn’t seem to have much imagination. Anyhow,
she said to herself, getting up from the dressing-table, things
couldn’t go on like this. She would have it out with him. This separate
life, this freezing loneliness, she had had enough of it. Why shouldn’t
she too be happy? Why on earth—the energetic expression matched her
mood of rebelliousness—shouldn’t she too be loved and allowed to love?

She looked at her little clock. Still ten minutes before dinner. Tired
of staying in her bedroom she thought she would go on to Mrs. Fisher’s
battlements, which would be empty at this hour, and watch the moon rise
out of the sea.

She went into the deserted upper hall with this intention, but was
attracted on her way along it by the firelight shining through the open
door of the drawing-room.

How gay it looked. The fire transformed the room. A dark, ugly room in
the daytime, it was transformed just as she had been transformed by the
warmth of—no, she wouldn’t be silly; she would think of the poor; the
thought of them always brought her down to sobriety at once.

She peeped in. Firelight and flowers; and outside the deep slits of
windows hung the blue curtain of the night. How pretty. What a sweet
place San Salvatore was. And that gorgeous lilac on the table—she must
go and put her face in it . . .

But she never got to the lilac. She went one step towards it, and then
stood still, for she had seen the figure looking out of the window in
the farthest corner, and it was Frederick.

All the blood in Rose’s body rushed to her heart and seemed to stop its
beating.

Frederick. Come.

She stood quite still. He had not heard her. He did not turn round. She
stood looking at him. The miracle had happened, and he had come.

She stood holding her breath. So he needed her, for he had come
instantly. So he too must have been thinking, longing . . .

Her heart, which had seemed to stop beating, was suffocating her now,
the way it raced along. Frederick did love her then—he must love her,
or why had he come? Something, perhaps her absence, had made him turn
to her, want her . . . and now the understanding she had made up her
mind to have with him would be quite—would be quite—easy—

Her thoughts wouldn’t go on. Her mind stammered. She couldn’t think.
She could only see and feel. She didn’t know how it had happened. It
was a miracle. God could do miracles. God had done this one. God
could—God could—could—

Her mind stammered again, and broke off.

“Frederick—” she tried to say; but no sound came, or if it did the
crackling of the fire covered it up.

She must go nearer. She began to creep towards him—softly, softly.

He did not move. He had not heard.

She stole nearer and nearer, and the fire crackled and he heard
nothing.

She stopped a moment, unable to breathe. She was afraid. Suppose
he—suppose he—oh, but he had come, he had come.

She went on again, close up to him, and her heart beat so loud that she
thought he must hear it. And couldn’t he feel—didn’t he know—

“Frederick,” she whispered, hardly able even to whisper, choked by the
beating of her heart.

He spun round on his heels.

“Rose!” he exclaimed, staring blankly.

But she did not see his stare, for her arms were round his neck, and
her cheek was against his, and she was murmuring, her lips on his ear,
“I knew you would come—in my very heart I always, always knew you would
come—”




Chapter 21


Now Frederick was not the man to hurt anything if he could help it;
besides, he was completely bewildered. Not only was his wife here—here,
of all places in the world—but she was clinging to him as she had not
clung for years, and murmuring love, and welcoming him. If she welcomed
him she must have been expecting him. Strange as this was, it was the
only thing in the situation which was evident—that, and the softness of
her cheek against his, and the long-forgotten sweet smell of her.

Frederick was bewildered. But not being the man to hurt anything if he
could help it he too put his arms round her, and having put them round
her he also kissed her; and presently he was kissing her almost as
tenderly as she was kissing him; and presently he was kissing her quite
as tenderly; and again presently he was kissing her more tenderly, and
just as if he had never left off.

He was bewildered, but he still could kiss. It seemed curiously natural
to be doing it. It made him feel as if he were thirty again instead of
forty, and Rose were his Rose of twenty, the Rose he had so much adored
before she began to weigh what he did with her idea of right, and the
balance went against him, and she had turned strange, and stony, and
more and more shocked, and oh, so lamentable. He couldn’t get at her in
those days at all; she wouldn’t, she couldn’t understand. She kept on
referring everything to what she called God’s eyes—in God’s eyes it
couldn’t be right, it wasn’t right. Her miserable face—whatever her
principles did for her they didn’t make her happy—her little miserable
face, twisted with effort to be patient, had been at last more than he
could bear to see, and he had kept away as much as he could. She never
ought to have been the daughter of a low-church rector—narrow devil;
she was quite unfitted to stand up against such an upbringing.

What had happened, why she was here, why she was his Rose again, passed
his comprehension; and meanwhile, and until such time as he understood,
he still could kiss. In fact he could not stop kissing; and it was he
now who began to murmur, to say love things in her ear under the hair
that smelt so sweet and tickled him just as he remembered it used to
tickle him.

And as he held her close to his heart and her arms were soft round his
neck, he felt stealing over him a delicious sense of—at first he didn’t
know what it was, this delicate, pervading warmth, and then he
recognised it as security. Yes; security. No need now to be ashamed of
his figure, and to make jokes about it so as to forestall other
people’s and show he didn’t mind it; no need now to be ashamed of
getting hot going up hills, or to torment himself with pictures of how
he probably appeared to beautiful young women—how middle-aged, how
absurd in his inability to keep away from them. Rose cared nothing for
such things. With her he was safe. To her he was her lover, as he used
to be; and she would never notice or mind any of the ignoble changes
that getting older had made in him and would go on making more and
more.

Frederick continued, therefore, with greater and greater warmth and
growing delight to kiss his wife, and the mere holding of her in
his arms caused him to forget everything else. How could he, for
instance, remember or think of Lady Caroline, to mention only one of
the complications with which his situation bristled, when here was his
sweet wife, miraculously restored to him, whispering with her cheek
against his in the dearest, most romantic words how much she loved him,
how terribly she had missed him? He did for one brief instant, for even
in moments of love there are brief instants of lucid thought, recognise
the immense power of the woman present and being actually held compared
to that of the woman, however beautiful, who is somewhere else, but
that is as far as he got towards remembering Scrap; no farther. She was
like a dream, fleeing before the morning light.

“When did you start?” murmured Rose, her mouth on his ear. She couldn’t
let him go; not even to talk she couldn’t let him go.

“Yesterday morning,” murmured Frederick, holding her close. He couldn’t
let her go either.

“Oh—the very instant then,” murmured Rose.

This was cryptic, but Frederick said, “Yes, the very instant,” and
kissed her neck.

“How quickly my letter got to you,” murmured Rose, whose eyes were shut
in the excess of her happiness.

“Didn’t it,” said Frederick, who felt like shutting his eyes himself.

So there had been a letter. Soon, no doubt, light would be vouchsafed
him, and meanwhile this was so strangely, touchingly sweet, this
holding his Rose to his heart again after all the years, that he
couldn’t bother to try to guess anything. Oh, he had been happy during
these years, because it was not in him to be unhappy; besides, how many
interests life had had to offer him, how many friends, how much
success, how many women only too willing to help him to blot out the
thought of the altered, petrified, pitiful little wife at home who
wouldn’t spend his money, who was appalled by his books, who drifted
away and away from him, and always if he tried to have it out with her
asked him with patient obstinacy what he thought the things he wrote
and lived by looked in the eyes of God. “No one,” she said once,
“should ever write a book God wouldn’t like to read. That is the test,
Frederick.” And he had laughed hysterically, burst into a great shriek
of laughter, and rushed out of the house, away from her solemn little
face—away from her pathetic, solemn little face. . .

But this Rose was his youth again, the best part of his life, the part
of it that had had all the visions in it and all the hopes. How they
had dreamed together, he and she, before he struck that vein of
memoirs; how they had planned, and laughed, and loved. They had lived
for a while in the very heart of poetry. After the happy days came the
happy nights, the happy, happy nights, with her asleep close against
his heart, with her when he woke in the morning still close against his
heart, for they hardly moved in their deep, happy sleep. It was
wonderful to have it all come back to him at the touch of her, at the
feel of her face against his—wonderful that she should be able to give
him back his youth.

“Sweetheart—sweetheart,” he murmured, overcome by remembrance, clinging
to her now in his turn.

“Beloved husband,” she breathed—the bliss of it—the sheer bliss . . .

Briggs, coming in a few minutes before the gong went on the chance that
Lady Caroline might be there, was much astonished. He had supposed Rose
Arbuthnot was a widow, and he still supposed it; so that he was much
astonished.

“Well I’m damned,” thought Briggs, quite clearly and distinctly, for
the shock of what he saw in the window startled him so much that for a
moment he was shaken free of his own confused absorption.

Aloud he said, very red, “Oh I say—I beg your pardon”—and then stood
hesitating, and wondering whether he oughtn’t to go back to his bedroom
again.

If he had said nothing they would not have noticed he was there, but
when he begged their pardon Rose turned and looked at him as one looks
who is trying to remember, and Frederick looked at him too without at
first quite seeing him.

They didn’t seem, thought Briggs, to mind or to be at all embarrassed.
He couldn’t be her brother; no brother ever brought that look into a
woman’s face. It was very awkward. If they didn’t mind, he did. It
upset him to come across his Madonna forgetting herself.

“Is this one of your friends?” Frederick was able after an instant to
ask Rose, who made no attempt to introduce the young man standing
awkwardly in front of them but continued to gaze at him with a kind of
abstracted, radiant goodwill.

“It’s Mr. Briggs,” said Rose, recognizing him. “This is my husband,”
she added.

And Briggs, shaking hands, just had time to think how surprising it was
to have a husband when you were a widow before the gong sounded, and
Lady Caroline would be there in a minute, and he ceased to be able to
think at all, and merely became a thing with its eyes fixed on the
door.

Through the door immediately entered, in what seemed to him an endless
procession, first Mrs. Fisher, very stately in her evening lace shawl
and brooch, who when she saw him at once relaxed into smiles and
benignity, only to stiffen, however, when she caught sight of the
stranger; then Mr. Wilkins, cleaner and neater and more carefully
dressed and brushed than any man on earth; and then, tying something
hurriedly as she came, Mrs. Wilkins; and then nobody.

Lady Caroline was late. Where was she? Had she heard the gong? Oughtn’t
it to be beaten again? Suppose she didn’t come to dinner after all. . .

Briggs went cold.

“Introduce me,” said Frederick on Mrs. Fisher’s entrance, touching
Rose’s elbow.

“My husband,” said Rose, holding him by the hand, her face exquisite.

“This,” thought Mrs. Fisher, “must now be the last of the husbands,
unless Lady Caroline produces one from up her sleeve.”

But she received him graciously, for he certainly looked exactly like a
husband, not at all like one of those people who go about abroad
pretending they are husbands when they are not, and said she supposed
he had come to accompany his wife home at the end of the month, and
remarked that now the house would be completely full. “So that,” she
added, smiling at Briggs, “we shall at last really be getting our
money’s worth.”

Briggs grinned automatically, because he was just able to realise that
somebody was being playful with him, but he had not heard her and he
did not look at her. Not only were his eyes fixed on the door but his
whole body was concentrated on it.

Introduced in his turn, Mr. Wilkins was most hospitable and called
Frederick “sir.”

“Well, sir,” said Mr. Wilkins heartily, “here we are, here we are”—and
having gripped his hand with an understanding that only wasn’t mutual
because Arbuthnot did not yet know what he was in for in the way of
trouble, he looked at him as a man should, squarely in the eyes, and
allowed his look to convey as plainly as a look can that in him would
be found staunchness, integrity, reliability—in fact a friend in need.
Mrs. Arbuthnot was very much flushed, Mr. Wilkins noticed. He had not
seen her flushed like that before. “Well, I’m their man,” he thought.

Lotty’s greeting was effusive. It was done with both hands. “Didn’t I
tell you?” she laughed to Rose over her shoulder while Frederick was
shaking her hands in both his.

“What did you tell her?” asked Frederick, in order to say something.
The way they were all welcoming him was confusing. They had evidently
all expected him, not only Rose.

The sandy but agreeable young woman didn’t answer his question, but
looked extraordinarily pleased to see him. Why should she be
extraordinarily pleased to see him?

“What a delightful place this is,” said Frederick, confused, and making
the first remark that occurred to him.

“It’s a tub of love,” said the sandy young woman earnestly; which
confused him more than ever.

And his confusion became excessive at the next words he heard—spoken,
these, by the old lady, who said: “We won’t wait. Lady Caroline is
always late”—for he only then, on hearing her name, really and properly
remembered Lady Caroline, and the thought of her confused him to
excess.

He went into the dining-room like a man in a dream. He had come out to
this place to see Lady Caroline, and had told her so. He had even told
her in his fatuousness—it was true, but how fatuous—that he hadn’t been
able to help coming. She didn’t know he was married. She thought his
name was Arundel. Everybody in London thought his name was Arundel. He
had used it and written under it so long that he almost thought it was
himself. In the short time since she had left him on the seat in the
garden, where he told her he had come because he couldn’t help it, he
had found Rose again, had passionately embraced and been embraced, and
had forgotten Lady Caroline. It would be an extraordinary piece of good
fortune if Lady Caroline’s being late meant she was tired or bored and
would not come to dinner at all. Then he could—no, he couldn’t. He
turned a deeper red even than usual, he being a man of full habit and
red anyhow, at the thought of such cowardice. No, he couldn’t go away
after dinner and catch his train and disappear to Rome; not unless,
that is, Rose came with him. But even so, what a running away. No, he
couldn’t.

When they got to the dining-room Mrs. Fisher went to the head of the
table—was this Mrs. Fisher’s house? he asked himself. He didn’t know;
he didn’t know anything—and Rose, who in her earlier days of defying
Mrs. Fisher had taken the other end as her place, for after all no one
could say by looking at a table which was its top and which its bottom,
led Frederick to the seat next to her. If only, he thought, he could
have been alone with Rose; just five minutes more alone with Rose, so
that he could have asked her—

But probably he wouldn’t have asked her anything, and only gone on
kissing her.

He looked round. The sandy young woman was telling the man they called
Briggs to go and sit beside Mrs. Fisher—was the house, then, the sandy
young woman’s and not Mrs. Fisher’s? He didn’t know; he didn’t know
anything—and she herself sat down on Rose’s other side, so that she was
opposite him, Frederick, and next to the genial man who had said “Here
we are,” when it was only too evident that there they were indeed.

Next to Frederick, and between him and Briggs, was an empty chair: Lady
Caroline’s. No more than Lady Caroline knew of the presence in
Frederick’s life of Rose was Rose aware of the presence in Frederick’s
life of Lady Caroline. What would each think? He didn’t know; he didn’t
know anything. Yes, he did know something, and that was that his wife
had made it up with him—suddenly, miraculously, unaccountably, and
divinely. Beyond that he knew nothing. The situation was one with which
he felt he could not cope. It must lead him whither it would. He could
only drift.

In silence Frederick ate his soup, and the eyes, the large expressive
eyes of the young woman opposite, were on him, he could feel, with a
growing look in them of inquiry. They were, he could see, very
intelligent and attractive eyes, and full, apart from the inquiry of
goodwill. Probably she thought he ought to talk—but if she knew
everything she wouldn’t think so. Briggs didn’t talk either. Briggs
seemed uneasy. What was the matter with Briggs? And Rose too didn’t
talk, but then that was natural. She never had been a talker. She had
the loveliest expression on her face. How long would it be on it after
Lady Caroline’s entrance? He didn’t know; he didn’t know anything.

But the genial man on Mrs. Fisher’s left was talking enough for
everybody. That fellow ought to have been a parson. Pulpits were the
place for a voice like his; it would get him a bishopric in six months.
He was explaining to Briggs, who shuffled about in his seat—why did
Briggs shuffle about in his seat?—that he must have come out by the
same train as Arbuthnot, and when Briggs, who said nothing, wriggled in
apparent dissent, he undertook to prove it to him, and did prove it to
him in long clear sentences.

“Who’s the man with the voice?” Frederick asked Rose in a whisper; and
the young woman opposite, whose ears appeared to have the quickness of
hearing of wild creatures, answered, “He’s my husband.”

“Then by all the rules,” said Frederick pleasantly, pulling himself
together, “you oughtn’t to be sitting next to him.”

“But I want to. I like sitting next to him. I didn’t before I came
here.”

Frederick could think of nothing to say to this, so he only smiled
generally.

“It’s this place,” she said, nodding at him. “It makes one understand.
You’ve no idea what a lot you’ll understand before you’ve done here.”

“I’m sure I hope so,” said Frederick with real fervour.

The soup was taken away, and the fish was brought. Briggs, on the other
side of the empty chair, seemed more uneasy than ever. What was the
matter with Briggs? Didn’t he like fish?

Frederick wondered what Briggs would do in the way of fidgets if he
were in his own situation. Frederick kept on wiping his moustache, and
was not able to look up from his plate, but that was as much as he
showed of what he was feeling.

Though he didn’t look up he felt the eyes of the young woman opposite
raking him like searchlights, and Rose’s eyes were on him too, he knew,
but they rested on him unquestioningly, beautifully, like a
benediction. How long would they go on doing that once Lady Caroline
was there? He didn’t know; he didn’t know anything.

He wiped his moustache for the twentieth unnecessary time, and could
not quite keep his hand steady, and the young woman opposite saw his
hand not being quite steady, and her eyes raked him persistently. Why
did her eyes rake him persistently? He didn’t know; he didn’t know
anything.

Then Briggs leapt to his feet. What was the matter with Briggs?
Oh—yes—quite: she had come.

Frederick wiped his moustache and got up too. He was in for it now.
Absurd, fantastic situation. Well, whatever happened he could only
drift—drift, and look like an ass to Lady Caroline, the most absolute
as well as deceitful ass—an ass who was also a reptile, for she might
well think he had been mocking her out in the garden when he said, no
doubt in a shaking voice—fool and ass—that he had come because he
couldn’t help it; while as for what he would look like to his Rose—when
Lady Caroline introduced him to her—when Lady Caroline introduced him
as her friend whom she had invited in to dinner—well, God alone knew
that.

He, therefore, as he got up wiped his moustache for the last time
before the catastrophe.

But he was reckoning without Scrap.

That accomplished and experienced young woman slipped into the chair
Briggs was holding for her, and on Lotty’s leaning across eagerly, and
saying before any one else could get a word in, “Just fancy, Caroline,
how quickly Rose’s husband has got here!” turned to him without so much
as the faintest shadow of surprise on her face, and held out her hand,
and smiled like a young angel, and said, “and me late your very first
evening.”

The daughter of the Droitwiches. . .




Chapter 22


That evening was the evening of the full moon. The garden was an
enchanted place where all the flowers seemed white. The lilies, the
daphnes, the orange-blossom, the white stocks, the white pinks, the
white roses—you could see these as plainly as in the day-time; but the
coloured flowers existed only as fragrance.

The three younger women sat on the low wall at the end of the top
garden after dinner, Rose a little apart from the others, and watched
the enormous moon moving slowly over the place where Shelley had lived
his last months just on a hundred years before. The sea quivered along
the path of the moon. The stars winked and trembled. The mountains were
misty blue outlines, with little clusters of lights shining through
from little clusters of homes. In the garden the plants stood quite
still, straight and unstirred by the smallest ruffle of air. Through
the glass doors the dining-room, with its candle-lit table and
brilliant flowers—nasturtiums and marigolds that night—glowed like some
magic cave of colour, and the three men smoking round it looked
strangely animated figures seen from the silence, the huge cool calm of
outside.

Mrs. Fisher had gone to the drawing-room and the fire. Scrap and Lotty,
their faces upturned to the sky, said very little and in whispers. Rose
said nothing. Her face too was upturned. She was looking at the
umbrella pine, which had been smitten into something glorious,
silhouetted against stars. Every now and then Scrap’s eyes lingered on
Rose; so did Lotty’s. For Rose was lovely. Anywhere at that moment,
among all the well-known beauties, she would have been lovely. Nobody
could have put her in the shade, blown out her light that evening; she
was too evidently shining.

Lotty bent close to Scrap’s ear, and whispered. “Love,” she whispered.

Scrap nodded. “Yes,” she said, under her breath.

She was obliged to admit it. You only had to look at Rose to know that
here was Love.

“There’s nothing like it,” whispered Lotty.

Scrap was silent.

“It’s a great thing,” whispered Lotty after a pause, during which they
both watched Rose’s upturned face, “to get on with one’s loving.
Perhaps you can tell me of anything else in the world that works such
wonders.”

But Scrap couldn’t tell her; and if she could have, what a night to
begin arguing in. This was a night for—

She pulled herself up. Love again. It was everywhere. There was no
getting away from it. She had come to this place to get away from it,
and here was everybody in its different stages. Even Mrs. Fisher seemed
to have been brushed by one of the many feathers of Love’s wing, and at
dinner was different—full of concern because Mr. Briggs wouldn’t eat,
and her face when she turned to him all soft with motherliness.

Scrap looked up at the pine-tree motionless among stars. Beauty made
you love, and love made you beautiful. . .

She pulled her wrap closer round her with a gesture of defence, of
keeping out and off. She didn’t want to grow sentimental. Difficult not
to, here; the marvellous night stole in through all one’s chinks, and
brought in with it, whether one wanted them or not, enormous
feelings—feelings one couldn’t manage, great things about death and
time and waste; glorious and devastating things, magnificent and bleak,
at once rapture and terror and immense, heart-cleaving longing. She
felt small and dreadfully alone. She felt uncovered and defenceless.
Instinctively she pulled her wrap closer. With this thing of chiffon
she tried to protect herself from the eternities.

“I suppose,” whispered Lotty, “Rose’s husband seems to you just an
ordinary, good-natured, middle-aged man.”

Scrap brought her gaze down from the stars and looked at Lotty a moment
while she focussed her mind again.

“Just a rather red, rather round man,” whispered Lotty.

Scrap bowed her head.

“He isn’t,” whispered Lotty. “Rose sees through all that. That’s mere
trimmings. She sees what we can’t see, because she loves him.”

Always love.

Scrap got up, and winding herself very tightly in her wrap moved away
to her day corner, and sat down there alone on the wall and looked out
across the other sea, the sea where the sun had gone down, the sea with
the far-away dim shadow stretching into it which was France.

Yes, love worked wonders, and Mr. Arundel—she couldn’t at once get used
to his other name—was to Rose Love itself; but it also worked inverted
wonders, it didn’t invariably, as she well knew, transfigure people
into saints and angels. Grievously indeed did it sometimes do the
opposite. She had had it in her life applied to her to excess. If it
had let her alone, if it had at least been moderate and infrequent, she
might, she thought, have turned out a quite decent, generous-minded,
kindly, human being. And what was she, thanks to this love Lotty talked
so much about? Scrap searched for a just description. She was a spoilt,
a sour, a suspicious, and a selfish spinster.

The glass doors of the dining-room opened, and the three men came out
into the garden, Mr. Wilkins’s voice flowing along in front of them. He
appeared to be doing all the talking; the other two were saying
nothing.

Perhaps she had better go back to Lotty and Rose; it would be tiresome
to be discovered and hemmed into thate _cul-de-sac_ by Mr. Briggs.

She got up reluctantly, for she considered it unpardonable of Mr.
Briggs to force her to move about like this, to force her out of any
place she wished to sit in; and she emerged from the daphne bushes
feeling like some gaunt, stern figure of just resentment and wishing
that she looked as gaunt and stern as she felt; so would she have
struck repugnance into the soul of Mr. Briggs, and been free of him.
But she knew she didn’t look like that, however hard she might try. At
dinner his hand shook when he drank, and he couldn’t speak to her
without flushing scarlet and then going pale, and Mrs. Fisher’s eyes
had sought hers with the entreaty of one who asks that her only son may
not be hurt.

How could a human being, thought Scrap, frowning as she issued forth
from her corner, how could a man made in God’s image behave so; and he
fitted for better things she was sure, with his youth, his
attractiveness, and his brains. He had brains. She had examined him
cautiously whenever at dinner Mrs. Fisher forced him to turn away to
answer her, and she was sure he had brains. Also he had character;
there was something noble about his head, about the shape of his
forehead—noble and kind. All the more deplorable that he should allow
himself to be infatuated by a mere outside, and waste any of his
strength, any of his peace of mind, hanging round just a woman-thing.
If only he could see right through her, see through all her skin and
stuff, he would be cured, and she might go on sitting undisturbed on
this wonderful night by herself.

Just beyond the daphne bushes she met Frederick, hurrying.

“I was determined to find you first,” he said, “before I go to Rose.”
And he added quickly, “I want to kiss your shoes.”

“Do you?” said Scrap, smiling. “Then I must go and put on my new ones.
These aren’t nearly good enough.”

She felt immensely well-disposed towards Frederick. He, at least, would
grab no more. His grabbing days, so sudden and so brief, were done.
Nice man; agreeable man. She now definitely liked him. Clearly he had
been getting into some sort of a tangle, and she was grateful to Lotty
for stopping her in time at dinner from saying something hopelessly
complicating. But whatever he had been getting into he was out of it
now; his face and Rose’s face had the same light in them.

“I shall adore you for ever now,” said Frederick.

Scrap smiled. “Shall you?” she said.

“I adored you before because of your beauty. Now I adore you because
you’re not only as beautiful as a dream but as decent as a man.”

Scrap laughed. “Am I?” she said, amused.

“When the impetuous young woman,” Frederick went on, “the blessedly
impetuous young woman, blurted out in the nick of time that I am Rose’s
husband, you behaved exactly as a man would have behaved to his
friend.”

“Did I?” said Scrap, her enchanting dimple very evident.

“It’s the rarest, most precious of combinations,” said Frederick, “to
be a woman and have the loyalty of a man.”

“Is it?” smiled Scrap, a little wistfully. These were indeed handsome
compliments. If only she were really like that . . .

“And I want to kiss your shoes.”

“Won’t this save trouble?” she asked, holding out her hand.

He took it and swiftly kissed it, and was hurrying away again. “Bless
you,” he said as he went.

“Where is your luggage?” Scrap called after him.

“Oh, Lord, yes—” said Frederick, pausing. “It’s at the station.”

“I’ll send for it.”

He disappeared through the bushes. She went indoors to give the order;
and this is how it happened that Domenico, for the second time that
evening, found himself journeying into Mezzago and wondering as he
went.

Then, having made the necessary arrangements for the perfect happiness
of these two people, she came slowly out into the garden again, very
much absorbed in thought. Love seemed to bring happiness to everybody
but herself. It had certainly got hold of everybody there, in its
different varieties, except herself. Poor Mr. Briggs had been got hold
of by its least dignified variety. Poor Mr. Briggs. He was a disturbing
problem, and his going away next day wouldn’t she was afraid solve him.

When she reached the others Mr. Arundel—she kept on forgetting that he
wasn’t Mr. Arundel—was already, his arm through Rose’s, going off with
her, probably to the greater seclusion of the lower garden. No doubt
they had a great deal to say to each other; something had gone wrong
between them, and had suddenly been put right. San Salvatore, Lotty
would say, San Salvatore working its spell of happiness. She could
quite believe in its spell. Even she was happier there than she had
been for ages and ages. The only person who would go empty away would
be Mr. Briggs.

Poor Mr. Briggs. When she came in sight of the group he looked much too
nice and boyish not to be happy. It seemed out of the picture that the
owner of the place, the person to whom they owed all this, should be
the only one to go away from it unblessed.

Compunction seized Scrap. What very pleasant days she had spent in his
house, lying in his garden, enjoying his flowers, loving his views,
using his things, being comfortable, being rested—recovering, in fact.
She had had the most leisured, peaceful, and thoughtful time of her
life; and all really thanks to him. Oh, she knew she paid him some
ridiculous small sum a week, out of all proportion to the benefits she
got in exchange, but what was that in the balance? And wasn’t it
entirely thanks to him that she had come across Lotty? Never else would
she and Lotty have met; never else would she have known her.

Compunction laid its quick, warm hand on Scrap. Impulsive gratitude
flooded her. She went straight up to Briggs.

“I owe you so _much_,” she said, overcome by the sudden realisation of
all she did owe him, and ashamed of her churlishness in the afternoon
and at dinner. Of course he hadn’t known she was being churlish. Of
course her disagreeable inside was camouflaged as usual by the chance
arrangement of her outside; but she knew it. She was churlish. She had
been churlish to everybody for years. Any penetrating eye, thought
Scrap, any really penetrating eye, would see her for what she was—a
spoilt, a sour, a suspicious and a selfish spinster.

“I owe you so _much_,” therefore said Scrap earnestly, walking straight
up to Briggs, humbled by these thoughts.

He looked at her in wonder. “_You_ owe _me?_” he said. “But it’s I
who—I who—” he stammered. To see her there in his garden . . . nothing
in it, no white flower, was whiter, more exquisite.

“Please,” said Scrap, still more earnestly, “won’t you clear your mind
of everything except just truth? You don’t owe me anything. How should
you?”

“I don’t owe you anything?” echoed Briggs. “Why, I owe you my first
sight of—of—”

“Oh, for goodness sake—for _goodness_ sake,” said Scrap entreatingly,
“do, please, be ordinary. Don’t be humble. Why should you be humble?
It’s ridiculous of you to be humble. You’re worth fifty of me.”

“Unwise,” thought Mr. Wilkins, who was standing there too, while Lotty
sat on the wall. He was surprised, he was concerned, he was shocked
that Lady Caroline should thus encourage Briggs. “Unwise—very,”
thought Mr. Wilkins, shaking his head.

Briggs’s condition was so bad already that the only course to take with
him was to repel him utterly, Mr. Wilkins considered. No half measures
were the least use with Briggs, and kindliness and familiar talk would
only be misunderstood by the unhappy youth. The daughter of the
Droitwiches could not really, it was impossible to suppose it, desire
to encourage him. Briggs was all very well, but Briggs was Briggs; his
name alone proved that. Probably Lady Caroline did not quite appreciate
the effect of her voice and face, and how between them they made
otherwise ordinary words seem—well, encouraging. But these words were
not quite ordinary; she had not, he feared, sufficiently pondered them.
Indeed and indeed she needed an adviser—some sagacious, objective
counsellor like himself. There she was, standing before Briggs almost
holding out her hands to him. Briggs of course ought to be thanked, for
they were having a most delightful holiday in his house, but not
thanked to excess and not by Lady Caroline alone. That very evening he
had been considering the presentation to him next day of a round robin
of collective gratitude on his departure; but he should not be thanked
like this, in the moonlight, in the garden, by the lady he was so
manifestly infatuated with.

Mr. Wilkins therefore, desiring to assist Lady Caroline out of this
situation by swiftly applied tact, said with much heartiness: “It is
most proper, Briggs, that you should be thanked. You will please allow
me to add my expressions of indebtedness, and those of my wife, to Lady
Caroline’s. We ought to have proposed a vote of thanks to you at
dinner. You should have been toasted. There certainly ought to have
been some—”

But Briggs took no notice of him whatever; he simply continued to look
at Lady Caroline as though she were the first woman he had ever seen.
Neither, Mr. Wilkins observed, did Lady Caroline take any notice of
him; she too continued to look at Briggs, and with that odd air of
almost appeal. Most unwise. Most.

Lotty, on the other hand, took too much notice of him, choosing this
moment when Lady Caroline needed special support and protection to get
up off the wall and put her arm through his and draw him away.

“I want to tell you something, Mellersh,” said Lotty at this juncture,
getting up.

“Presently,” said Mr. Wilkins, waving her aside.

“No—now,” said Lotty; and she drew him away.

He went with extreme reluctance. Briggs should be given no rope at
all—not an inch.

“Well—what is it?” he asked impatiently, as she led him towards the
house. Lady Caroline ought not to be left like that, exposed to
annoyance.

“Oh, but she isn’t,” Lotty assured him, just as if he had said this
aloud, which he certainly had not. “Caroline is perfectly all right.”

“Not at all all right. That young Briggs is—”

“Of course he is. What did you expect? Let’s go indoors to the fire and
Mrs. Fisher. She’s all by herself.”

“I cannot,” said Mr. Wilkins, trying to draw back, “leave Lady Caroline
alone in the garden.”

“Don’t be silly, Mellersh—she isn’t alone. Besides, I want to tell you
something.”

“Well tell me, then.”

“Indoors.”

With a reluctance that increased at every step Mr. Wilkins was taken
farther and farther away from Lady Caroline. He believed in his wife
now and trusted her, but on this occasion he thought she was making a
terrible mistake. In the drawing-room sat Mrs. Fisher by the fire, and
it certainly was to Mr. Wilkins, who preferred rooms and fires after
dark to gardens and moonlight, more agreeable to be in there than
out-of-doors if he could have brought Lady Caroline safely in with him.
As it was, he went in with extreme reluctance.

Mrs. Fisher, her hands folded on her lap, was doing nothing, merely
gazing fixedly into the fire. The lamp was arranged conveniently for
reading, but she was not reading. Her great dead friends did not seem
worth reading that night. They always said the same things now—over and
over again they said the same things, and nothing new was to be got out
of them any more for ever. No doubt they were greater than any one was
now, but they had this immense disadvantage, that they were dead.
Nothing further was to be expected of them; while of the living, what
might one not still expect? She craved for the living, the
developing—the crystallised and finished wearied her. She was thinking
that if only she had had a son—a son like Mr. Briggs, a dear boy like
that, going on, unfolding, alive, affectionate, taking care of her and
loving her. . .

The look on her face gave Mrs. Wilkins’s heart a little twist when she
saw it. “Poor old dear,” she thought, all the loneliness of age
flashing upon her, the loneliness of having outstayed one’s welcome in
the world, of being in it only on sufferance, the complete loneliness
of the old childless woman who has failed to make friends. It did seem
that people could only be really happy in pairs—any sorts of pairs, not
in the least necessarily lovers, but pairs of friends, pairs of mothers
and children, of brothers and sisters—and where was the other half of
Mrs. Fisher’s pair going to be found?

Mrs. Wilkins thought she had perhaps better kiss her again. The kissing
this afternoon had been a great success; she knew it, she had instantly
felt Mrs. Fisher’s reaction to it. So she crossed over and bent down
and kissed her and said cheerfully, “We’ve come in—” which indeed was
evident.

This time Mrs. Fisher actually put up her hand and held Mrs. Wilkins’s
cheek against her own—this living thing, full of affection, of warm,
racing blood; and as she did this she felt safe with the strange
creature, sure that she who herself did unusual things so naturally
would take the action quite as a matter of course, and not embarrass
her by being surprised.

Mrs. Wilkins was not at all surprised; she was delighted. “I believe
_I’m_ the other half of her pair,” flashed into her mind. “I believe
it’s me, positively me, going to be fast friends with Mrs. Fisher!”

Her face when she lifted her head was full of laughter. Too
extraordinary, the developments produced by San Salvatore. She and Mrs.
Fisher . . . but she _saw_ them being fast friends.

“Where are the others?” asked Mrs. Fisher. “Thank you—dear,” she added,
as Mrs. Wilkins put a footstool under her feet, a footstool obviously
needed, Mrs. Fisher’s legs being short.

“I see myself throughout the years,” thought Mrs. Wilkins, her eyes
dancing, “bringing footstools to Mrs. Fisher. . .”

“The Roses,” she said, straightening herself, “have gone into the lower
garden—I _think_ lovemaking.”

“The Roses?”

“The Fredericks, then, if you like. They’re completely merged and
indistinguishable.”

“Why not say the Arbuthnots, my dear?” said Mr. Wilkins.

“Very well, Mellersh—the Arbuthnots. And the Carolines—”

Both Mr. Wilkins and Mrs. Fisher started. Mr. Wilkins, usually in such
complete control of himself, started even more than Mrs. Fisher, and
for the first time since his arrival felt angry with his wife.

“Really—” he began indignantly.

“Very well, Mellersh—the Briggses, then.”

“The Briggses!” cried Mr. Wilkins, now very angry indeed; for the
implication was to him a most outrageous insult to the entire race of
Desters—dead Desters, living Desters, and Desters still harmless
because they were yet unborn. “Really—”

“I’m sorry, Mellersh,” said Mrs. Wilkins, pretending meekness, “if you
don’t like it.”

“Like it! You’ve taken leave of your senses. Why, they’ve never set
eyes on each other before to-day.”

“That’s true. But that’s why they’re able now to go ahead.”

“Go ahead!” Mr. Wilkins could only echo the outrageous words.

“I’m sorry, Mellersh,” said Mrs. Wilkins again, “if you don’t like it,
but—”

Her grey eyes shone, and her face rippled with the light and conviction
that had so much surprised Rose the first time they met.

“It’s useless minding,” she said. “I shouldn’t struggle if I were you.
Because—”

She stopped, and looked first at one alarmed solemn face and then at
the other, and laughter as well as light flickered and danced over her.

“I see them being the Briggses,” finished Mrs. Wilkins.

That last week the syringa came out at San Salvatore, and all the
acacias flowered. No one had noticed how many acacias there were till
one day the garden was full of a new scent, and there were the delicate
trees, the lovely successors to the wistaria, hung all over among their
trembling leaves with blossom. To lie under an acacia tree that last
week and look up through the branches at its frail leaves and white
flowers quivering against the blue of the sky, while the least movement
of the air shook down their scent, was a great happiness. Indeed, the
whole garden dressed itself gradually towards the end in white, and
grew more and more scented. There were the lilies, as vigorous as ever,
and the white stocks and white pinks and white banksia roses, and the
syringa and the jessamine, and at last the crowning fragrance of the
acacias. When, on the first of May, everybody went away, even after
they had got to the bottom of the hill and passed through the iron
gates out into the village they still could smell the acacias.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENCHANTED APRIL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


A wild dog slips by a banana.
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Blue Castle: a novel
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Blue Castle: a novel

Author: L. M. Montgomery

Release date: May 3, 2022 [eBook #67979]
                Most recently updated: July 14, 2023

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Frederick A. Stokes company

Credits: Laura Natal Rodrigues (Images generously made available by Hathi Trust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE CASTLE: A NOVEL ***




_The_
BLUE CASTLE

_A NOVEL_

BY
L. M. MONTGOMERY

NEW YORK
FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
MCMXXVI




CONTENTS

 CHAPTER I
 CHAPTER II
 CHAPTER III
 CHAPTER IV
 CHAPTER V
 CHAPTER VI
 CHAPTER VII
 CHAPTER VIII
 CHAPTER IX
 CHAPTER X
 CHAPTER XI
 CHAPTER XII
 CHAPTER XIII
 CHAPTER XIV
 CHAPTER XV
 CHAPTER XVI
 CHAPTER XVII
 CHAPTER XVIII
 CHAPTER XIX
 CHAPTER XX
 CHAPTER XXI
 CHAPTER XXII
 CHAPTER XXIII
 CHAPTER XXIV
 CHAPTER XXV
 CHAPTER XXVI
 CHAPTER XXVII
 CHAPTER XXVIII
 CHAPTER XXIX
 CHAPTER XXX
 CHAPTER XXXI
 CHAPTER XXXII
 CHAPTER XXXIII
 CHAPTER XXXIV
 CHAPTER XXXV
 CHAPTER XXXVI
 CHAPTER XXXVII
 CHAPTER XXXVIII
 CHAPTER XXXIX
 CHAPTER XL
 CHAPTER XLI
 CHAPTER XLII
 CHAPTER XLIII
 CHAPTER XLIV
 CHAPTER XLV




THE BLUE CASTLE




CHAPTER I


If it had not rained on a certain May morning Valancy Stirling’s whole
life would have been entirely different. She would have gone, with the
rest of her clan, to Aunt Wellington’s engagement picnic and Dr. Trent
would have gone to Montreal. But it did rain and you shall hear what
happened to her because of it.

Valancy wakened early, in the lifeless, hopeless hour just preceding
dawn. She had not slept very well. One does not sleep well, sometimes,
when one is twenty-nine on the morrow, and unmarried, in a community
and connection where the unmarried are simply those who have failed to
get a man.

Deerwood and the Stirlings had long since relegated Valancy to hopeless
old maidenhood. But Valancy herself had never quite relinquished a
certain pitiful, shamed, little hope that Romance would come her way
yet—never, until this wet, horrible morning, when she wakened to the
fact that she was twenty-nine and unsought by any man.

Ay, _there_ lay the sting. Valancy did not mind so much being an old
maid. After all, she thought, being an old maid couldn’t possibly be as
dreadful as being married to an Uncle Wellington or an Uncle Benjamin,
or even an Uncle Herbert. What hurt her was that she had never had a
chance to be anything but an old maid. No man had ever desired her.

The tears came into her eyes as she lay there alone in the faintly
greying darkness. She dared not let herself cry as hard as she wanted
to, for two reasons. She was afraid that crying might bring on another
attack of that pain around the heart. She had had a spell of it after
she had got into bed—rather worse than any she had had yet. And she was
afraid her mother would notice her red eyes at breakfast and keep at
her with minute, persistent, mosquito-like questions regarding the
cause thereof.

“Suppose,” thought Valancy with a ghastly grin, “I answered with the
plain truth, ‘I am crying because I cannot get married.’ How horrified
Mother would be—though she is ashamed every day of her life of her old
maid daughter.”

But of course appearances should be kept up. “It is not,” Valancy could
hear her mother’s prim, dictatorial voice asserting, “it is not
_maidenly_ to think about _men_.”

The thought of her mother’s expression made Valancy laugh—for she had a
sense of humour nobody in her clan suspected. For that matter, there
were a good many things about Valancy that nobody suspected. But her
laughter was very superficial and presently she lay there, a huddled,
futile little figure, listening to the rain pouring down outside and
watching, with a sick distaste, the chill, merciless light creeping
into her ugly, sordid room.

She knew the ugliness of that room by heart—knew it and hated it. The
yellow-painted floor, with one hideous, “hooked” rug by the bed, with a
grotesque, “hooked” dog on it, always grinning at her when she awoke;
the faded, dark-red paper; the ceiling discoloured by old leaks and
crossed by cracks; the narrow, pinched little washstand; the
brown-paper lambrequin with purple roses on it; the spotted old
looking-glass with the crack across it, propped up on the inadequate
dressing-table; the jar of ancient potpourri made by her mother in her
mythical honeymoon; the shell-covered box, with one burst corner, which
Cousin Stickles had made in her equally mythical girlhood; the beaded
pincushion with half its bead fringe gone; the one stiff, yellow chair;
the faded old motto, “Gone but not forgotten,” worked in coloured yarns
about Great-grand-mother Stirling’s grim old face; the old photographs
of ancient relatives long banished from the rooms below. There were
only two pictures that were not of relatives. One, an old chromo of a
puppy sitting on a rainy doorstep. That picture always made Valancy
unhappy. That forlorn little dog crouched on the doorstep in the
driving rain! Why didn’t _some one_ open the door and let him in? The
other picture was a faded, passe-partouted engraving of Queen Louise
coming down a stairway, which Aunt Wellington had lavishly given her on
her tenth birthday. For nineteen years she had looked at it and hated
it, beautiful, smug, self-satisfied Queen Louise. But she never dared
destroy it or remove it. Mother and Cousin Stickles would have been
aghast, or, as Valancy irreverently expressed it in her thoughts, would
have had a fit.

Every room in the house was ugly, of course. But downstairs appearances
were kept up somewhat. There was no money for rooms nobody ever saw.
Valancy sometimes felt that she could have done something for her room
herself, even without money, if she were permitted. But her mother had
negatived every timid suggestion and Valancy did not persist. Valancy
never persisted. She was afraid to. Her mother could not brook
opposition. Mrs. Stirling would sulk for days if offended, with the
airs of an insulted duchess.

The only thing Valancy liked about her room was that she could be alone
there at night to cry if she wanted to.

But, after all, what did it matter if a room, which you used for
nothing except sleeping and dressing in, were ugly? Valancy was never
permitted to stay alone in her room for any other purpose. People who
wanted to be alone, so Mrs. Frederick Stirling and Cousin Stickles
believed, could only want to be alone for some sinister purpose. But
her room in the Blue Castle was everything a room should be.

Valancy, so cowed and subdued and overridden and snubbed in real life,
was wont to let herself go rather splendidly in her day-dreams. Nobody
in the Stirling clan, or its ramifications, suspected this, least of
all her mother and Cousin Stickles. They never knew that Valancy had
two homes—the ugly red brick box of a home, on Elm Street, and the Blue
Castle in Spain. Valancy had lived spiritually in the Blue Castle ever
since she could remember. She had been a very tiny child when she found
herself possessed of it. Always, when she shut her eyes, she could see
it plainly, with its turrets and banners on the pine-clad mountain
height, wrapped in its faint, blue loveliness, against the sunset skies
of a fair and unknown land. Everything wonderful and beautiful was in
that castle. Jewels that queens might have worn; robes of moonlight and
fire; couches of roses and gold; long flights of shallow marble steps,
with great, white urns, and with slender, mist-clad maidens going up
and down them; courts, marble-pillared, where shimmering fountains fell
and nightingales sang among the myrtles; halls of mirrors that
reflected only handsome knights and lovely women—herself the loveliest
of all, for whose glance men died. All that supported her through the
boredom of her days was the hope of going on a dream spree at night.
Most, if not all, of the Stirlings would have died of horror if they
had known half the things Valancy did in her Blue Castle.

For one thing she had quite a few lovers in it. Oh, only one at a time.
One who wooed her with all the romantic ardour of the age of chivalry
and won her after long devotion and many deeds of derring-do, and was
wedded to her with pomp and circumstance in the great, banner-hung
chapel of the Blue Castle.

At twelve, this lover was a fair lad with golden curls and heavenly
blue eyes. At fifteen, he was tall and dark and pale, but still
necessarily handsome. At twenty, he was ascetic, dreamy, spiritual. At
twenty-five, he had a clean-cut jaw, slightly grim, and a face strong
and rugged rather than handsome. Valancy never grew older than
twenty-five in her Blue Castle, but recently—very recently—her hero had
had reddish, tawny hair, a twisted smile and a mysterious past.

I don’t say Valancy deliberately murdered these lovers as she outgrew
them. One simply faded away as another came. Things are very convenient
in this respect in Blue Castles.

But, on this morning of her day of fate, Valancy could not find the key
of her Blue Castle. Reality pressed on her too hardly, barking at her
heels like a maddening little dog. She was twenty-nine, lonely,
undesired, ill-favoured—the only homely girl in a handsome clan, with
no past and no future. As far as she could look back, life was drab and
colourless, with not one single crimson or purple spot anywhere. As far
as she could look forward it seemed certain to be just the same until
she was nothing but a solitary, little withered leaf clinging to a
wintry bough. The moment when a woman realises that she has nothing to
live for—neither love, duty, purpose nor hope—holds for her the
bitterness of death.

“And I just have to go on living because I can’t stop. I may have to
live eighty years,” thought Valancy, in a kind of panic. “We’re all
horribly long-lived. It sickens me to think of it.”

She was glad it was raining—or rather, she was drearily satisfied that
it was raining. There would be no picnic that day. This annual picnic,
whereby Aunt and Uncle Wellington—one always thought of them in that
succession—inevitably celebrated their engagement at a picnic thirty
years before, had been, of late years, a veritable nightmare to
Valancy. By an impish coincidence it was the same day as her birthday
and, after she had passed twenty-five, nobody let her forget it.

Much as she hated going to the picnic, it would never have occurred to
her to rebel against it. There seemed to be nothing of the
revolutionary in her nature. And she knew exactly what every one would
say to her at the picnic. Uncle Wellington, whom she disliked and
despised even though he had fulfilled the highest Stirling aspiration,
“marrying money,” would say to her in a pig’s whisper, “Not thinking of
getting married yet, my dear?” and then go off into the bellow of
laughter with which he invariably concluded his dull remarks. Aunt
Wellington, of whom Valancy stood in abject awe, would tell her about
Olive’s new chiffon dress and Cecil’s last devoted letter. Valancy
would have to look as pleased and interested as if the dress and letter
had been hers or else Aunt Wellington would be offended. And Valancy
had long ago decided that she would rather offend God than Aunt
Wellington, because God might forgive her but Aunt Wellington never
would.

Aunt Alberta, enormously fat, with an amiable habit of always referring
to her husband as “he,” as if he were the only male creature in the
world, who could never forget that she had been a great beauty in her
youth, would condole with Valancy on her sallow skin—

“I don’t know why all the girls of today are so sunburned. When _I_ was
a girl my skin was roses and cream. I was counted the prettiest girl in
Canada, my dear.”

Perhaps Uncle Herbert wouldn’t say anything—or perhaps he would remark
jocularly, “How fat you’re getting, Doss!” And then everybody would
laugh over the excessively humorous idea of poor, scrawny little Doss
getting fat.

Handsome, solemn Uncle James, whom Valancy disliked but respected
because he was reputed to be very clever and was therefore the clan
oracle—brains being none too plentiful in the Stirling connection—would
probably remark with the owl-like sarcasm that had won him his
reputation, “I suppose you’re busy with your hope-chest these days?”

And Uncle Benjamin would ask some of his abominable conundrums, between
wheezy chuckles, and answer them himself.

“What is the difference between Doss and a mouse?

“The mouse wishes to harm the cheese and Doss wishes to charm the
he’s.”

Valancy had heard him ask that riddle fifty times and every time she
wanted to throw something at him. But she never did. In the first
place, the Stirlings simply did not throw things; in the second place,
Uncle Benjamin was a wealthy and childless old widower and Valancy had
been brought up in the fear and admonition of his money. If she
offended him he would cut her out of his will—supposing she were in it.
Valancy did not want to be cut out of Uncle Benjamin’s will. She had
been poor all her life and knew the galling bitterness of it. So she
endured his riddles and even smiled tortured little smiles over them.

Aunt Isabel, downright and disagreeable as an east wind, would
criticise her in some way—Valancy could not predict just how, for Aunt
Isabel never repeated a criticism—she found something new with which to
jab you every time. Aunt Isabel prided herself on saying what she
thought, but didn’t like it so well when other people said what _they_
thought to _her_. Valancy never said what _she_ thought.

Cousin Georgiana—named after her great-great-grand-mother, who had been
named after George the Fourth—would recount dolorously the names of all
relatives and friends who had died since the last picnic and wonder
“which of us will be the first to go next.”

Oppressively competent, Aunt Mildred would talk endlessly of her
husband and her odious prodigies of babies to Valancy, because Valancy
would be the only one she could find to put up with it. For the same
reason, Cousin Gladys—really First Cousin Gladys once removed,
according to the strict way in which the Stirlings tabulated
relationship—a tall, thin lady who admitted she had a sensitive
disposition, would describe minutely the tortures of her neuritis. And
Olive, the wonder girl of the whole Stirling clan, who had everything
Valancy had not—beauty, popularity, love,—would show off her beauty and
presume on her popularity and flaunt her diamond insignia of love in
Valancy’s dazzled, envious eyes.

There would be none of all this today. And there would be no packing up
of teaspoons. The packing up was always left for Valancy and Cousin
Stickles. And once, six years ago, a silver teaspoon from Aunt
Wellington’s wedding set had been lost. Valancy never heard the last of
that silver teaspoon. Its ghost appeared Banquo-like at every
subsequent family feast.

Oh, yes, Valancy knew exactly what the picnic would be like and she
blessed the rain that had saved her from it. There would be no picnic
this year. If Aunt Wellington could not celebrate on the sacred day
itself she would have no celebration at all. Thank whatever gods there
were for that.

Since there would be no picnic, Valancy made up her mind that, if the
rain held up in the afternoon, she would go up to the library and get
another of John Foster’s books. Valancy was never allowed to read
novels, but John Foster’s books were not novels. They were “nature
books”—so the librarian told Mrs. Frederick Stirling—“all about the
woods and birds and bugs and things like that, you know.” So Valancy
was allowed to read them—under protest, for it was only too evident
that she enjoyed them too much. It was permissible, even laudable, to
read to improve your mind and your religion, but a book that was
enjoyable was dangerous. Valancy did not know whether her mind was
being improved or not; but she felt vaguely that if she had come across
John Foster’s books years ago life might have been a different thing
for her. They seemed to her to yield glimpses of a world into which she
might once have entered, though the door was forever barred to her now.
It was only within the last year that John Foster’s books had been in
the Deerwood library, though the librarian told Valancy that he had
been a well-known writer for several years.

“Where does he live?” Valancy had asked.

“Nobody knows. From his books he must be a Canadian, but no more
information can be had. His publishers won’t say a word. Quite likely
John Foster is a nom de plume. His books are so popular we can’t keep
them in at all, though I really can’t see what people find in them to
rave over.”

“I think they’re wonderful,” said Valancy, timidly.

“Oh—well—” Miss Clarkson smiled in a patronising fashion that relegated
Valancy’s opinions to limbo, “I can’t say I care much for bugs myself.
But certainly Foster seems to know all there is to know about them.”

Valancy didn’t know whether she cared much for bugs either. It was not
John Foster’s uncanny knowledge of wild creatures and insect life that
enthralled her. She could hardly say what it was—some tantalising lure
of a mystery never revealed—some hint of a great secret just a little
further on—some faint, elusive echo of lovely, forgotten things—John
Foster’s magic was indefinable.

Yes, she would get a new Foster book. It was a month since she had
_Thistle Harvest_, so surely Mother could not object. Valancy had read
it four times—she knew whole passages off by heart.

And—she almost thought she would go and see Dr. Trent about that queer
pain around the heart. It had come rather often lately, and the
palpitations were becoming annoying, not to speak of an occasional
dizzy moment and a queer shortness of breath. But could she go to see
him without telling any one? It was a most daring thought. None of the
Stirlings ever consulted a doctor without holding a family council and
getting Uncle James’ approval. _Then_, they went to Dr. Ambrose Marsh
of Port Lawrence, who had married Second Cousin Adelaide Stirling.

But Valancy disliked Dr. Ambrose Marsh. And, besides, she could not get
to Port Lawrence, fifteen miles away, without being taken there. She
did not want any one to know about her heart. There would be such a
fuss made and every member of the family would come down and talk it
over and advise her and caution her and warn her and tell her horrible
tales of great-aunts and cousins forty times removed who had been “just
like that” and “dropped dead without a moment’s warning, my dear.”

Aunt Isabel would remember that she had always said Doss looked like a
girl who would have heart trouble—“so pinched and peaked always”; and
Uncle Wellington would take it as a personal insult, when “no Stirling
ever had heart disease before”; and Georgiana would forebode in
perfectly audible asides that “poor, dear little Doss isn’t long for
this world, I’m afraid”; and Cousin Gladys would say, “Why, _my_ heart
has been like that for _years_,” in a tone that implied no one else had
any business even to have a heart; and Olive—Olive would merely look
beautiful and superior and disgustingly healthy, as if to say, “Why all
this fuss over a faded superfluity like Doss when you have _me_?”

Valancy felt that she couldn’t tell anybody unless she had to. She felt
quite sure there was nothing at all seriously wrong with her heart and
no need of all the pother that would ensue if she mentioned it. She
would just slip up quietly and see Dr. Trent that very day. As for his
bill, she had the two hundred dollars that her father had put in the
bank for her the day she was born. She was never allowed to use even
the interest of this, but she would secretly take out enough to pay Dr.
Trent.

Dr. Trent was a gruff, outspoken, absent-minded old fellow, but he was
a recognised authority on heart disease, even if he were only a general
practitioner in out-of-the-world Deerwood. Dr. Trent was over seventy
and there had been rumours that he meant to retire soon. None of the
Stirling clan had ever gone to him since he had told Cousin Gladys, ten
years before, that her neuritis was all imaginary and that she enjoyed
it. You couldn’t patronise a doctor who insulted your
first-cousin-once-removed like that—not to mention that he was a
Presbyterian when all the Stirlings went to the Anglican church. But
Valancy, between the devil of disloyalty to clan and the deep sea of
fuss and clatter and advice, thought she would take a chance with the
devil.




CHAPTER II


When Cousin Stickles knocked at her door, Valancy knew it was half-past
seven and she must get up. As long as she could remember, Cousin
Stickles had knocked at her door at half-past seven. Cousin Stickles
and Mrs. Frederick Stirling had been up since seven, but Valancy was
allowed to lie abed half an hour longer because of a family tradition
that she was delicate. Valancy got up, though she hated getting up more
this morning than ever she had before. What was there to get up for?
Another dreary day like all the days that had preceded it, full of
meaningless little tasks, joyless and unimportant, that benefited
nobody. But if she did not get up at once she would not be ready for
breakfast at eight o’clock. Hard and fast times for meals were the rule
in Mrs. Stirling’s household. Breakfast at eight, dinner at one, supper
at six, year in and year out. No excuses for being late were ever
tolerated. So up Valancy got, shivering.

The room was bitterly cold with the raw, penetrating chill of a wet May
morning. The house would be cold all day. It was one of Mrs.
Frederick’s rules that no fires were necessary after the twenty-fourth
of May. Meals were cooked on the little oil-stove in the back porch.
And though May might be icy and October frost-bitten, no fires were
lighted until the twenty-first of October by the calendar. On the
twenty-first of October Mrs. Frederick began cooking over the kitchen
range and lighted a fire in the sitting-room stove in the evenings. It
was whispered about in the connection that the late Frederick Stirling
had caught the cold which resulted in his death during Valancy’s first
year of life because Mrs. Frederick would not have a fire on the
twentieth of October. She lighted it the next day—but that was a day
too late for Frederick Stirling.

Valancy took off and hung up in the closet her nightdress of coarse,
unbleached cotton, with high neck and long, tight sleeves. She put on
undergarments of a similar nature, a dress of brown gingham, thick,
black stockings and rubber-heeled boots. Of late years she had fallen
into the habit of doing her hair with the shade of the window by the
looking-glass pulled down. The lines on her face did not show so
plainly then. But this morning she jerked the shade to the very top and
looked at herself in the leprous mirror with a passionate determination
to see herself as the world saw her.

The result was rather dreadful. Even a beauty would have found that
harsh, unsoftened side-light trying. Valancy saw straight black hair,
short and thin, always lustreless despite the fact that she gave it one
hundred strokes of the brush, neither more nor less, every night of her
life and faithfully rubbed Redfern’s Hair Vigor into the roots, more
lustreless than ever in its morning roughness; fine, straight, black
brows; a nose she had always felt was much too small even for her
small, three-cornered, white face; a small, pale mouth that always fell
open a trifle over little, pointed white teeth; a figure thin and
flat-breasted, rather below the average height. She had somehow escaped
the family high cheek-bones, and her dark-brown eyes, too soft and
shadowy to be black, had a slant that was almost Oriental. Apart from
her eyes she was neither pretty nor ugly—just insignificant-looking,
she concluded bitterly. How plain the lines around her eyes and mouth
were in that merciless light! And never had her narrow, white face
looked so narrow and so white.

She did her hair in a pompadour. Pompadours had long gone out of
fashion, but they had been in when Valancy first put her hair up and
Aunt Wellington had decided that she must always wear her hair so.

“It is the _only_ way that becomes you. Your face is so small that you
_must_ add height to it by a pompadour effect,” said Aunt Wellington,
who always enunciated commonplaces as if uttering profound and
important truths.

Valancy had hankered to do her hair pulled low on her forehead, with
puffs above the ears, as Olive was wearing hers. But Aunt Wellington’s
dictum had such an effect on her that she never dared change her style
of hairdressing again. But then, there were so many things Valancy
never dared do.

All her life she had been afraid of something, she thought bitterly.
From the very dawn of recollection, when she had been so horribly
afraid of the big black bear that lived, so Cousin Stickles told her,
in the closet under the stairs.

“And I always will be—I know it—I can’t help it. I don’t know what it
would be like not to be afraid of something.”

Afraid of her mother’s sulky fits—afraid of offending Uncle
Benjamin—afraid of becoming a target for Aunt Wellington’s
contempt—afraid of Aunt Isabel’s biting comments—afraid of Uncle James’
disapproval—afraid of offending the whole clan’s opinions and
prejudices—afraid of not keeping up appearances—afraid to say what she
really thought of  anything—afraid of poverty in her old age.
Fear—fear—fear—she could never escape from it. It bound her and
enmeshed her like a spider’s web of steel. Only in her Blue Castle
could she find temporary release. And this morning Valancy could not
believe she had a Blue Castle. She would never be able to find it
again. Twenty-nine, unmarried, undesired—what had she to do with the
fairy-like chatelaine of the Blue Castle? She would cut such childish
nonsense out of her life forever and face reality unflinchingly.

She turned from her unfriendly mirror and looked out. The ugliness of
the view always struck her like a blow; the ragged fence, the
tumble-down old carriage-shop in the next lot, plastered with crude,
violently coloured advertisements; the grimy railway station beyond,
with the awful derelicts that were always hanging around it even at
this early hour. In the pouring rain everything looked worse than
usual, especially the beastly advertisement, “Keep that schoolgirl
complexion.” Valancy _had_ kept her schoolgirl complexion. That was
just the trouble. There was not a gleam of beauty anywhere—“exactly
like my life,” thought Valancy drearily. Her brief bitterness had
passed. She accepted facts as resignedly as she had always accepted
them. She was one of the people whom life always passes by. There was
no altering that fact.

In this mood Valancy went down to breakfast.




CHAPTER III


Breakfast was always the same. Oatmeal porridge, which Valancy loathed,
toast and tea, and one teaspoonful of marmalade. Mrs. Frederick thought
two teaspoonfuls extravagant—but that did not matter to Valancy, who
hated marmalade, too. The chilly, gloomy little dining-room was
chillier and gloomier than usual; the rain streamed down outside the
window; departed Stirlings, in atrocious, gilt frames, wider than the
pictures, glowered down from the walls. And yet Cousin Stickles wished
Valancy many happy returns of the day!

“Sit up straight, Doss,” was all her mother said.

Valancy sat up straight. She talked to her mother and Cousin Stickles
of the things they always talked of. She never wondered what would
happen if she tried to talk of something else. She knew. Therefore she
never did it.

Mrs. Frederick was offended with Providence for sending a rainy day
when she wanted to go to a picnic, so she ate her breakfast in a sulky
silence for which Valancy was rather grateful. But Christine Stickles
whined endlessly on as usual, complaining about everything—the weather,
the leak in the pantry, the price of oatmeal and butter—Valancy felt at
once she had buttered her toast too lavishly—the epidemic of mumps in
Deerwood.

“Doss will be sure to ketch them,” she foreboded.

“Doss must not go where she is likely to catch mumps,” said Mrs.
Frederick shortly.

Valancy had never had mumps—or whooping cough—or chicken-pox—or
measles—or anything she should have had—nothing but horrible colds
every winter. Doss’ winter colds were a sort of tradition in the
family. Nothing, it seemed, could prevent her from catching them. Mrs.
Frederick and Cousin Stickles did their heroic best. One winter they
kept Valancy housed up from November to May, in the warm sitting-room.
She was not even allowed to go to church. And Valancy took cold after
cold and ended up with bronchitis in June.

“None of _my_ family were ever like that,” said Mrs. Frederick,
implying that it must be a Stirling tendency.

“The Stirlings seldom take colds,” said Cousin Stickles resentfully.
_She_ had been a Stirling.

“I think,” said Mrs. Frederick, “that if a person makes up her mind
_not_ to have colds she will not _have_ colds.”

So that was the trouble. It was all Valancy’s own fault.

But on this particular morning Valancy’s unbearable grievance was that
she was called Doss. She had endured it for twenty-nine years, and all
at once she felt she could not endure it any longer. Her full name was
Valancy Jane. Valancy Jane was rather terrible, but she liked Valancy,
with its odd, out-land tang. It was always a wonder to Valancy that the
Stirlings had allowed her to be so christened. She had been told that
her maternal grandfather, old Amos Wansbarra, had chosen the name for
her. Her father had tacked on the Jane by way of civilising it, and the
whole connection got out of the difficulty by nicknaming her Doss. She
never got Valancy from any one but outsiders.

“Mother,” she said timidly, “would you mind calling me Valancy after
this? Doss seems so—so—I don’t like it.”

Mrs. Frederick looked at her daughter in astonishment. She wore glasses
with enormously strong lenses that gave her eyes a peculiarly
disagreeable appearance.

“What is the matter with Doss?”

“It—seems so childish,” faltered Valancy.

“Oh!” Mrs. Frederick had been a Wansbarra and the Wansbarra smile was
not an asset. “I see. Well, it should suit _you_ then. You are childish
enough in all conscience, my dear child.”

“I am twenty-nine,” said the dear child desperately.

“I wouldn’t proclaim it from the house-tops if I were you, dear,” said
Mrs. Frederick. “Twenty-nine! _I_ had been married nine years when I
was twenty-nine.”

“_I_ was married at seventeen,” said Cousin Stickles proudly.

Valancy looked at them furtively. Mrs. Frederick, except for those
terrible glasses and the hooked nose that made her look more like a
parrot than a parrot itself could look, was not ill-looking. At twenty
she might have been quite pretty. But Cousin Stickles! And yet
Christine Stickles had once been desirable in some man’s eyes. Valancy
felt that Cousin Stickles, with her broad, flat, wrinkled face, a mole
right on the end of her dumpy nose, bristling hairs on her chin,
wrinkled yellow neck, pale, protruding eyes, and thin, puckered mouth,
had yet this advantage over her—this right to look down on her. And
even yet Cousin Stickles was necessary to Mrs. Frederick. Valancy
wondered pitifully what it would be like to be wanted by some
one—needed by some one. No one in the whole world needed her, or would
miss anything from life if she dropped suddenly out of it. She was a
disappointment to her mother. No one loved her. She had never so much
as had a girl friend.

“I haven’t even a gift for friendship,” she had once admitted to
herself pitifully.

“Doss, you haven’t eaten your crusts,” said Mrs. Frederick rebukingly.

It rained all the forenoon without cessation. Valancy pieced a quilt.
Valancy hated piecing quilts. And there was no need of it. The house
was full of quilts. There were three big chests, packed with quilts, in
the attic. Mrs. Frederick had begun storing away quilts when Valancy
was seventeen and she kept on storing them, though it did not seem
likely that Valancy would ever need them. But Valancy must be at work
and fancy work materials were too expensive. Idleness was a cardinal
sin in the Stirling household. When Valancy had been a child she had
been made to write down every night, in a small, hated, black notebook,
all the minutes she had spent in idleness that day. On Sundays her
mother made her tot them up and pray over them.

On this particular forenoon of this day of destiny Valancy spent only
ten minutes in idleness. At least, Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles
would have called it idleness. She went to her room to get a better
thimble and she opened _Thistle Harvest_ guiltily at random.

“The woods are so human,” wrote John Foster, “that to know them one
must live with them. An occasional saunter through them, keeping to the
well-trodden paths, will never admit us to their intimacy. If we wish
to be friends we must seek them out and win them by frequent, reverent
visits at all hours; by morning, by noon, and by night; and at all
seasons, in spring, in summer, in autumn, in winter. Otherwise we can
never really know them and any pretence we may make to the contrary
will never impose on them. They have their own effective way of keeping
aliens at a distance and shutting their hearts to mere casual
sightseers. It is of no use to seek the woods from any motive except
sheer love of them; they will find us out at once and hide all their
sweet, old-world secrets from us. But if they know we come to them
because we love them they will be very kind to us and give us such
treasures of beauty and delight as are not bought or sold in any
market-place. For the woods, when they give at all, give unstintedly
and hold nothing back from their true worshippers. We must go to them
lovingly, humbly, patiently, watchfully, and we shall learn what
poignant loveliness lurks in the wild places and silent intervals,
lying under starshine and sunset, what cadences of unearthly music are
harped on aged pine boughs or crooned in copses of fir, what delicate
savours exhale from mosses and ferns in sunny corners or on damp
brooklands, what dreams and myths and legends of an older time haunt
them. Then the immortal heart of the woods will beat against ours and
its subtle life will steal into our veins and make us its own forever,
so that no matter where we go or how widely we wander we shall yet be
drawn back to the forest to find our most enduring kinship.”

“Doss,” called her mother from the hall below, “what are you doing all
by yourself in that room?”

Valancy dropped _Thistle Harvest_ like a hot coal and fled downstairs
to her patches; but she felt the strange exhilaration of spirit that
always came momentarily to her when she dipped into one of John
Foster’s books. Valancy did not know much about woods—except the
haunted groves of oak and pine around her Blue Castle. But she had
always secretly hankered after them and a Foster book about woods was
the next best thing to the woods themselves.

At noon it stopped raining, but the sun did not come out until three.
Then Valancy timidly said she thought she would go uptown.

“What do you want to go uptown for?” demanded her mother.

“I want to get a book from the library.”

“You got a book from the library only last week.”

“No, it was four weeks.”

“Four weeks. Nonsense!”

“Really it was, Mother.”

“You are mistaken. It cannot possibly have been more than two weeks. I
dislike contradiction. And I do not see what you want to get a book
for, anyhow. You waste too much time reading.”

“Of what value is my time?” asked Valancy bitterly.

“Doss! Don’t speak in that tone to _me_.”

“We need some tea,” said Cousin Stickles. “She might go and get that if
she wants a walk—though this damp weather is bad for colds.”

They argued the matter for ten minutes longer and finally Mrs.
Frederick agreed rather grudgingly that Valancy might go.




CHAPTER IV


“Got your rubbers on?” called Cousin Stickles, as Valancy left the
house.

Christine Stickles had never once forgotten to ask that question when
Valancy went out on a damp day.

“Yes.”

“Have you got your flannel petticoat on?” asked Mrs. Frederick.

“No.”

“Doss, I really do not understand you. Do you want to catch your death
of cold _again_?” Her voice implied that Valancy had died of a cold
several times already. “Go upstairs this minute and put it on!”

“Mother, I don’t _need_ a flannel petticoat. My sateen one is warm
enough.”

“Doss, remember you had bronchitis two years ago. Go and do as you are
told!”

Valancy went, though nobody will ever know just how near she came to
hurling the rubber-plant into the street before she went. She hated
that grey flannel petticoat more than any other garment she owned.
Olive never had to wear flannel petticoats. Olive wore ruffled silk and
sheer lawn and filmy laced flounces. But Olive’s father had “married
money” and Olive never had bronchitis. So there you were.

“Are you sure you didn’t leave the soap in the water?” demanded Mrs.
Frederick. But Valancy was gone. She turned at the corner and looked
back down the ugly, prim, respectable street where she lived. The
Stirling house was the ugliest on it—more like a red brick box than
anything else. Too high for its breadth, and made still higher by a
bulbous glass cupola on top. About it was the desolate, barren peace of
an old house whose life is lived.

There was a very pretty little house, with leaded casements and dubbed
gables, just around the corner—a new house, one of those houses you
love the minute you see them. Clayton Markley had built it for his
bride. He was to be married to Jennie Lloyd in June. The little house,
it was said, was furnished from attic to cellar, in complete readiness
for its mistress.

“I don’t envy Jennie the man,” thought Valancy sincerely—Clayton
Markley was not one of her many ideals—“but I _do_ envy her the house.
It’s such a nice young house. Oh, if I could only have a house of my
own—ever so poor, so tiny—but my own! But then,” she added bitterly,
“there is no use in yowling for the moon when you can’t even get a
tallow candle.”

In dreamland nothing would do Valancy but a castle of pale sapphire. In
real life she would have been fully satisfied with a little house of
her own. She envied Jennie Lloyd more fiercely than ever today. Jennie
was not so much better looking than she was, and not so very much
younger. Yet she was to have this delightful house. And the nicest
little Wedgwood teacups—Valancy had seen them; an open fireplace, and
monogrammed linen; hemstitched tablecloths, and china-closets. Why did
_everything_ come to some girls and _nothing_ to others? It wasn’t
fair.

Valancy was once more seething with rebellion as she walked along, a
prim, dowdy little figure in her shabby raincoat and three-year-old
hat, splashed occasionally by the mud of a passing motor with its
insulting shrieks. Motors were still rather a novelty in Deerwood,
though they were common in Port Lawrence, and most of the summer
residents up at Muskoka had them. In Deerwood only some of the smart
set had them; for even Deerwood was divided into sets. There was the
smart set—the intellectual set—the old-family set—of which the
Stirlings were members—the common run, and a few pariahs. Not one of
the Stirling clan had as yet condescended to a motor, though Olive was
teasing her father to have one. Valancy had never even been in a
motorcar. But she did not hanker after this. In truth, she felt rather
afraid of motorcars, especially at night. They seemed to be too much
like big purring beasts that might turn and crush you—or make some
terrible savage leap somewhere. On the steep mountain trails around her
Blue Castle only gaily caparisoned steeds might proudly pace; in real
life Valancy would have been quite contented to drive in a buggy behind
a nice horse. She got a buggy drive only when some uncle or cousin
remembered to fling her “a chance,” like a bone to a dog.




CHAPTER V


Of course she must buy the tea in Uncle Benjamin’s grocery-store. To
buy it anywhere else was unthinkable. Yet Valancy hated to go to Uncle
Benjamin’s store on her twenty-ninth birthday. There was no hope that
he would not remember it.

“Why,” demanded Uncle Benjamin, leeringly, as he tied up her tea, “are
young ladies like bad grammarians?”

Valancy, with Uncle Benjamin’s will in the background of her mind, said
meekly, “I don’t know. Why?”

“Because,” chuckled Uncle Benjamin, “they can’t decline matrimony.”

The two clerks, Joe Hammond and Claude Bertram, chuckled also, and
Valancy disliked them a little more than ever. On the first day Claude
Bertram had seen her in the store she had heard him whisper to Joe,
“Who is that?” And Joe had said, “Valancy Stirling—one of the Deerwood
old maids.” “Curable or incurable?” Claude had asked with a snicker,
evidently thinking the question very clever. Valancy smarted anew with
the sting of that old recollection.

“Twenty-nine,” Uncle Benjamin was saying. “Dear me, Doss, you’re
dangerously near the second corner and not even thinking of getting
married yet. Twenty-nine. It seems impossible.”

Then Uncle Benjamin said an original thing. Uncle Benjamin said, “How
time does fly!”

“_I_ think it _crawls_,” said Valancy passionately. Passion was so
alien to Uncle Benjamin’s conception of Valancy that he didn’t know
what to make of her. To cover his confusion, he asked another conundrum
as he tied up her beans—Cousin Stickles had remembered at the last
moment that they must have beans. Beans were cheap and filling.

“What two ages are apt to prove illusory?” asked Uncle Benjamin; and,
not waiting for Valancy to “give it up,” he added, “Mir-age and
marriage.”

“M-i-r-a-g-e is pronounced _mirazh_,” said Valancy shortly, picking up
her tea and her beans. For the moment she did not care whether Uncle
Benjamin cut her out of his will or not. She walked out of the store
while Uncle Benjamin stared after her with his mouth open. Then he
shook his head.

“Poor Doss is taking it hard,” he said.

Valancy was sorry by the time she reached the next crossing. Why had
she lost her patience like that? Uncle Benjamin would be annoyed and
would likely tell her mother that Doss had been impertinent—“to
_me_!”—and her mother would lecture her for a week.

“I’ve held my tongue for twenty years,” thought Valancy. “Why couldn’t
I have held it once more?”

Yes, it was just twenty, Valancy reflected, since she had first been
twitted with her loverless condition. She remembered the bitter moment
perfectly. She was just nine years old and she was standing alone on
the school playground while the other little girls of her class were
playing a game in which you must be chosen by a boy as his partner
before you could play. Nobody had chosen Valancy—little, pale,
black-haired Valancy, with her prim, long-sleeved apron and odd,
slanted eyes.

“Oh,” said a pretty little girl to her, “I’m so sorry for you. You
haven’t got a beau.”

Valancy had said defiantly, as she continued to say for twenty years,
“I don’t _want_ a beau.” But this afternoon Valancy once and for all
stopped saying that.

“I’m going to be honest with myself anyhow,” she thought savagely.
“Uncle Benjamin’s riddles hurt me because they are true. I _do_ want to
be married. I want a house of my own—I want a husband of my own—I want
sweet, little fat _babies_ of my own—” Valancy stopped suddenly aghast
at her own recklessness. She felt sure that Rev. Dr. Stalling, who
passed her at this moment, read her thoughts and disapproved of them
thoroughly. Valancy was afraid of Dr. Stalling—had been afraid of him
ever since the Sunday, twenty-three years before, when he had first
come to St. Albans’. Valancy had been too late for Sunday School that
day and she had gone into the church timidly and sat in their pew. No
one else was in the church—nobody except the new rector, Dr. Stalling.
Dr. Stalling stood up in front of the choir door, beckoned to her, and
said sternly, “Little boy, come up here.”

Valancy had stared around her. There was no little boy—there was no one
in all the huge church but herself. This strange man with the blue
glasses couldn’t mean her. She was not a boy.

“Little boy,” repeated Dr. Stalling, more sternly still, shaking his
forefinger fiercely at her, “come up here at once!”

Valancy arose as if hypnotised and walked up the aisle. She was too
terrified to do anything else. What dreadful thing was going to happen
to her? What _had_ happened to her? Had she actually turned into a boy?
She came to a stop in front of Dr. Stalling. Dr. Stalling shook his
forefinger—such a long, knuckly forefinger—at her and said:

“Little boy, take off your hat.”

Valancy took off her hat. She had a scrawny little pigtail hanging down
her back, but Dr. Stalling was short-sighted and did not perceive it.

“Little boy, go back to your seat and _always_ take off your hat in
church. _Remember_!”

Valancy went back to her seat carrying her hat like an automaton.
Presently her mother came in.

“Doss,” said Mrs. Stirling, “what do you mean by taking off your hat?
Put it on instantly!”

Valancy put it on instantly. She was cold with fear lest Dr. Stalling
should immediately summon her up front again. She would have to go, of
course—it never occurred to her that one could disobey the rector—and
the church was full of people now. Oh, what would she do if that
horrible, stabbing forefinger were shaken at her again before all those
people? Valancy sat through the whole service in an agony of dread and
was sick for a week afterwards. Nobody knew why—Mrs. Frederick again
bemoaned herself of her delicate child.

Dr. Stalling found out his mistake and laughed over it to Valancy—who
did not laugh. She never got over her dread of Dr. Stalling. And now to
be caught by him on the street corner, thinking such things!

Valancy got her John Foster book—_Magic of Wings_. “His latest—all
about birds,” said Miss Clarkson. She had almost decided that she would
go home, instead of going to see Dr. Trent. Her courage had failed her.
She was afraid of offending Uncle James—afraid of angering her
mother—afraid of facing gruff, shaggy-browed old Dr. Trent, who would
probably tell her, as he had told Cousin Gladys, that her trouble was
entirely imaginary and that she only had it because she liked to have
it. No, she would not go; she would get a bottle of Redfern’s Purple
Pills instead. Redfern’s Purple Pills were the standard medicine of the
Stirling clan. Had they not cured Second Cousin Geraldine when five
doctors had given her up? Valancy always felt very sceptical concerning
the virtues of the Purple Pills; but there _might_ be something in
them; and it was easier to take them than to face Dr. Trent alone. She
would glance over the magazines in the reading-room a few minutes and
then go home.

Valancy tried to read a story, but it made her furious. On every page
was a picture of the heroine surrounded by adoring men. And here was
she, Valancy Stirling, who could not get a solitary beau! Valancy
slammed the magazine shut; she opened _Magic of Wings_. Her eyes fell
on the paragraph that changed her life.

“_Fear is the original sin_,” wrote John Foster. “_Almost all the evil
in the world has its origin in the fact that some one is afraid of
something_. It is a cold, slimy serpent coiling about you. It is
horrible to live with fear; and it is of all things degrading.”

Valancy shut _Magic of Wings_ and stood up. She would go and see Dr.
Trent.




CHAPTER VI


The ordeal was not so dreadful, after all. Dr. Trent was as gruff and
abrupt as usual, but he did not tell her ailment was imaginary. After
he had listened to her symptoms and asked a few questions and made a
quick examination, he sat for a moment looking at her quite intently.
Valancy thought he looked as if he were sorry for her. She caught her
breath for a moment. Was the trouble serious? Oh, it couldn’t be,
surely—it really hadn’t bothered her _much_—only lately it had got a
little worse.

Dr. Trent opened his mouth—but before he could speak the telephone at
his elbow rang sharply. He picked up the receiver. Valancy, watching
him, saw his face change suddenly as he listened,
“‘Lo—yes—yes—_what_?—yes—yes”—a brief interval—“My God!”

Dr. Trent dropped the receiver, dashed out of the room and upstairs
without even a glance at Valancy. She heard him rushing madly about
overhead, barking out a few remarks to somebody—presumably his
housekeeper. Then he came tearing downstairs with a club bag in his
hand, snatched his hat and coat from the rack, jerked open the street
door and rushed down the street in the direction of the station.

Valancy sat alone in the little office, feeling more absolutely foolish
than she had ever felt before in her life. Foolish—and humiliated. So
this was all that had come of her heroic determination to live up to
John Foster and cast fear aside. Not only was she a failure as a
relative and non-existent as a sweetheart or friend, but she was not
even of any importance as a patient. Dr. Trent had forgotten her very
presence in his excitement over whatever message had come by the
telephone. She had gained nothing by ignoring Uncle James and flying in
the face of family tradition.

For a moment she was afraid she was going to cry. It _was_ all
so—ridiculous. Then she heard Dr. Trent’s housekeeper coming down the
stairs. Valancy rose and went to the office door.

“The doctor forgot all about me,” she said with a twisted smile.

“Well, that’s too bad,” said Mrs. Patterson sympathetically. “But it
wasn’t much wonder, poor man. That was a telegram they ’phoned over
from the Port. His son has been terribly injured in an auto accident in
Montreal. The doctor had just ten minutes to catch the train. I don’t
know what he’ll do if anything happens to Ned—he’s just bound up in the
boy. You’ll have to come again, Miss Stirling. I hope it’s nothing
serious.”

“Oh, no, nothing serious,” agreed Valancy. She felt a little less
humiliated. It was no wonder poor Dr. Trent had forgotten her at such a
moment. Nevertheless, she felt very flat and discouraged as she went
down the street.

Valancy went home by the short-cut of Lover’s Lane. She did not often
go through Lover’s Lane—but it was getting near supper-time and it
would never do to be late. Lover’s Lane wound back of the village,
under great elms and maples, and deserved its name. It was hard to go
there at any time and not find some canoodling couple—or young girls in
pairs, arms intertwined, earnestly talking over their little secrets.
Valancy didn’t know which made her feel more self-conscious and
uncomfortable.

This evening she encountered both. She met Connie Hale and Kate Bayley,
in new pink organdy dresses with flowers stuck coquettishly in their
glossy, bare hair. Valancy had never had a pink dress or worn flowers
in her hair. Then she passed a young couple she didn’t know, dandering
along, oblivious to everything but themselves. The young man’s arm was
around the girl’s waist quite shamelessly. Valancy had never walked
with a man’s arm about her. She felt that she ought to be shocked—they
might leave that sort of thing for the screening twilight, at least—but
she wasn’t shocked. In another flash of desperate, stark honesty she
owned to herself that she was merely envious. When she passed them she
felt quite sure they were laughing at her—pitying her—“there’s that
queer little old maid, Valancy Stirling. They say she never had a beau
in her whole life”—Valancy fairly ran to get out of Lover’s Lane. Never
had she felt so utterly colourless and skinny and insignificant.

Just where Lover’s Lane debouched on the street, an old car was parked.
Valancy knew that car well—by sound, at least—and everybody in Deerwood
knew it. This was before the phrase “tin Lizzie” had come into
circulation—in Deerwood, at least; but if it had been known, this car
was the tinniest of Lizzies—though it was not a Ford but an old Grey
Slosson. Nothing more battered and disreputable could be imagined.

It was Barney Snaith’s car and Barney himself was just scrambling up
from under it, in overalls plastered with mud. Valancy gave him a
swift, furtive look as she hurried by. This was only the second time
she had ever seen the notorious Barney Snaith, though she had heard
enough about him in the five years that he had been living “up back” in
Muskoka. The first time had been nearly a year ago, on the Muskoka
road. He had been crawling out from under his car then, too, and he had
given her a cheerful grin as she went by—a little, whimsical grin that
gave him the look of an amused gnome. He didn’t look bad—she didn’t
believe he was bad, in spite of the wild yarns that were always being
told of him. Of course he went tearing in that terrible old Grey
Slosson through Deerwood at hours when all decent people were in
bed—often with old “Roaring Abel,” who made the night hideous with his
howls—“both of them dead drunk, my dear.” And every one knew that he
was an escaped convict and a defaulting bank clerk and a murderer in
hiding and an infidel and an illegitimate son of old Roaring Abel Gay
and the father of Roaring Abel’s illegitimate grandchild and a
counterfeiter and a forger and a few other awful things. But still
Valancy didn’t believe he was bad. Nobody with a smile like that could
be bad, no matter what he had done.

It was that night the Prince of the Blue Castle changed from a being of
grim jaw and hair with a dash of premature grey to a rakish individual
with overlong, tawny hair, dashed with red, dark-brown eyes, and ears
that stuck out just enough to give him an alert look but not enough to
be called flying jibs. But he still retained something a little grim
about the jaw.

Barney Snaith looked even more disreputable than usual just now. It was
very evident that he hadn’t shaved for days, and his hands and arms,
bare to the shoulders, were black with grease. But he was whistling
gleefully to himself and he seemed so happy that Valancy envied him.
She envied him his light-heartedness and his irresponsibility and his
mysterious little cabin up on an island in Lake Mistawis—even his
rackety old Grey Slosson. Neither he nor his car had to be respectable
and live up to traditions. When he rattled past her a few minutes
later, bareheaded, leaning back in his Lizzie at a raffish angle, his
longish hair blowing in the wind, a villainous-looking old black pipe
in his mouth, she envied him again. Men had the best of it, no doubt
about that. This outlaw was happy, whatever he was or wasn’t. She,
Valancy Stirling, respectable, well-behaved to the last degree, was
unhappy and had always been unhappy. So there you were.

Valancy was just in time for supper. The sun had clouded over, and a
dismal, drizzling rain was falling again. Cousin Stickles had the
neuralgia. Valancy had to do the family darning and there was no time
for _Magic of Wings_.

“Can’t the darning wait till tomorrow?” she pleaded.

“Tomorrow will bring its own duties,” said Mrs. Frederick inexorably.

Valancy darned all the evening and listened to Mrs. Frederick and
Cousin Stickles talking the eternal, niggling gossip of the clan, as
they knitted drearily at interminable black stockings. They discussed
Second Cousin Lilian’s approaching wedding in all its bearings. On the
whole, they approved. Second Cousin Lilian was doing well for herself.

“Though she hasn’t hurried,” said Cousin Stickles. “She must be
twenty-five.”

“There have not—fortunately—been many old maids in our connection,”
said Mrs. Frederick bitterly.

Valancy flinched. She had run the darning needle into her finger.

Third Cousin Aaron Gray had been scratched by a cat and had
blood-poisoning in his finger. “Cats are most dangerous animals,” said
Mrs. Frederick. “I would never have a cat about the house.”

She glared significantly at Valancy through her terrible glasses. Once,
five years ago, Valancy had asked if she might have a cat. She had
never referred to it since, but Mrs. Frederick still suspected her of
harbouring the unlawful desire in her heart of hearts.

Once Valancy sneezed. Now, in the Stirling code, it was very bad form
to sneeze in public.

“You can always repress a sneeze by pressing your finger on your upper
lip,” said Mrs. Frederick rebukingly.

Half-past nine o’clock and so, as Mr. Pepys would say, to bed. But
First Cousin Stickles’ neuralgic back must be rubbed with Redfern’s
Liniment. Valancy did that. Valancy always had to do it. She hated the
smell of Redfern’s Liniment—she hated the smug, beaming, portly,
be-whiskered, be-spectacled picture of Dr. Redfern on the bottle. Her
fingers smelled of the horrible stuff after she got into bed, in spite
of all the scrubbing she gave them.

Valancy’s day of destiny had come and gone. She ended it as she had
begun it, in tears.




CHAPTER VII


There was a rosebush on the little Stirling lawn, growing beside the
gate. It was called “Doss’s rosebush.” Cousin Georgiana had given it to
Valancy five years ago and Valancy had planted it joyfully. She loved
roses. But—of course—the rosebush never bloomed. That was her luck.
Valancy did everything she could think of and took the advice of
everybody in the clan, but still the rosebush would not bloom. It
throve and grew luxuriantly, with great leafy branches untouched of
rust or spider; but not even a bud had ever appeared on it. Valancy,
looking at it two days after her birthday, was filled with a sudden,
overwhelming hatred for it. The thing wouldn’t bloom: very well, then,
she would cut it down. She marched to the tool-room in the barn for her
garden knife and she went at the rosebush viciously. A few minutes
later horrified Mrs. Frederick came out to the verandah and beheld her
daughter slashing insanely among the rosebush boughs. Half of them were
already strewn on the walk. The bush looked sadly dismantled.

“Doss, what on earth are you doing? Have you gone crazy?”

“No,” said Valancy. She meant to say it defiantly, but habit was too
strong for her. She said it deprecatingly. “I—I just made up my mind to
cut this bush down. It is no good. It never blooms—never will bloom.”

“That is no reason for destroying it,” said Mrs. Frederick sternly. “It
was a beautiful bush and quite ornamental. You have made a
sorry-looking thing of it.”

“Rose trees should _bloom_,” said Valancy a little obstinately.

“Don’t argue with _me_, Doss. Clear up that mess and leave the bush
alone. I don’t know what Georgiana will say when she sees how you have
hacked it to pieces. Really, I’m surprised at you. And to do it without
consulting _me_!”

“The bush is mine,” muttered Valancy.

“What’s that? What did you say, Doss?”

“I only said the bush was mine,” repeated Valancy humbly.

Mrs. Frederick turned without a word and marched back into the house.
The mischief was done now. Valancy knew she had offended her mother
deeply and would not be spoken to or noticed in any way for two or
three days. Cousin Stickles would see to Valancy’s bringing-up but Mrs.
Frederick would preserve the stony silence of outraged majesty.

Valancy sighed and put away her garden knife, hanging it precisely on
its precise nail in the tool-shop. She cleared away the severed
branches and swept up the leaves. Her lips twitched as she looked at
the straggling bush. It had an odd resemblance to its shaken, scrawny
donor, little Cousin Georgiana herself.

“I certainly have made an awful-looking thing of it,” thought Valancy.

But she did not feel repentant—only sorry she had offended her mother.
Things would be so uncomfortable until she was forgiven. Mrs. Frederick
was one of those women who can make their anger felt all over a house.
Walls and doors are no protection from it.

“You’d better go uptown and git the mail,” said Cousin Stickles, when
Valancy went in. “_I_ can’t go—I feel all sorter peaky and piny this
spring. I want you to stop at the drugstore and git me a bottle of
Redfern’s Blood Bitters. There’s nothing like Redfern’s Bitters for
building a body up. Cousin James says the Purple Pills are the best,
but I know better. My poor dear husband took Redfern’s Bitters right up
to the day he died. Don’t let them charge you more’n ninety cents. I
kin git it for that at the Port. And what _have_ you been saying to
your poor mother? Do you ever stop to think, Doss, that you kin only
have one mother?”

“One is enough for me,” thought Valancy undutifully, as she went
uptown.

She got Cousin Stickles’ bottle of bitters and then she went to the
post-office and asked for her mail at the General Delivery. Her mother
did not have a box. They got too little mail to bother with it. Valancy
did not expect any mail, except the _Christian Times_, which was the
only paper they took. They hardly ever got any letters. But Valancy
rather liked to stand in the office and watch Mr. Carewe, the
grey-bearded, Santa-Clausy old clerk, handing out letters to the lucky
people who did get them. He did it with such a detached, impersonal,
Jove-like air, as if it did not matter in the least to him what
supernal joys or shattering horrors might be in those letters for the
people to whom they were addressed. Letters had a fascination for
Valancy, perhaps because she so seldom got any. In her Blue Castle
exciting epistles, bound with silk and sealed with crimson, were always
being brought to her by pages in livery of gold and blue, but in real
life her only letters were occasional perfunctory notes from relatives
or an advertising circular.

Consequently she was immensely surprised when Mr. Carewe, looking even
more Jovian than usual, poked a letter out to her. Yes, it was
addressed to her plainly, in a fierce, black hand: “Miss Valancy
Stirling, Elm Street, Deerwood”—and the postmark was Montreal. Valancy
picked it up with a little quickening of her breath. Montreal! It must
be from Doctor Trent. He had remembered her, after all.

Valancy met Uncle Benjamin coming in as she was going out and was glad
the letter was safely in her bag.

“What,” said Uncle Benjamin, “is the difference between a donkey and a
postage-stamp?”

“I don’t know. What?” answered Valancy dutifully.

“One you lick with a stick and the other you stick with a lick. Ha,
ha!”

Uncle Benjamin passed in, tremendously pleased with himself.

Cousin Stickles pounced on the _Times_ when Valancy got home, but it
did not occur to her to ask if there were any letters. Mrs. Frederick
would have asked it, but Mrs. Frederick’s lips at present were sealed.
Valancy was glad of this. If her mother had asked if there were any
letters Valancy would have had to admit there was. Then she would have
had to let her mother and Cousin Stickles read the letter and all would
be discovered.

Her heart acted strangely on the way upstairs, and she sat down by her
window for a few minutes before opening her letter. She felt very
guilty and deceitful. She had never before kept a letter secret from
her mother. Every letter she had ever written or received had been read
by Mrs. Frederick. That had never mattered. Valancy had never had
anything to hide. But this _did_ matter. She could not have any one see
this letter. But her fingers trembled with a consciousness of
wickedness and unfilial conduct as she opened it—trembled a little,
too, perhaps, with apprehension. She felt quite sure there was nothing
seriously wrong with her heart but—one never knew.

Dr. Trent’s letter was like himself—blunt, abrupt, concise, wasting no
words. Dr. Trent never beat about the bush. “Dear Miss Sterling”—and
then a page of black, positive writing. Valancy seemed to read it at a
glance; she dropped it on her lap, her face ghost-white.

Dr. Trent told her that she had a very dangerous and fatal form of
heart disease—angina pectoris—evidently complicated with an
aneurism—whatever that was—and in the last stages. He said, without
mincing matters, that nothing could be done for her. If she took great
care of herself she might live a year—but she might also die at any
moment—Dr. Trent never troubled himself about euphemisms. She must be
careful to avoid all excitement and all severe muscular efforts. She
must eat and drink moderately, she must never run, she must go upstairs
and uphill with great care. Any sudden jolt or shock might be fatal.
She was to get the prescription he enclosed filled and carry it with
her always, taking a dose whenever her attacks came on. And he was hers
truly, H. B. Trent.

Valancy sat for a long while by her window. Outside was a world drowned
in the light of a spring afternoon—skies entrancingly blue, winds
perfumed and free, lovely, soft, blue hazes at the end of every street.
Over at the railway station a group of young girls was waiting for a
train; she heard their gay laughter as they chattered and joked. The
train roared in and roared out again. But none of these things had any
reality. Nothing had any reality except the fact that she had only
another year to live.

When she was tired of sitting at the window she went over and lay down
on her bed, staring at the cracked, discoloured ceiling. The curious
numbness that follows on a staggering blow possessed her. She did not
feel anything except a boundless surprise and incredulity—behind which
was the conviction that Dr. Trent knew his business and that she,
Valancy Stirling, who had never lived, was about to die.

When the gong rang for supper Valancy got up and went downstairs
mechanically, from force of habit. She wondered that she had been let
alone so long. But of course her mother would not pay any attention to
her just now. Valancy was thankful for this. She thought the quarrel
over the rosebush had been really, as Mrs. Frederick herself might have
said, Providential. She could not eat anything, but both Mrs. Frederick
and Cousin Stickles thought this was because she was deservedly unhappy
over her mother’s attitude, and her lack of appetite was not commented
on. Valancy forced herself to swallow a cup of tea and then sat and
watched the others eat, with an odd feeling that years had passed since
she had sat with them at the dinner-table. She found herself smiling
inwardly to think what a commotion she could make if she chose. Let her
merely tell them what was in Dr. Trent’s letter and there would be as
much fuss made as if—Valancy thought bitterly—they really cared two
straws about her.

“Dr. Trent’s housekeeper got word from him today,” said Cousin
Stickles, so suddenly that Valancy jumped guiltily. Was there anything
in thought waves? “Mrs. Judd was talking to her uptown. They think his
son will recover, but Dr. Trent wrote that if he did he was going to
take him abroad as soon as he was able to travel and wouldn’t be back
here for a year at least.”

“That will not matter much to _us_,” said Mrs. Frederick majestically.
“He is not _our_ doctor. I would not”—here she looked or seemed to look
accusingly right through Valancy—“have _him_ to doctor a sick cat.”

“May I go upstairs and lie down?” said Valancy faintly. “I—I have a
headache.”

“What has given you a headache?” asked Cousin Stickles, since Mrs.
Frederick would not. The question had to be asked. Valancy could not be
allowed to have headaches without interference.

“You ain’t in the habit of having headaches. I hope you’re not taking
the mumps. Here, try a spoonful of vinegar.”

“Piffle!” said Valancy rudely, getting up from the table. She did not
care just then if she were rude. She had had to be so polite all her
life.

If it had been possible for Cousin Stickles to turn pale she would
have. As it was not, she turned yellower.

“Are you sure you ain’t feverish, Doss? You sound like it. You go and
get right into bed,” said Cousin Stickles, thoroughly alarmed, “and
I’ll come up and rub your forehead and the back of your neck with
Redfern’s Liniment.”

Valancy had reached the door, but she turned. “I won’t be rubbed with
Redfern’s Liniment!” she said.

Cousin Stickles stared and gasped. “What—what do you mean?”

“I said I wouldn’t be rubbed with Redfern’s Liniment,” repeated
Valancy. “Horrid, sticky stuff! And it has the vilest smell of any
liniment I ever saw. It’s no good. I want to be left alone, that’s
all.”

Valancy went out, leaving Cousin Stickles aghast.

“She’s feverish—she _must_ be feverish,” ejaculated Cousin Stickles.

Mrs. Frederick went on eating her supper. It did not matter whether
Valancy was or was not feverish. Valancy had been guilty of
impertinence to _her_.




CHAPTER VIII


Valancy did not sleep that night. She lay awake all through the long
dark hours—thinking—thinking. She made a discovery that surprised her:
she, who had been afraid of almost everything in life, was not afraid
of death. It did not seem in the least terrible to her. And she need
not now be afraid of anything else. Why had she been afraid of things?
Because of life. Afraid of Uncle Benjamin because of the menace of
poverty in old age. But now she would never be old—neglected—tolerated.
Afraid of being an old maid all her life. But now she would not be an
old maid very long. Afraid of offending her mother and her clan because
she had to live with and among them and couldn’t live peaceably if she
didn’t give in to them. But now she hadn’t. Valancy felt a curious
freedom.

But she was still horribly afraid of one thing—the fuss the whole
jamfry of them would make when she told them. Valancy shuddered at the
thought of it. She couldn’t endure it. Oh, she knew so well how it
would be. First there would be indignation—yes, indignation on the part
of Uncle James because she had gone to a doctor—any doctor—without
consulting HIM. Indignation on the part of her mother for being so sly
and deceitful—“to your own mother, Doss.” Indignation on the part of
the whole clan because she had not gone to Dr. Marsh.

Then would come the solicitude. She would be taken to Dr. Marsh, and
when Dr. Marsh confirmed Dr. Trent’s diagnosis she would be taken to
specialists in Toronto and Montreal. Uncle Benjamin would foot the bill
with a splendid gesture of munificence in thus assisting the widow and
orphan, and talk forever after of the shocking fees specialists charged
for looking wise and saying they couldn’t do anything. And when the
specialists could do nothing for her Uncle James would insist on her
taking Purple Pills—“I’ve known them to effect a cure when _all_ the
doctors had given up”—and her mother would insist on Redfern’s Blood
Bitters, and Cousin Stickles would insist on rubbing her over the heart
every night with Redfern’s Liniment on the grounds that it _might_ do
good and _couldn’t_ do harm; and everybody else would have some pet
dope for her to take. Dr. Stalling would come to her and say solemnly,
“You are very ill. Are you prepared for what may be before you?”—almost
as if he were going to shake his forefinger at her, the forefinger that
had not grown any shorter or less knobbly with age. And she would be
watched and checked like a baby and never let do anything or go
anywhere alone. Perhaps she would not even be allowed to sleep alone
lest she die in her sleep. Cousin Stickles or her mother would insist
on sharing her room and bed. Yes, undoubtedly they would.

It was this last thought that really decided Valancy. She could not put
up with it and she wouldn’t. As the clock in the hall below struck
twelve Valancy suddenly and definitely made up her mind that she would
not tell anybody. She had always been told, ever since she could
remember, that she must hide her feelings. “It is not ladylike to have
feelings,” Cousin Stickles had once told her disapprovingly. Well, she
would hide them with a vengeance.

But though she was not afraid of death she was not indifferent to it.
She found that she _resented_ it; it was not fair that she should have
to die when she had never lived. Rebellion flamed up in her soul as the
dark hours passed by—not because she had no future but because she had
no past.

“I’m poor—I’m ugly—I’m a failure—and I’m near death,” she thought. She
could see her own obituary notice in the Deerwood _Weekly Times_,
copied into the Port Lawrence _Journal_. “A deep gloom was cast over
Deerwood, etc., etc.”—“leaves a large circle of friends to mourn, etc.,
etc., etc.”—lies, all lies. Gloom, forsooth! Nobody would miss her. Her
death would not matter a straw to anybody. Not even her mother loved
her—her mother who had been so disappointed that she was not a boy—or
at least, a pretty girl.

Valancy reviewed her whole life between midnight and the early spring
dawn. It was a very drab existence, but here and there an incident
loomed out with a significance out of all proportion to its real
importance. These incidents were all unpleasant in one way or another.
Nothing really pleasant had ever happened to Valancy.

“I’ve never had one wholly happy hour in my life—not one,” she thought.
“I’ve just been a colourless nonentity. I remember reading somewhere
once that there is an hour in which a woman might be happy all her life
if she could but find it. I’ve never found my hour—never, never. And I
never will now. If I could only have had that hour I’d be willing to
die.”

Those significant incidents kept bobbing up in her mind like unbidden
ghosts, without any sequence of time or place. For instance, that time
when, at sixteen, she had blued a tubful of clothes too deeply. And the
time when, at eight, she had “stolen” some raspberry jam from Aunt
Wellington’s pantry. Valancy never heard the last of those two
misdemeanours. At almost every clan gathering they were raked up
against her as jokes. Uncle Benjamin hardly ever missed re-telling the
raspberry jam incident—he had been the one to catch her, her face all
stained and streaked.

“I have really done so few bad things that they have to keep harping on
the old ones,” thought Valancy. “Why, I’ve never even had a quarrel
with any one. I haven’t an enemy. What a spineless thing I must be not
to have even one enemy!”

There was that incident of the dust-pile at school when she was seven.
Valancy always recalled it when Dr. Stalling referred to the text, “To
him that hath shall be given and from him that hath not shall be taken
even that which he hath.” Other people might puzzle over that text but
it never puzzled Valancy. The whole relationship between herself and
Olive, dating from the day of the dust-pile, was a commentary on it.

She had been going to school a year, but Olive, who was a year younger,
had just begun and had about her all the glamour of “a new girl” and an
exceedingly pretty girl at that. It was at recess and all the girls,
big and little, were out on the road in front of the school making
dust-piles. The aim of each girl was to have the biggest pile. Valancy
was good at making dust-piles—there was an art in it—and she had secret
hopes of leading. But Olive, working off by herself, was suddenly
discovered to have a larger dust-pile than anybody. Valancy felt no
jealousy. Her dust-pile was quite big enough to please her. Then one of
the older girls had an inspiration.

“Let’s put all our dust on Olive’s pile and make a tremendous one,” she
exclaimed.

A frenzy seemed to seize the girls. They swooped down on the dust-piles
with pails and shovels and in a few seconds Olive’s pile was a
veritable pyramid. In vain Valancy, with scrawny, outstretched little
arms, tried to protect hers. She was ruthlessly swept aside, her
dust-pile scooped up and poured on Olive’s. Valancy turned away
resolutely and began building another dust-pile. Again a bigger girl
pounced on it. Valancy stood before it, flushed, indignant, arms
outspread.

“Don’t take it,” she pleaded. “Please don’t take it.”

“But _why_?” demanded the older girl. “Why won’t you help to build
Olive’s bigger?”

“I want my own little dust-pile,” said Valancy piteously.

Her plea went unheeded. While she argued with one girl another scraped
up her dust-pile. Valancy turned away, her heart swelling, her eyes
full of tears.

“Jealous—you’re jealous!” said the girls mockingly.

“You were very selfish,” said her mother coldly, when Valancy told her
about it at night. That was the first and last time Valancy had ever
taken any of her troubles to her mother.

Valancy was neither jealous nor selfish. It was only that she wanted a
dust-pile of her own—small or big mattered not. A team of horses came
down the street—Olive’s dust pile was scattered over the roadway—the
bell rang—the girls trooped into school and had forgotten the whole
affair before they reached their seats. Valancy never forgot it. To
this day she resented it in her secret soul. But was it not symbolical
of her life?

“I’ve never been able to have my own dust-pile,” thought Valancy.

The enormous red moon she had seen rising right at the end of the
street one autumn evening of her sixth year. She had been sick and cold
with the awful, uncanny horror of it. So near to her. So big. She had
run in trembling to her mother and her mother had laughed at her. She
had gone to bed and hidden her face under the clothes in terror lest
she might look at the window and see that horrible moon glaring in at
her through it.

The boy who had tried to kiss her at a party when she was fifteen. She
had not let him—she had evaded him and run. He was the only boy who had
ever tried to kiss her. Now, fourteen years later, Valancy found
herself wishing that she had let him.

The time she had been made to apologise to Olive for something she
hadn’t done. Olive had said that Valancy had pushed her into the mud
and spoiled her new shoes _on purpose_. Valancy knew she hadn’t. It had
been an accident—and even that wasn’t her fault—but nobody would
believe her. She had to apologise—and kiss Olive to “make up.” The
injustice of it burned in her soul tonight.

That summer when Olive had the most beautiful hat, trimmed with creamy
yellow net, with a wreath of red roses and little ribbon bows under the
chin. Valancy had wanted a hat like that more than she had ever wanted
anything. She pleaded for one and had been laughed at—all summer she
had to wear a horrid little brown sailor with elastic that cut behind
her ears. None of the girls would go around with her because she was so
shabby—nobody but Olive. People had thought Olive so sweet and
unselfish.

“I was an excellent foil for her,” thought Valancy. “Even then she knew
that.”

Valancy had tried to win a prize for attendance in Sunday School once.
But Olive won it. There were so many Sundays Valancy had to stay home
because she had colds. She had once tried to “say a piece” in school
one Friday afternoon and had broken down in it. Olive was a good
reciter and never got stuck.

The night she had spent in Port Lawrence with Aunt Isabel when she was
ten. Byron Stirling was there; from Montreal, twelve years old,
conceited, clever. At family prayers in the morning Byron had reached
across and given Valancy’s thin arm such a savage pinch that she
screamed out with pain. After prayers were over she was summoned to
Aunt Isabel’s bar of judgment. But when she said Byron had pinched her
Byron denied it. He said she cried out because the kitten scratched
her. He said she had put the kitten up on her chair and was playing
with it when she should have been listening to Uncle David’s prayer. He
was _believed_. In the Stirling clan the boys were always believed
before the girls. Valancy was sent home in disgrace because of her
exceedingly bad behavior during family prayers and she was not asked to
Aunt Isabel’s again for many moons.

The time Cousin Betty Stirling was married. Somehow Valancy got wind of
the fact that Betty was going to ask her to be one of her bridesmaids.
Valancy was secretly uplifted. It would be a delightful thing to be a
bridesmaid. And of course she would have to have a new dress for it—a
pretty new dress—a pink dress. Betty wanted her bridesmaids to dress in
pink.

But Betty had never asked her, after all. Valancy couldn’t guess why,
but long after her secret tears of disappointment had been dried Olive
told her. Betty, after much consultation and reflection, had decided
that Valancy was too insignificant—she would “spoil the effect.” That
was nine years ago. But tonight Valancy caught her breath with the old
pain and sting of it.

That day in her eleventh year when her mother had badgered her into
confessing something she had never done. Valancy had denied it for a
long time but eventually for peace’ sake she had given in and pleaded
guilty. Mrs. Frederick was always making people lie by pushing them
into situations where they _had_ to lie. Then her mother had made her
kneel down on the parlour floor, between herself and Cousin Stickles,
and say, “O God, please forgive me for not speaking the truth.” Valancy
had said it, but as she rose from her knees she muttered. “But, O God,
_you_ know I did speak the truth.” Valancy had not then heard of
Galileo but her fate was similar to his. She was punished just as
severely as if she hadn’t confessed and prayed.

The winter she went to dancing-school. Uncle James had decreed she
should go and had paid for her lessons. How she had looked forward to
it! And how she had hated it! She had never had a voluntary partner.
The teacher always had to tell some boy to dance with her, and
generally he had been sulky about it. Yet Valancy was a good dancer, as
light on her feet as thistledown. Olive, who never lacked eager
partners, was heavy.

The affair of the button-string, when she was ten. All the girls in
school had button-strings. Olive had a very long one with a great many
beautiful buttons. Valancy had one. Most of the buttons on it were very
commonplace, but she had six beauties that had come off Grandmother
Stirling’s wedding-gown—sparkling buttons of gold and glass, much more
beautiful than any Olive had. Their possession conferred a certain
distinction on Valancy. She knew every little girl in school envied her
the exclusive possession of those beautiful buttons. When Olive saw
them on the button-string she had looked at them narrowly but said
nothing—then. The next day Aunt Wellington had come to Elm Street and
told Mrs. Frederick that she thought Olive should have some of those
buttons—Grandmother Stirling was just as much Wellington’s mother as
Frederick’s. Mrs. Frederick had agreed amiably. She could not afford to
fall out with Aunt Wellington. Moreover, the matter was of no
importance whatever. Aunt Wellington carried off four of the buttons,
generously leaving two for Valancy. Valancy had torn these from her
string and flung them on the floor—she had not yet learned that it was
unladylike to have feelings—and had been sent supperless to bed for the
exhibition.

The night of Margaret Blunt’s party. She had made such pathetic efforts
to be pretty that night. Rob Walker was to be there; and two nights
before, on the moonlit verandah of Uncle Herbert’s cottage at Mistawis,
Rob had really seemed attracted to her. At Margaret’s party Rob never
even asked her to dance—did not notice her at all. She was a
wallflower, as usual. That, of course, was years ago. People in
Deerwood had long since given up inviting Valancy to dances. But to
Valancy its humiliation and disappointment were of the other day. Her
face burned in the darkness as she recalled herself, sitting there with
her pitifully crimped, thin hair and the cheeks she had pinched for an
hour before coming, in an effort to make them red. All that came of it
was a wild story that Valancy Stirling was rouged at Margaret Blunt’s
party. In those days in Deerwood that was enough to wreck your
character forever. It did not wreck Valancy’s, or even damage it.
People knew _she_ couldn’t be fast if she tried. They only laughed at
her.

“I’ve had nothing but a second-hand existence,” decided Valancy. “All
the great emotions of life have passed me by. I’ve never even had a
grief. And have I ever really loved anybody? Do I really love Mother?
No, I don’t. That’s the truth, whether it is disgraceful or not. I
don’t love her—I’ve never loved her. What’s worse, I don’t even like
her. So I don’t know anything about any kind of love. My life has been
empty—empty. Nothing is worse than emptiness. Nothing!” Valancy
ejaculated the last “nothing” aloud passionately. Then she moaned and
stopped thinking about anything for a while. One of her attacks of pain
had come on.

When it was over something had happened to Valancy—perhaps the
culmination of the process that had been going on in her mind ever
since she had read Dr. Trent’s letter. It was three o’clock in the
morning—the wisest and most accursed hour of the clock. But sometimes
it sets us free.

“I’ve been trying to please other people all my life and failed,” she
said. “After this I shall please myself. I shall never pretend anything
again. I’ve breathed an atmosphere of fibs and pretences and evasions
all my life. What a luxury it will be to tell the truth! I may not be
able to do much that I want to do but I won’t do another thing that I
don’t want to do. Mother can pout for weeks—I shan’t worry over it.
‘Despair is a free man—hope is a slave.’”

Valancy got up and dressed, with a deepening of that curious sense of
freedom. When she had finished with her hair she opened the window and
hurled the jar of potpourri over into the next lot. It smashed
gloriously against the schoolgirl complexion on the old carriage-shop.

“I’m sick of the fragrance of dead things,” said Valancy.




CHAPTER IX


Uncle Herbert and Aunt Alberta’s silver wedding was delicately referred
to among the Stirlings during the following weeks as “the time we first
noticed poor Valancy was—a little—you understand?”

Not for worlds would any of the Stirlings have said out and out at
first that Valancy had gone mildly insane or even that her mind was
slightly deranged. Uncle Benjamin was considered to have gone entirely
too far when he had ejaculated, “She’s dippy—I tell you, she’s dippy,”
and was only excused because of the outrageousness of Valancy’s conduct
at the aforesaid wedding dinner.

But Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles had noticed a few things that
made them uneasy _before_ the dinner. It had begun with the rosebush,
of course; and Valancy never was really “quite right” again. She did
not seem to worry in the least over the fact that her mother was not
speaking to her. You would never suppose she noticed it at all. She had
flatly refused to take either Purple Pills or Redfern’s Bitters. She
had announced coolly that she did not intend to answer to the name of
“Doss” any longer. She had told Cousin Stickles that she wished she
would give up wearing that brooch with Cousin Artemas Stickles’ hair in
it. She had moved her bed in her room to the opposite corner. She had
read _Magic of Wings_ Sunday afternoon. When Cousin Stickles had
rebuked her Valancy had said indifferently, “Oh, I forgot it was
Sunday”—and _had gone on reading it_.

Cousin Stickles had seen a terrible thing—she had caught Valancy
sliding down the bannister. Cousin Stickles did not tell Mrs. Frederick
this—poor Amelia was worried enough as it was. But it was Valancy’s
announcement on Saturday night that she was not going to go to the
Anglican church any more that broke through Mrs. Frederick’s stony
silence.

“Not going to church any more! Doss, have you absolutely taken leave——”

“Oh, I’m going to church,” said Valancy airily. “I’m going to the
Presbyterian church. But to the Anglican church I will not go.”

This was even worse. Mrs. Frederick had recourse to tears, having found
outraged majesty had ceased to be effective.

“What have you got against the Anglican church?” she sobbed.

“Nothing—only just that you’ve always made me go there. If you’d made
me go to the Presbyterian church I’d want to go to the Anglican.”

“Is that a nice thing to say to your mother? Oh, how true it is that it
is sharper than a serpent’s tooth to have a thankless child.”

“Is that a nice thing to say to your daughter?” said unrepentant
Valancy.

So Valancy’s behaviour at the silver wedding was not quite the surprise
to Mrs. Frederick and Christine Stickles that it was to the rest. They
were doubtful about the wisdom of taking her, but concluded it would
“make talk” if they didn’t. Perhaps she would behave herself, and so
far no outsider suspected there was anything queer about her. By a
special mercy of Providence it had poured torrents Sunday morning, so
Valancy had not carried out her hideous threat of going to the
Presbyterian church.

Valancy would not have cared in the least if they had left her at home.
These family celebrations were all hopelessly dull. But the Stirlings
always celebrated everything. It was a long-established custom. Even
Mrs. Frederick gave a dinner party on her wedding anniversary and
Cousin Stickles had friends in to supper on her birthday. Valancy hated
these entertainments because they had to pinch and save and contrive
for weeks afterwards to pay for them. But she wanted to go to the
silver wedding. It would hurt Uncle Herbert’s feelings if she stayed
away, and she rather liked Uncle Herbert. Besides, she wanted to look
over all her relatives from her new angle. It would be an excellent
place to make public her declaration of independence if occasion
offered.

“Put on your brown silk dress,” said Mrs. Stirling.

As if there were anything else to put on! Valancy had only the one
festive dress—that snuffy-brown silk Aunt Isabel had given her. Aunt
Isabel had decreed that Valancy should never wear colours. They did not
become her. When she was young they allowed her to wear white, but that
had been tacitly dropped for some years. Valancy put on the brown silk.
It had a high collar and long sleeves. She had never had a dress with
low neck and elbow sleeves, although they had been worn, even in
Deerwood, for over a year. But she did not do her hair pompadour. She
knotted it on her neck and pulled it out over her ears. She thought it
became her—only the little knot was so absurdly small. Mrs. Frederick
resented the hair but decided it was wisest to say nothing on the eve
of the party. It was so important that Valancy should be kept in good
humour, if possible, until it was over. Mrs. Frederick did not reflect
that this was the first time in her life that she had thought it
necessary to consider Valancy’s humours. But then Valancy had never
been “queer” before.

On their way to Uncle Herbert’s—Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles
walking in front, Valancy trotting meekly along behind—Roaring Abel
drove past them. Drunk as usual but not in the roaring stage. Just
drunk enough to be excessively polite. He raised his disreputable old
tartan cap with the air of a monarch saluting his subjects and swept
them a grand bow. Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles dared not cut
Roaring Abel altogether. He was the only person in Deerwood who could
be got to do odd jobs of carpentering and repairing when they needed to
be done, so it would not do to offend him. But they responded with only
the stiffest, slightest of bows. Roaring Abel must be kept in his
place.

Valancy, behind them, did a thing they were fortunately spared seeing.
She smiled gaily and waved her hand to Roaring Abel. Why not? She had
always liked the old sinner. He was such a jolly, picturesque,
unashamed reprobate and stood out against the drab respectability of
Deerwood and its customs like a flame-red flag of revolt and protest.
Only a few nights ago Abel had gone through Deerwood in the wee sma’s,
shouting oaths at the top of his stentorian voice which could be heard
for miles, and lashing his horse into a furious gallop as he tore along
prim, proper Elm Street.

“Yelling and blaspheming like a fiend,” shuddered Cousin Stickles at
the breakfast-table.

“I cannot understand why the judgment of the Lord has not fallen upon
that man long ere this,” said Mrs. Frederick petulantly, as if she
thought Providence was very dilatory and ought to have a gentle
reminder.

“He’ll be picked up dead some morning—he’ll fall under his horse’s
hoofs and be trampled to death,” said Cousin Stickles reassuringly.

Valancy had said nothing, of course; but she wondered to herself if
Roaring Abel’s periodical sprees were not his futile protest against
the poverty and drudgery and monotony of his existence. _She_ went on
dream sprees in her Blue Castle. Roaring Abel, having no imagination,
could not do that. _His_ escapes from reality had to be concrete. So
she waved at him today with a sudden fellow feeling, and Roaring Abel,
not too drunk to be astonished, nearly fell off his seat in his
amazement.

By this time they had reached Maple Avenue and Uncle Herbert’s house, a
large, pretentious structure peppered with meaningless bay windows and
excrescent porches. A house that always looked like a stupid,
prosperous, self-satisfied man with warts on his face.

“A house like that,” said Valancy solemnly, “is a blasphemy.”

Mrs. Frederick was shaken to her soul. What had Valancy said? Was it
profane? Or only just queer? Mrs. Frederick took off her hat in Aunt
Alberta’s spare-room with trembling hands. She made one more feeble
attempt to avert disaster. She held Valancy back on the landing as
Cousin Stickles went downstairs.

“Won’t you try to remember you’re a lady?” she pleaded.

“Oh, if there were only any hope of being able to forget it!” said
Valancy wearily.

Mrs. Frederick felt that she had not deserved this from Providence.




CHAPTER X


“Bless this food to our use and consecrate our lives to Thy service,”
said Uncle Herbert briskly.

Aunt Wellington frowned. She always considered Herbert’s graces
entirely too short and “flippant.” A grace, to be a grace in Aunt
Wellington’s eyes, had to be at least three minutes long and uttered in
an unearthly tone, between a groan and a chant. As a protest she kept
her head bent a perceptible time after all the rest had been lifted.
When she permitted herself to sit upright she found Valancy looking at
her. Ever afterwards Aunt Wellington averred that she had known from
that moment that there was something wrong with Valancy. In those
queer, slanted eyes of hers—“we should always have known she was not
entirely _right_ with eyes like that”—there was an odd gleam of mockery
and amusement—as if Valancy were laughing at _her_. Such a thing was
unthinkable, of course. Aunt Wellington at once ceased to think it.

Valancy was enjoying herself. She had never enjoyed herself at a
“family reunion” before. In social function, as in childish games, she
had only “filled in.” Her clan had always considered her very dull. She
had no parlour tricks. And she had been in the habit of taking refuge
from the boredom of family parties in her Blue Castle, which resulted
in an absent-mindedness that increased her reputation for dulness and
vacuity.

“She has no social presence whatever,” Aunt Wellington had decreed once
and for all. Nobody dreamed that Valancy was dumb in their presence
merely because she was afraid of them. Now she was no longer afraid of
them. The shackles had been stricken off her soul. She was quite
prepared to talk if occasion offered. Meanwhile she was giving herself
such freedom of thought as she had never dared to take before. She let
herself go with a wild, inner exultation, as Uncle Herbert carved the
turkey. Uncle Herbert gave Valancy a second look that day. Being a man,
he didn’t know what she had done to her hair, but he thought
surprisedly that Doss was not such a bad-looking girl, after all; and
he put an extra piece of white meat on her plate.

“What herb is most injurious to a young lady’s beauty?” propounded
Uncle Benjamin by way of starting conversation—“loosening things up a
bit,” as he would have said.

Valancy, whose duty it was to say, “What?” did not say it. Nobody else
said it, so Uncle Benjamin, after an expectant pause, had to answer,
“Thyme,” and felt that his riddle had fallen flat. He looked
resentfully at Valancy, who had never failed him before, but Valancy
did not seem even to be aware of him. She was gazing around the table,
examining relentlessly every one in this depressing assembly of
sensible people and watching their little squirms with a detached,
amused smile.

So these were the people she had always held in reverence and fear. She
seemed to see them with new eyes.

Big, capable, patronising, voluble Aunt Mildred, who thought herself
the cleverest woman in the clan, her husband a little lower than the
angels and her children wonders. Had not her son, Howard, been all
through teething at eleven months? And could she not tell you the best
way to do everything, from cooking mushrooms to picking up a snake?
What a bore she was! What ugly moles she had on her face!

Cousin Gladys, who was always praising her son, who had died young, and
always fighting with her living one. She had neuritis—or what she
called neuritis. It jumped about from one part of her body to another.
It was a convenient thing. If anybody wanted her to go somewhere she
didn’t want to go she had neuritis in her legs. And always if any
mental effort was required she could have neuritis in her head. You
can’t _think_ with neuritis in your head, my dear.

“What an old humbug you are!” thought Valancy impiously.

Aunt Isabel. Valancy counted her chins. Aunt Isabel was the critic of
the clan. She had always gone about squashing people flat. More members
of it than Valancy were afraid of her. She had, it was conceded, a
biting tongue.

“I wonder what would happen to your face if you ever smiled,”
speculated Valancy, unblushingly.

Second Cousin Sarah Taylor, with her great, pale, expressionless eyes,
who was noted for the variety of her pickle recipes and for nothing
else. So afraid of saying something indiscreet that she never said
anything worth listening to. So proper that she blushed when she saw
the advertisement picture of a corset and had put a dress on her Venus
de Milo statuette which made it look “real tasty.”

Little Cousin Georgiana. Not such a bad little soul. But dreary—very.
Always looking as if she had just been starched and ironed. Always
afraid to let herself go. The only thing she really enjoyed was a
funeral. You knew where you were with a corpse. Nothing more could
happen to _it_. But while there was life there was fear.

Uncle James. Handsome, black, with his sarcastic, trap-like mouth and
iron-grey side-burns, whose favourite amusement was to write
controversial letters to the _Christian Times_, attacking Modernism.
Valancy always wondered if he looked as solemn when he was asleep as he
did when awake. No wonder his wife had died young. Valancy remembered
her. A pretty, sensitive thing. Uncle James had denied her everything
she wanted and showered on her everything she didn’t want. He had
killed her—quite legally. She had been smothered and starved.

Uncle Benjamin, wheezy, pussy-mouthed. With great pouches under eyes
that held nothing in reverence.

Uncle Wellington. Long, pallid face, thin, pale-yellow hair—“one of the
fair Stirlings”—thin, stooping body, abominably high forehead with such
ugly wrinkles, and “eyes about as intelligent as a fish’s,” thought
Valancy. “Looks like a cartoon of himself.”

Aunt Wellington. Named Mary but called by her husband’s name to
distinguish her from Great-aunt Mary. A massive, dignified, permanent
lady. Splendidly arranged, iron-grey hair. Rich, fashionable beaded
dress. Had _her_ moles removed by electrolysis—which Aunt Mildred
thought was a wicked evasion of the purposes of God.

Uncle Herbert, with his spiky grey hair. Aunt Alberta, who twisted her
mouth so unpleasantly in talking and had a great reputation for
unselfishness because she was always giving up a lot of things she
didn’t want. Valancy let them off easily in her judgment because she
liked them, even if they were in Milton’s expressive phrase, “stupidly
good.” But she wondered for what inscrutable reason Aunt Alberta had
seen fit to tie a black velvet ribbon around each of her chubby arms
above the elbow.

Then she looked across the table at Olive. Olive, who had been held up
to her as a paragon of beauty, behaviour and success as long as she
could remember. “Why can’t you hold yourself like Olive, Doss? Why
can’t you stand correctly like Olive, Doss? Why can’t you speak
prettily like Olive, Doss? Why can’t you make an effort, Doss?”

Valancy’s elfin eyes lost their mocking glitter and became pensive and
sorrowful. You could not ignore or disdain Olive. It was quite
impossible to deny that she was beautiful and effective and sometimes
she was a little intelligent. Her mouth might be a trifle heavy—she
might show her fine, white, regular teeth rather too lavishly when she
smiled. But when all was said and done, Olive justified Uncle
Benjamin’s summing up—“a stunning girl.” Yes, Valancy agreed in her
heart, Olive was stunning.

Rich, golden-brown hair, elaborately dressed, with a sparkling bandeau
holding its glossy puffs in place; large, brilliant blue eyes and thick
silken lashes; face of rose and bare neck of snow, rising above her
gown; great pearl bubbles in her ears; the blue-white diamond flame on
her long, smooth, waxen finger with its rosy, pointed nail. Arms of
marble, gleaming through green chiffon and shadow lace. Valancy felt
suddenly thankful that her own scrawny arms were decently swathed in
brown silk. Then she resumed her tabulation of Olive’s charms.

Tall. Queenly. Confident. Everything that Valancy was _not_. Dimples,
too, in cheeks and chin. “A woman with dimples always gets her own
way,” thought Valancy, in a recurring spasm of bitterness at the fate
which had denied her even one dimple.

Olive was only a year younger than Valancy, though a stranger would
have thought that there was at least ten years between them. But nobody
ever dreaded old maidenhood for her. Olive had been surrounded by a
crowd of eager beaus since her early teens, just as her mirror was
always surrounded by a fringe of cards, photographs, programmes and
invitations. At eighteen, when she had graduated from Havergal College,
Olive had been engaged to Will Desmond, lawyer in embryo. Will Desmond
had died and Olive had mourned for him properly for two years. When she
was twenty-three she had a hectic affair with Donald Jackson. But Aunt
and Uncle Wellington disapproved of that and in the end Olive dutifully
gave him up. Nobody in the Stirling clan—whatever outsiders might
say—hinted that she did so because Donald himself was cooling off.
However that might be, Olive’s third venture met with everybody’s
approval. Cecil Price was clever and handsome and “one of the Port
Lawrence Prices.” Olive had been engaged to him for three years. He had
just graduated in civil engineering and they were to be married as soon
as he landed a contract. Olive’s hope chest was full to overflowing
with exquisite things and Olive had already confided to Valancy what
her wedding-dress was to be. Ivory silk draped with lace, white satin
court train, lined with pale green georgette, heirloom veil of Brussels
lace. Valancy knew also—though Olive had not told her—that the
bridesmaids were selected and that she was not among them.

Valancy had, after a fashion, always been Olive’s confidante—perhaps
because she was the only girl in the connection who could not bore
Olive with return confidences. Olive always told Valancy all the
details of her love affairs, from the days when the little boys in
school used to “persecute” her with love letters. Valancy could not
comfort herself by thinking these affairs mythical. Olive really had
them. Many men had gone mad over her besides the three fortunate ones.

“I don’t know what the poor idiots see in me, that drives them to make
such double idiots of themselves,” Olive was wont to say. Valancy would
have liked to say, “I don’t either,” but truth and diplomacy both
restrained her. She _did_ know, perfectly well. Olive Stirling was one
of the girls about whom men do go mad just as indubitably as she,
Valancy, was one of the girls at whom no man ever looked twice.

“And yet,” thought Valancy, summing her up with a new and merciless
conclusiveness, “she’s like a dewless morning. There’s _something_
lacking.”




CHAPTER XI


Meanwhile the dinner in its earlier stages was dragging its slow length
along true to Stirling form. The room was chilly, in spite of the
calendar, and Aunt Alberta had the gas-logs lighted. Everybody in the
clan envied her those gas-logs except Valancy. Glorious open fires
blazed in every room of her Blue Castle when autumnal nights were cool,
but she would have frozen to death in it before she would have
committed the sacrilege of a gas-log. Uncle Herbert made his hardy
perennial joke when he helped Aunt Wellington to the cold meat—“Mary,
will you have a little lamb?” Aunt Mildred told the same old story of
once finding a lost ring in a turkey’s crop. Uncle Benjamin told _his_
favourite prosy tale of how he had once chased and punished a now
famous man for stealing apples. Second Cousin Jane described all her
sufferings with an ulcerating tooth. Aunt Wellington admired the
pattern of Aunt Alberta’s silver teaspoons and lamented the fact that
one of her own had been lost.

“It spoiled the set. I could never get it matched. And it was my
wedding-present from dear old Aunt Matilda.”

Aunt Isabel thought the seasons were changing and couldn’t imagine what
had become of our good, old-fashioned springs. Cousin Georgiana, as
usual, discussed the last funeral and wondered, audibly, “which of us
will be the next to pass away.” Cousin Georgiana could never say
anything as blunt as “die.” Valancy thought she could tell her, but
didn’t. Cousin Gladys, likewise as usual, had a grievance. Her visiting
nephews had nipped all the buds off her house-plants and chivied her
brood of fancy chickens—“squeezed some of them actually to death, my
dear.”

“Boys will be boys,” reminded Uncle Herbert tolerantly.

“But they needn’t be ramping, rampageous animals,” retorted Cousin
Gladys, looking round the table for appreciation of her wit. Everybody
smiled except Valancy. Cousin Gladys remembered that. A few minutes
later, when Ellen Hamilton was being discussed, Cousin Gladys spoke of
her as “one of those shy, plain girls who can’t get husbands,” and
glanced significantly at Valancy.

Uncle James thought the conversation was sagging to a rather low plane
of personal gossip. He tried to elevate it by starting an abstract
discussion on “the greatest happiness.” Everybody was asked to state
his or her idea of “the greatest happiness.”

Aunt Mildred thought the greatest happiness—for a woman—was to be “a
loving and beloved wife and mother.” Aunt Wellington thought it would
be to travel in Europe. Olive thought it would be to be a great singer
like Tetrazzini. Cousin Gladys remarked mournfully that _her_ greatest
happiness would be to be free—absolutely free—from neuritis. Cousin
Georgiana’s greatest happiness would be “to have her dear, dead brother
Richard back.” Aunt Alberta remarked vaguely that the greatest
happiness was to be found in “the poetry of life” and hastily gave some
directions to her maid to prevent any one asking her what she meant.
Mrs. Frederick said the greatest happiness was to spend your life in
loving service for others, and Cousin Stickles and Aunt Isabel agreed
with her—Aunt Isabel with a resentful air, as if she thought Mrs.
Frederick had taken the wind out of her sails by saying it first. “We
are all too prone,” continued Mrs. Frederick, determined not to lose so
good an opportunity, “to live in selfishness, worldliness and sin.” The
other women all felt rebuked for their low ideals, and Uncle James had
a conviction that the conversation had been uplifted with a vengeance.

“The greatest happiness,” said Valancy suddenly and distinctly, “is to
sneeze when you want to.”

Everybody stared. Nobody felt it safe to say anything. Was Valancy
trying to be funny? It was incredible. Mrs. Frederick, who had been
breathing easier since the dinner had progressed so far without any
outbreak on the part of Valancy, began to tremble again. But she deemed
it the part of prudence to say nothing. Uncle Benjamin was not so
prudent. He rashly rushed in where Mrs. Frederick feared to tread.

“Doss,” he chuckled, “what is the difference between a young girl and
an old maid?”

“One is happy and careless and the other is cappy and hairless,” said
Valancy. “You have asked that riddle at least fifty times in my
recollection, Uncle Ben. Why don’t you hunt up some new riddles if
riddle you _must_? It is such a fatal mistake to try to be funny if you
don’t succeed.”

Uncle Benjamin stared foolishly. Never in his life had he, Benjamin
Stirling, of Stirling and Frost, been spoken to so. And by Valancy of
all people! He looked feebly around the table to see what the others
thought of it. Everybody was looking rather blank. Poor Mrs. Frederick
had shut her eyes. And her lips moved tremblingly—as if she were
praying. Perhaps she was. The situation was so unprecedented that
nobody knew how to meet it. Valancy went on calmly eating her salad as
if nothing out of the usual had occurred.

Aunt Alberta, to save her dinner, plunged into an account of how a dog
had bitten her recently. Uncle James, to back her up, asked where the
dog had bitten her.

“Just a little below the Catholic church,” said Aunt Alberta.

At that point Valancy laughed. Nobody else laughed. What was there to
laugh at?

“Is that a vital part?” asked Valancy.

“What do you mean?” said bewildered Aunt Alberta, and Mrs. Frederick
was almost driven to believe that she had served God all her years for
naught.

Aunt Isabel concluded that it was up to her to suppress Valancy.

“Doss, you are horribly thin,” she said. “You are _all_ corners. Do you
_ever_ try to fatten up a little?”

“No.” Valancy was not asking quarter or giving it. “But I can tell you
where you’ll find a beauty parlor in Port Lawrence where they can
reduce the number of your chins.”

“_Val-an-cy_!” The protest was wrung from Mrs. Frederick. She meant her
tone to be stately and majestic, as usual, but it sounded more like an
imploring whine. And she did not say “Doss.”

“She’s feverish,” said Cousin Stickles to Uncle Benjamin in an agonised
whisper. “We’ve thought she’s seemed feverish for several days.”

“She’s gone dippy, in my opinion,” growled Uncle Benjamin. “If not, she
ought to be spanked. Yes, spanked.”

“You can’t spank her.” Cousin Stickles was much agitated. “She’s
twenty-nine years old.”

“So there is that advantage, at least, in being twenty-nine,” said
Valancy, whose ears had caught this aside.

“Doss,” said Uncle Benjamin, “when I am dead you may say what you
please. As long as I am alive I demand to be treated with respect.”

“Oh, but you know we’re all dead,” said Valancy, “the whole Stirling
clan. Some of us are buried and some aren’t—yet. That is the only
difference.”

“Doss,” said Uncle Benjamin, thinking it might cow Valancy, “do you
remember the time you stole the raspberry jam?”

Valancy flushed scarlet—with suppressed laughter, not shame. She had
been sure Uncle Benjamin would drag that jam in somehow.

“Of course I do,” she said. “It was good jam. I’ve always been sorry I
hadn’t time to eat more of it before you found me. Oh, _look_ at Aunt
Isabel’s profile on the wall. Did you ever see anything so funny?”

Everybody looked, including Aunt Isabel herself, which of course,
destroyed it. But Uncle Herbert said kindly, “I—I wouldn’t eat any more
if I were you, Doss. It isn’t that I grudge it—but don’t you think it
would be better for yourself? Your—your stomach seems a little out of
order.”

“Don’t worry about my stomach, old dear,” said Valancy. “It is all
right. I’m going to keep right on eating. It’s so seldom I get the
chance of a satisfying meal.”

It was the first time any one had been called “old dear” in Deerwood.
The Stirlings thought Valancy had invented the phrase and they were
afraid of her from that moment. There was something so uncanny about
such an expression. But in poor Mrs. Frederick’s opinion the reference
to a satisfying meal was the worst thing Valancy had said yet. Valancy
had always been a disappointment to her. Now she was a disgrace. She
thought she would have to get up and go away from the table. Yet she
dared not leave Valancy there.

Aunt Alberta’s maid came in to remove the salad plates and bring in the
dessert. It was a welcome diversion. Everybody brightened up with a
determination to ignore Valancy and talk as if she wasn’t there. Uncle
Wellington mentioned Barney Snaith. Eventually somebody did mention
Barney Snaith at every Stirling function, Valancy reflected. Whatever
he was, he was an individual that could not be ignored. She resigned
herself to listen. There was a subtle fascination in the subject for
her, though she had not yet faced this fact. She could feel her pulses
beating to her finger-tips.

Of course they abused him. Nobody ever had a good word to say of Barney
Snaith. All the old, wild tales were canvassed—the defaulting
cashier-counterfeiter-infidel-murderer-in-hiding legends were thrashed
out. Uncle Wellington was very indignant that such a creature should be
allowed to exist at all in the neighbourhood of Deerwood. He didn’t
know what the police at Port Lawrence were thinking of. Everybody would
be murdered in their beds some night. It was a shame that he should be
allowed to be at large after all that he had done.

“What _has_ he done?” asked Valancy suddenly.

Uncle Wellington stared at her, forgetting that she was to be ignored.

“Done! Done! He’s done _everything_.”

“_What_ has he done?” repeated Valancy inexorably. “What do you _know_
that he has done? You’re always running him down. And what has ever
been proved against him?”

“I don’t argue with women,” said Uncle Wellington. “And I don’t need
proof. When a man hides himself up there on an island in Muskoka, year
in and year out, and nobody can find out where he came from or how he
lives, or what he does there, _that’s_ proof enough. Find a mystery and
you find a crime.”

“The very idea of a man named Snaith!” said Second Cousin Sarah. “Why,
the name itself is enough to condemn him!”

“I wouldn’t like to meet him in a dark lane,” shivered Cousin
Georgiana.

“What do you suppose he would do to you?” asked Valancy.

“Murder me,” said Cousin Georgiana solemnly.

“Just for the fun of it?” suggested Valancy.

“Exactly,” said Cousin Georgiana unsuspiciously. “When there is so much
smoke there must be some fire. I was afraid he was a criminal when he
came here first. I _felt_ he had something to hide. I am not often
mistaken in my intuitions.”

“Criminal! Of course he’s a criminal,” said Uncle Wellington. “Nobody
doubts it”—glaring at Valancy. “Why, they say he served a term in the
penitentiary for embezzlement. I don’t doubt it. And they say he’s in
with that gang that are perpetrating all those bank robberies round the
country.”

“_Who_ say?” asked Valancy.

Uncle Wellington knotted his ugly forehead at her. What had got into
this confounded girl, anyway? He ignored the question.

“He has the identical look of a jail-bird,” snapped Uncle Benjamin. “I
noticed it the first time I saw him.”

“‘A fellow by the hand of nature marked,
Quoted and signed to do a deed of shame’,”


declaimed Uncle James. He looked enormously pleased over managing to
work that quotation in at last. He had been waiting all his life for
the chance.

“One of his eyebrows is an arch and the other is a triangle,” said
Valancy. “Is _that_ why you think him so villainous?”

Uncle James lifted _his_ eyebrows. Generally when Uncle James lifted
his eyebrows the world came to an end. This time it continued to
function.

“How do _you_ know his eyebrows so well, Doss?” asked Olive, a trifle
maliciously. Such a remark would have covered Valancy with confusion
two weeks ago, and Olive knew it.

“Yes, how?” demanded Aunt Wellington.

“I’ve seen him twice and I looked at him closely,” said Valancy
composedly. “I thought his face the most interesting one I ever saw.”

“There is no doubt there is something fishy in the creature’s past
life,” said Olive, who began to think she was decidedly out of the
conversation, which had centred so amazingly around Valancy. “But he
can hardly be guilty of _everything_ he’s accused of, you know.”

Valancy felt annoyed with Olive. Why should _she_ speak up in even this
qualified defence of Barney Snaith? What had _she_ to do with him? For
that matter, what had Valancy? But Valancy did not ask herself this
question.

“They say he keeps dozens of cats in that hut up back on Mistawis,”
said Second Cousin Sarah Taylor, by way of appearing not entirely
ignorant of him.

Cats. It sounded quite alluring to Valancy, in the plural. She pictured
an island in Muskoka haunted by pussies.

“That alone shows there is something wrong with him,” decreed Aunt
Isabel.

“People who don’t like cats,” said Valancy, attacking her dessert with
a relish, “always seem to think that there is some peculiar virtue in
not liking them.”

“The man hasn’t a friend except Roaring Abel,” said Uncle Wellington.
“And if Roaring Abel had kept away from him, as everybody else did, it
would have been better for—for some members of his family.”

Uncle Wellington’s rather lame conclusion was due to a marital glance
from Aunt Wellington reminding him of what he had almost forgotten—that
there were girls at the table.

“If you mean,” said Valancy passionately, “that Barney Snaith is the
father of Cecily Gay’s child, he _isn’t_. It’s a wicked lie.”

In spite of her indignation Valancy was hugely amused at the expression
of the faces around that festal table. She had not seen anything like
it since the day, seventeen years ago, when at Cousin Gladys’ thimble
party, they discovered that she had got—SOMETHING—in her head at
school. _Lice_ in her head! Valancy was done with euphemisms.

Poor Mrs. Frederick was almost in a state of collapse. She had
believed—or pretended to believe—that Valancy still supposed that
children were found in parsley beds.

“Hush—hush!” implored Cousin Stickles.

“I don’t mean to hush,” said Valancy perversely. “I’ve hush—hushed all
my life. I’ll scream if I want to. Don’t make me want to. And stop
talking nonsense about Barney Snaith.”

Valancy didn’t exactly understand her own indignation. What did Barney
Snaith’s imputed crimes and misdemeanours matter to her? And why, out
of them all, did it seem most intolerable that he should have been
poor, pitiful little Cecily Gay’s false lover? For it _did_ seem
intolerable to her. She did not mind when they called him a thief and a
counterfeiter and jail-bird; but she could not endure to think that he
had loved and ruined Cecily Gay. She recalled his face on the two
occasions of their chance meetings—his twisted, enigmatic, engaging
smile, his twinkle, his thin, sensitive, almost ascetic lips, his
general air of frank daredeviltry. A man with such a smile and lips
might have murdered or stolen but he could not have betrayed. She
suddenly hated every one who said it or believed it of him.

“When _I_ was a young girl I never thought or spoke about such matters,
Doss,” said Aunt Wellington, crushingly.

“But I’m not a young girl,” retorted Valancy, uncrushed. “Aren’t you
always rubbing that into me? And you are all evil-minded, senseless
gossips. Can’t you leave poor Cissy Gay alone? She’s dying. Whatever
she did, God or the Devil has punished her enough for it. _You_ needn’t
take a hand, too. As for Barney Snaith, the only crime he has been
guilty of is living to himself and minding his own business. He can, it
seems, get along without you. Which _is_ an unpardonable sin, of
course, in your little snobocracy.” Valancy coined that concluding word
suddenly and felt that it was an inspiration. That was exactly what
they were and not one of them was fit to mend another.

“Valancy, your poor father would turn over in his grave if he could
hear you,” said Mrs. Frederick.

“I dare say he would like that for a change,” said Valancy brazenly.

“Doss,” said Uncle James heavily, “the Ten Commandments are fairly up
to date still—especially the fifth. Have you forgotten that?”

“No,” said Valancy, “but I thought _you_ had—especially the ninth. Have
you ever thought, Uncle James, how dull life would be without the Ten
Commandments? It is only when things are forbidden that they become
fascinating.”

But her excitement had been too much for her. She knew, by certain
unmistakable warnings, that one of her attacks of pain was coming on.
It must not find her there. She rose from her chair.

“I am going home now. I only came for the dinner. It was very good,
Aunt Alberta, although your salad-dressing is not salt enough and a
dash of cayenne would improve it.”

None of the flabbergasted silver wedding guests could think of anything
to say until the lawn gate clanged behind Valancy in the dusk. Then—

“She’s feverish—I’ve said right along she was feverish,” moaned Cousin
Stickles.

Uncle Benjamin punished his pudgy left hand fiercely with his pudgy
right.

“She’s dippy—I tell you she’s gone dippy,” he snorted angrily. “That’s
all there is about it. Clean dippy.”

“Oh, Benjamin,” said Cousin Georgiana soothingly, “don’t condemn her
too rashly. We _must_ remember what dear old Shakespeare says—that
charity thinketh no evil.”

“Charity! Poppy-cock!” snorted Uncle Benjamin. “I never heard a young
woman talk such stuff in my life as she just did. Talking about things
she ought to be ashamed to think of, much less mention. Blaspheming!
Insulting _us_! What she wants is a generous dose of spank-weed and I’d
like to be the one to administer it. H-uh-h-h-h!” Uncle Benjamin gulped
down the half of a scalding cup of coffee.

“Do you suppose that the mumps could work on a person that way?” wailed
Cousin Stickles.

“I opened an umbrella in the house yesterday,” sniffed Cousin
Georgiana. “I _knew_ it betokened some misfortune.”

“Have you tried to find out if she has a temperature?” asked Cousin
Mildred.

“She wouldn’t let Amelia put the thermometer under her tongue,”
whimpered Cousin Stickles.

Mrs. Frederick was openly in tears. All her defences were down.

“I must tell you,” she sobbed, “that Valancy has been acting very
strangely for over two weeks now. She hasn’t been a bit like
herself—Christine could tell you. I have hoped against hope that it was
only one of her colds coming on. But it is—it must be something worse.”

“This is bringing on my neuritis again,” said Cousin Gladys, putting
her hand to her head.

“Don’t cry, Amelia,” said Herbert kindly, pulling nervously at his
spiky grey hair. He hated “family ructions.” Very inconsiderate of Doss
to start one at _his_ silver wedding. Who could have supposed she had
it in her? “You’ll have to take her to a doctor. This may be only
a—er—a brainstorm. There are such things as brainstorms nowadays,
aren’t there?”

“I—I suggested consulting a doctor to her yesterday,” moaned Mrs.
Frederick. “And she said she wouldn’t go to a doctor—wouldn’t. Oh,
surely I have had trouble enough!”

“And she _won’t_ take Redfern’s Bitters,” said Cousin Stickles.

“Or _anything_,” said Mrs. Frederick.

“And she’s determined to go to the Presbyterian church,” said Cousin
Stickles—repressing, however, to her credit be it said, the story of
the bannister.

“That proves she’s dippy,” growled Uncle Benjamin. “I noticed something
strange about her the minute she came in today. I noticed it _before_
today.” (Uncle Benjamin was thinking of “m-i-r-a-z-h.”) “Everything she
said today showed an unbalanced mind. That question—‘Was it a vital
part?’ Was there any sense at all in that remark? None whatever! There
never was anything like that in the Stirlings. It must be from the
Wansbarras.”

Poor Mrs. Frederick was too crushed to be indignant.

“I never heard of anything like that in the Wansbarras,” she sobbed.

“Your father was odd enough,” said Uncle Benjamin.

“Poor Pa was—peculiar,” admitted Mrs. Frederick tearfully, “but his
mind was never affected.”

“He talked all his life exactly as Valancy did today,” retorted Uncle
Benjamin. “And he believed he was his own great-great grandfather born
over again. I’ve heard him say it. Don’t tell _me_ that a man who
believed a thing like _that_ was ever in his right senses. Come, come,
Amelia, stop sniffling. Of course Doss has made a terrible exhibition
of herself today, but she’s not responsible. Old maids are apt to fly
off at a tangent like that. If she had been married when she should
have been she wouldn’t have got like this.”

“Nobody wanted to marry her,” said Mrs. Frederick, who felt that,
somehow, Uncle Benjamin was blaming her.

“Well, fortunately there’s no outsider here,” snapped Uncle Benjamin.
“We may keep it in the family yet. I’ll take her over to see Dr. Marsh
tomorrow. _I_ know how to deal with pig-headed people. Won’t that be
best, James?”

“We must have medical advice certainly,” agreed Uncle James.

“Well, that’s settled. In the meantime, Amelia, act as if nothing had
happened and keep an eye on her. Don’t let her be alone. Above all,
don’t let her sleep alone.”

Renewed whimpers from Mrs. Frederick.

“I can’t help it. Night before last I suggested she’d better have
Christine sleep with her. She positively refused—_and locked her door_.
Oh, you don’t know how she’s changed. She won’t work. At least, she
won’t sew. She does her usual housework, of course. But she wouldn’t
sweep the parlour yesterday morning, though we _always_ sweep it on
Thursdays. She said she’d wait till it was dirty. ‘Would you rather
sweep a dirty room than a clean one?’ I asked her. She said, ‘Of
course. I’d see something for my labour then.’ Think of it!”

Uncle Benjamin thought of it.

“The jar of potpourri”—Cousin Stickles pronounced it as spelled—“has
disappeared from her room. I found the pieces in the next lot. She
won’t tell us what happened to it.”

“I should never have dreamed it of Doss,” said Uncle Herbert. “She has
always seemed such a quiet, sensible girl. A bit backward—but
sensible.”

“The only thing you can be sure of in this world is the multiplication
table,” said Uncle James, feeling cleverer than ever.

“Well, let’s cheer up,” suggested Uncle Benjamin. “Why are chorus girls
like fine stock raisers?”

“Why?” asked Cousin Stickles, since it had to be asked and Valancy
wasn’t there to ask it.

“Like to exhibit calves,” chuckled Uncle Benjamin.

Cousin Stickles thought Uncle Benjamin a little indelicate. Before
Olive, too. But then, he was a man.

Uncle Herbert was thinking that things were rather dull now that Doss
had gone.




CHAPTER XII


Valancy hurried home through the faint blue twilight—hurried too fast
perhaps. The attack she had when she thankfully reached the shelter of
her own room was the worst yet. It was really very bad. She might die
in one of those spells. It would be dreadful to die in such pain.
Perhaps—perhaps this was death. Valancy felt pitifully alone. When she
could think at all she wondered what it would be like to have some one
with her who could sympathise—some one who really cared—just to hold
her hand tight, if nothing else—some one just to say, “Yes, I know.
It’s dreadful—be brave—you’ll soon be better;” not some one merely
fussy and alarmed. Not her mother or Cousin Stickles. Why did the
thought of Barney Snaith come into her mind? Why did she suddenly feel,
in the midst of this hideous loneliness of pain, that _he_ would be
sympathetic—sorry for any one that was suffering? Why did he seem to
her like an old, well-known friend? Was it because she had been
defending him—standing up to her family for him?

She was so bad at first that she could not even get herself a dose of
Dr. Trent’s prescription. But eventually she managed it, and soon after
relief came. The pain left her and she lay on her bed, spent,
exhausted, in a cold perspiration. Oh, that had been horrible! She
could not endure many more attacks like that. One didn’t mind dying if
death could be instant and painless. But to be hurt so in dying!

Suddenly she found herself laughing. That dinner _had_ been fun. And it
had all been so simple. She had merely _said_ the things she had always
_thought_. Their faces—oh, their faces! Uncle Benjamin—poor,
flabbergasted Uncle Benjamin! Valancy felt quite sure he would make a
new will that very night. Olive would get Valancy’s share of his fat
hoard. Olive had always got Valancy’s share of everything. Remember the
dust-pile.

To laugh at her clan as she had always wanted to laugh was all the
satisfaction she could get out of life now. But she thought it was
rather pitiful that it should be so. Might she not pity herself a
little when nobody else did?

Valancy got up and went to her window. The moist, beautiful wind
blowing across groves of young-leafed wild trees touched her face with
the caress of a wise, tender, old friend. The lombardies in Mrs.
Tredgold’s lawn, off to the left—Valancy could just see them between
the stable and the old carriage-shop—were in dark purple silhouette
against a clear sky and there was a milk-white, pulsating star just
over one of them, like a living pearl on a silver-green lake. Far
beyond the station were the shadowy, purple-hooded woods around Lake
Mistawis. A white, filmy mist hung over them and just above it was a
faint, young crescent. Valancy looked at it over her thin left
shoulder.

“I wish,” she said whimsically, “that I may have _one_ little dust-pile
before I die.”




CHAPTER XIII


Uncle Benjamin found he had reckoned without his host when he promised
so airily to take Valancy to a doctor. Valancy would not go. Valancy
laughed in his face.

“Why on earth should I go to Dr. Marsh? There’s nothing the matter with
my mind. Though you all think I’ve suddenly gone crazy. Well, I
haven’t. I’ve simply grown tired of living to please other people and
have decided to please myself. It will give you something to talk about
besides my stealing the raspberry jam. So that’s that.”

“Doss,” said Uncle Benjamin, solemnly and helplessly, “you are not—like
yourself.”

“Who am I like, then?” asked Valancy.

Uncle Benjamin was rather posed.

“Your Grandfather Wansbarra,” he answered desperately.

“Thanks.” Valancy looked pleased. “That’s a real compliment. I remember
Grandfather Wansbarra. He was one of the few human beings I _have_
known—almost the only one. Now, it is of no use to scold or entreat or
command, Uncle Benjamin—or exchange anguished glances with Mother and
Cousin Stickles. I am not going to any doctor. And if you bring any
doctor here I won’t see him. So what are you going to do about it?”

What indeed! It was not seemly—or even possible—to hale Valancy
doctorwards by physical force. And in no other way could it be done,
seemingly. Her mother’s tears and imploring entreaties availed not.

“Don’t worry, Mother,” said Valancy, lightly but quite respectfully.
“It isn’t likely I’ll do anything very terrible. But I mean to have a
little fun.”

“Fun!” Mrs. Frederick uttered the word as if Valancy had said she was
going to have a little tuberculosis.

Olive, sent by her mother to see if _she_ had any influence over
Valancy, came away with flushed cheeks and angry eyes. She told her
mother that nothing could be done with Valancy. After _she_, Olive, had
talked to her just like a sister, tenderly and wisely, all Valancy had
said, narrowing her funny eyes to mere slips, was, “_I_ don’t show my
gums when I laugh.”

“More as if she were talking to herself than to me. Indeed, Mother, all
the time I was talking to her she gave me the impression of not really
listening. And that wasn’t all. When I finally decided that what I was
saying had no influence over her I begged her, when Cecil came next
week, not to say anything queer before him, at least. Mother, what do
you think she said?”

“I’m sure I can’t imagine,” groaned Aunt Wellington, prepared for
anything.

“She said, ‘I’d rather like to shock Cecil. His mouth is too red for a
man’s.’ Mother, I can never feel the same to Valancy again.”

“Her mind is affected, Olive,” said Aunt Wellington solemnly. “You must
not hold her responsible for what she says.”

When Aunt Wellington told Mrs. Frederick what Valancy had said to
Olive, Mrs. Frederick wanted Valancy to apologise.

“You made me apologise to Olive fifteen years ago for something I
didn’t do,” said Valancy. “That old apology will do for now.”

Another solemn family conclave was held. They were all there except
Cousin Gladys, who had been suffering such tortures of neuritis in her
head “ever since poor Doss went queer” that she couldn’t undertake any
responsibility. They decided—that is, they accepted a fact that was
thrust in their faces—that the wisest thing was to leave Valancy alone
for a while—“give her her head” as Uncle Benjamin expressed it—“keep a
careful eye on her but let her pretty much alone.” The term of
“watchful waiting” had not been invented then, but that was practically
the policy Valancy’s distracted relatives decided to follow.

“We must be guided by developments,” said Uncle Benjamin. “It
is”—solemnly—“easier to scramble eggs than unscramble them. Of
course—if she becomes violent——”

Uncle James consulted Dr. Ambrose Marsh. Dr. Ambrose Marsh approved
their decision. He pointed out to irate Uncle James—who would have
liked to lock Valancy up somewhere, out of hand—that Valancy had not,
as yet, really done or said anything that could be construed as proof
of lunacy—and without proof you cannot lock people up in this
degenerate age. Nothing that Uncle James had reported seemed very
alarming to Dr. Marsh, who put up his hand to conceal a smile several
times. But then he himself was not a Stirling. And he knew very little
about the old Valancy. Uncle James stalked out and drove back to
Deerwood, thinking that Ambrose Marsh wasn’t much of a doctor, after
all, and that Adelaide Stirling might have done better for herself.




CHAPTER XIV


Life cannot stop because tragedy enters it. Meals must be made ready
though a son dies and porches must be repaired even if your only
daughter is going out of her mind. Mrs. Frederick, in her systematic
way, had long ago appointed the second week in June for the repairing
of the front porch, the roof of which was sagging dangerously. Roaring
Abel had been engaged to do it many moons before and Roaring Abel
promptly appeared on the morning of the first day of the second week,
and fell to work. Of course he was drunk. Roaring Abel was never
anything but drunk. But he was only in the first stage, which made him
talkative and genial. The odour of whisky on his breath nearly drove
Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles wild at dinner. Even Valancy, with
all her emancipation, did not like it. But she liked Abel and she liked
his vivid, eloquent talk, and after she washed the dinner dishes she
went out and sat on the steps and talked to him.

Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles thought it a terrible proceeding,
but what could they do? Valancy only smiled mockingly at them when they
called her in, and did not go. It was so easy to defy once you got
started. The first step was the only one that really counted. They were
both afraid to say anything more to her lest she might make a scene
before Roaring Abel, who would spread it all over the country with his
own characteristic comments and exaggerations. It was too cold a day,
in spite of the June sunshine, for Mrs. Frederick to sit at the
dining-room window and listen to what was said. She had to shut the
window and Valancy and Roaring Abel had their talk to themselves. But
if Mrs. Frederick had known what the outcome of that talk was to be she
would have prevented it, if the porch was never repaired.

Valancy sat on the steps, defiant of the chill breeze of this cold June
which had made Aunt Isabel aver the seasons were changing. She did not
care whether she caught a cold or not. It was delightful to sit there
in that cold, beautiful, fragrant world and feel free. She filled her
lungs with the clean, lovely wind and held out her arms to it and let
it tear her hair to pieces while she listened to Roaring Abel, who told
her his troubles between intervals of hammering gaily in time to his
Scotch songs. Valancy liked to hear him. Every stroke of his hammer
fell true to the note.

Old Abel Gay, in spite of his seventy years, was handsome still, in a
stately, patriarchal manner. His tremendous beard, falling down over
his blue flannel shirt, was still a flaming, untouched red, though his
shock of hair was white as snow, and his eyes were a fiery, youthful
blue. His enormous, reddish-white eyebrows were more like moustaches
than eyebrows. Perhaps this was why he always kept his upper lip
scrupulously shaved. His cheeks were red and his nose ought to have
been, but wasn’t. It was a fine, upstanding, aquiline nose, such as the
noblest Roman of them all might have rejoiced in. Abel was six feet two
in his stockings, broad-shouldered, lean-hipped. In his youth he had
been a famous lover, finding all women too charming to bind himself to
one. His years had been a wild, colourful panorama of follies and
adventures, gallantries, fortunes and misfortunes. He had been
forty-five before he married—a pretty slip of a girl whom his goings-on
killed in a few years. Abel was piously drunk at her funeral and
insisted on repeating the fifty-fifth chapter of Isaiah—Abel knew most
of the Bible and all the Psalms by heart—while the minister, whom he
disliked, prayed or tried to pray. Thereafter his house was run by an
untidy old cousin who cooked his meals and kept things going after a
fashion. In this unpromising environment little Cecilia Gay had grown
up.

Valancy had known “Cissy Gay” fairly well in the democracy of the
public school, though Cissy had been three years younger than she.
After they left school their paths diverged and she had seen nothing of
her. Old Abel was a Presbyterian. That is, he got a Presbyterian
preacher to marry him, baptise his child and bury his wife; and he knew
more about Presbyterian theology than most ministers, which made him a
terror to them in arguments. But Roaring Abel never went to church.
Every Presbyterian minister who had been in Deerwood had tried his
hand—once—at reforming Roaring Abel. But he had not been pestered of
late. Rev. Mr. Bently had been in Deerwood for eight years, but he had
not sought out Roaring Abel since the first three months of his
pastorate. He had called on Roaring Abel then and found him in the
theological stage of drunkenness—which always followed the sentimental
maudlin one, and preceded the roaring, blasphemous one. The eloquently
prayerful one, in which he realised himself temporarily and intensely
as a sinner in the hands of an angry God, was the final one. Abel never
went beyond it. He generally fell asleep on his knees and awakened
sober, but he had never been “dead drunk” in his life. He told Mr.
Bently that he was a sound Presbyterian and sure of his election. He
had no sins—that he knew of—to repent of.

“Have you never done anything in your life that you are sorry for?”
asked Mr. Bently.

Roaring Abel scratched his bushy white head and pretended to reflect.
“Well, yes,” he said finally. “There were some women I might have
kissed and didn’t. I’ve always been sorry for _that_.”

Mr. Bently went out and went home.

Abel had seen that Cissy was properly baptised—jovially drunk at the
same time himself. He made her go to church and Sunday School
regularly. The church people took her up and she was in turn a member
of the Mission Band, the Girls’ Guild and the Young Women’s Missionary
Society. She was a faithful, unobtrusive, sincere, little worker.
Everybody liked Cissy Gay and was sorry for her. She was so modest and
sensitive and pretty in that delicate, elusive fashion of beauty which
fades so quickly if life is not kept in it by love and tenderness. But
then liking and pity did not prevent them from tearing her in pieces
like hungry cats when the catastrophe came. Four years previously Cissy
Gay had gone up to a Muskoka hotel as a summer waitress. And when she
had come back in the fall she was a changed creature. She hid herself
away and went nowhere. The reason soon leaked out and scandal raged.
That winter Cissy’s baby was born. Nobody ever knew who the father was.
Cecily kept her poor pale lips tightly locked on her sorry secret.
Nobody dared ask Roaring Abel any questions about it. Rumour and
surmise laid the guilt at Barney Snaith’s door because diligent inquiry
among the other maids at the hotel revealed the fact that nobody there
had ever seen Cissy Gay “with a fellow.” She had “kept herself to
herself” they said, rather resentfully. “Too good for _our_ dances. And
now look!”

The baby had lived for a year. After its death Cissy faded away. Two
years ago Dr. Marsh had given her only six months to live—her lungs
were hopelessly diseased. But she was still alive. Nobody went to see
her. Women would not go to Roaring Abel’s house. Mr. Bently had gone
once, when he knew Abel was away, but the dreadful old creature who was
scrubbing the kitchen floor told him Cissy wouldn’t see any one. The
old cousin had died and Roaring Abel had had two or three disreputable
housekeepers—the only kind who could be prevailed on to go to a house
where a girl was dying of consumption. But the last one had left and
Roaring Abel had now no one to wait on Cissy and “do” for him. This was
the burden of his plaint to Valancy and he condemned the “hypocrites”
of Deerwood and its surrounding communities with some rich, meaty oaths
that happened to reach Cousin Stickles’ ears as she passed through the
hall and nearly finished the poor lady. Was Valancy listening to
_that_?

Valancy hardly noticed the profanity. Her attention was focussed on the
horrible thought of poor, unhappy, disgraced little Cissy Gay, ill and
helpless in that forlorn old house out on the Mistawis road, without a
soul to help or comfort her. And this in a nominally Christian
community in the year of grace nineteen and some odd!

“Do you mean to say that Cissy is all alone there now, with nobody to
do anything for her—_nobody_?”

“Oh, she can move about a bit and get a bite and sup when she wants it.
But she can’t work. It’s d——d hard for a man to work hard all day and
go home at night tired and hungry and cook his own meals. Sometimes I’m
sorry I kicked old Rachel Edwards out.” Abel described Rachel
picturesquely.

“Her face looked as if it had wore out a hundred bodies. And she moped.
Talk about temper! Temper’s nothing to moping. She was too slow to
catch worms, and dirty—d——d dirty. I ain’t unreasonable—I know a man
has to eat his peck before he dies—but she went over the limit. What
d’ye sp’ose I saw that lady do? She’d made some punkin jam—had it on
the table in glass jars with the tops off. The dawg got up on the table
and stuck his paw into one of them. What did she do? She jest took holt
of the dawg and wrung the syrup off his paw back into the jar! Then
screwed the top on and set it in the pantry. I sets open the door and
says to her, ‘Go!’ The dame went, and I fired the jars of punkin after
her, two at a time. Thought I’d die laughing to see old Rachel run—with
them punkin jars raining after her. She’s told everywhere I’m crazy, so
nobody’ll come for love or money.”

“But Cissy _must_ have some one to look after her,” insisted Valancy,
whose mind was centred on this aspect of the case. She did not care
whether Roaring Abel had any one to cook for him or not. But her heart
was wrung for Cecilia Gay.

“Oh, she gits on. Barney Snaith always drops in when he’s passing and
does anything she wants done. Brings her oranges and flowers and
things. There’s a Christian for you. Yet that sanctimonious, snivelling
parcel of St. Andrew’s people wouldn’t be seen on the same side of the
road with him. Their dogs’ll go to heaven before they do. And their
minister—slick as if the cat had licked him!”

“There are plenty of good people, both in St. Andrew’s and St.
George’s, who would be kind to Cissy if you would behave yourself,”
said Valancy severely. “They’re afraid to go near your place.”

“Because I’m such a sad old dog? But I don’t bite—never bit any one in
my life. A few loose words spilled around don’t hurt any one. And I’m
not asking people to come. Don’t want ’em poking and prying about. What
I want is a housekeeper. If I shaved every Sunday and went to church
I’d get all the housekeepers I’d want. I’d be respectable then. But
what’s the use of going to church when it’s all settled by
predestination? Tell me that, Miss.”

“Is it?” said Valancy.

“Yes. Can’t git around it nohow. Wish I could. I don’t want either
heaven or hell for steady. Wish a man could have ’em mixed in equal
proportions.”

“Isn’t that the way it is in this world?” said Valancy
thoughtfully—but rather as if her thought was concerned with something
else than theology.

“No, no,” boomed Abel, striking a tremendous blow on a stubborn nail.
“There’s too much hell here—entirely too much hell. That’s why I get
drunk so often. It sets you free for a little while—free from
yourself—yes, by God, free from predestination. Ever try it?”

“No, I’ve another way of getting free,” said Valancy absently. “But
about Cissy now. She _must_ have some one to look after her——”

“What are you harping on Sis for? Seems to me you ain’t bothered much
about her up to now. You never even come to see her. And she used to
like you so well.”

“I should have,” said Valancy. “But never mind. You couldn’t
understand. The point is—you must have a housekeeper.”

“Where am I to get one? I can pay decent wages if I could get a decent
woman. D’ye think I like old hags?”

“Will I do?” said Valancy.




CHAPTER XV


“Let us be calm,” said Uncle Benjamin. “Let us be perfectly calm.”

“Calm!” Mrs. Frederick wrung her hands. “How can I be calm—how could
anybody be calm under such a disgrace as this?”

“Why in the world did you let her go?” asked Uncle James.

“_Let_ her! How could I stop her, James? It seems she packed the big
valise and sent it away with Roaring Abel when he went home after
supper, while Christine and I were out in the kitchen. Then Doss
herself came down with her little satchel, dressed in her green serge
suit. I felt a terrible premonition. I can’t tell you how it was, but I
seemed to _know_ that Doss was going to do something dreadful.”

“It’s a pity you couldn’t have had your premonition a little sooner,”
said Uncle Benjamin drily.

“I said, ‘Doss, _where are you going_?’ and _she_ said, ‘I am going to
look for my Blue Castle.’”

“Wouldn’t you think _that_ would convince Marsh that her mind is
affected?” interjected Uncle James.

“And _I_ said, ‘Valancy, what _do_ you mean?’ And _she_ said, ‘I am
going to keep house for Roaring Abel and nurse Cissy. He will pay me
thirty dollars a month.’ I wonder I didn’t drop dead on the spot.”

“You shouldn’t have let her go—you shouldn’t have let her out of the
house,” said Uncle James. “You should have locked the door—anything——”

“She was between me and the front door. And you can’t realise how
determined she was. She was like a rock. That’s the strangest thing of
all about her. She used to be so good and obedient, and now she’s
neither to hold nor bind. But I said _everything_ I could think of to
bring her to her senses. I asked her if she had no regard for her
reputation. I said to her solemnly, ‘Doss, when a woman’s reputation is
once smirched nothing can ever make it spotless again. Your character
will be gone for ever if you go to Roaring Abel’s to wait on a bad girl
like Sis Gay.’ And she said, ‘I don’t believe Cissy was a bad girl, but
I don’t care if she was.’ Those were her very words, ‘I don’t care if
she was.’”

“She has lost all sense of decency,” exploded Uncle Benjamin.

“‘Cissy Gay is dying,’ she said, ‘and it’s a shame and disgrace that
she is dying in a Christian community with no one to do anything for
her. Whatever she’s been or done, she’s a human being.’”

“Well, you know, when it comes to that, I suppose she is,” said Uncle
James with the air of one making a splendid concession.

“I asked Doss if she had no regard for appearances. She said, ‘I’ve
been keeping up appearances all my life. Now I’m going in for
realities. Appearances can go hang!’ Go _hang_!”

“An outrageous thing!” said Uncle Benjamin violently. “An outrageous
thing!”

Which relieved his feelings, but didn’t help any one else.

Mrs. Frederick wept. Cousin Stickles took up the refrain between her
moans of despair.

“I told her—we _both_ told her—that Roaring Abel had certainly killed
his wife in one of his drunken rages and would kill her. She laughed
and said, ‘I’m not afraid of Roaring Abel. He won’t kill _me_, and he’s
too old for me to be afraid of his gallantries.’ What did she mean?
What _are_ gallantries?”

Mrs. Frederick saw that she must stop crying if she wanted to regain
control of the conversation.

“_I_ said to her, ‘Valancy, if you have no regard for your own
reputation and your family’s standing, have you none for _my_
feelings?’ She said, ‘None.’ Just like that, ‘_None_!’”

“Insane people never _do_ have any regard for other people’s feelings,”
said Uncle Benjamin. “That’s one of the symptoms.”

“I broke out into tears then, and she said, ‘Come now, Mother, be a
good sport. I’m going to do an act of Christian charity, and as for the
damage it will do my reputation, why, you know I haven’t any
matrimonial chances anyhow, so what does it matter?’ And with that she
turned and went out.”

“The last words I said to her,” said Cousin Stickles pathetically,
“were, ‘Who will rub my back at nights now?’ And she said—she said—but
no, I cannot repeat it.”

“Nonsense,” said Uncle Benjamin. “Out with it. This is no time to be
squeamish.”

“She said”—Cousin Stickles’ voice was little more than a whisper—“she
said—‘Oh, _darn_!’”

“To think I should have lived to hear my daughter swearing!” sobbed
Mrs. Frederick.

“It—it was only imitation swearing,” faltered Cousin Stickles, desirous
of smoothing things over now that the worst was out. But she had
_never_ told about the bannister.

“It will be only a step from that to real swearing,” said Uncle James
sternly.

“The worst of this”—Mrs. Frederick hunted for a dry spot on her
handkerchief—“is that every one will know now that she is deranged. We
can’t keep it a secret any longer. Oh, I cannot bear it!”

“You should have been stricter with her when she was young,” said Uncle
Benjamin.

“I don’t see how I could have been,” said Mrs. Frederick—truthfully
enough.

“The worst feature of the case is that Snaith scoundrel is always
hanging around Roaring Abel’s,” said Uncle James. “I shall be thankful
if nothing worse comes of this mad freak than a few weeks at Roaring
Abel’s. Cissy Gay _can’t_ live much longer.”

“And she didn’t even take her flannel petticoat!” lamented Cousin
Stickles.

“I’ll see Ambrose Marsh again about this,” said Uncle Benjamin—meaning
Valancy, not the flannel petticoat.

“I’ll see Lawyer Ferguson,” said Uncle James.

“Meanwhile,” added Uncle Benjamin, “let us be calm.”




CHAPTER XVI


Valancy had walked out to Roaring Abel’s house on the Mistawis road
under a sky of purple and amber, with a queer exhilaration and
expectancy in her heart. Back there, behind her, her mother and Cousin
Stickles were crying—over themselves, not over her. But here the wind
was in her face, soft, dew-wet, cool, blowing along the grassy roads.
Oh, she loved the wind! The robins were whistling sleepily in the firs
along the way and the moist air was fragrant with the tang of balsam.
Big cars went purring past in the violet dusk—the stream of summer
tourists to Muskoka had already begun—but Valancy did not envy any of
their occupants. Muskoka cottages might be charming, but beyond, in the
sunset skies, among the spires of the firs, her Blue Castle towered.
She brushed the old years and habits and inhibitions away from her like
dead leaves. She would not be littered with them.

Roaring Abel’s rambling, tumble-down old house was situated about three
miles from the village, on the very edge of “up back,” as the sparsely
settled, hilly, wooded country around Mistawis was called vernacularly.
It did not, it must be confessed, look much like a Blue Castle.

It had once been a snug place enough in the days when Abel Gay had been
young and prosperous, and the punning, arched sign over the gate—“A.
Gay, Carpenter,” had been fine and freshly painted. Now it was a faded,
dreary old place, with a leprous, patched roof and shutters hanging
askew. Abel never seemed to do any carpenter jobs about his own house.
It had a listless air, as if tired of life. There was a dwindling grove
of ragged, crone-like old spruces behind it. The garden, which Cissy
used to keep neat and pretty, had run wild. On two sides of the house
were fields full of nothing but mulleins. Behind the house was a long
stretch of useless barrens, full of scrub pines and spruces, with here
and there a blossoming bit of wild cherry, running back to a belt of
timber on the shores of Lake Mistawis, two miles away. A rough, rocky,
boulder-strewn lane ran through it to the woods—a lane white with
pestiferous, beautiful daisies.

Roaring Abel met Valancy at the door.

“So you’ve come,” he said incredulously. “I never s’posed that ruck of
Stirlings would let you.”

Valancy showed all her pointed teeth in a grin.

“They couldn’t stop me.”

“I didn’t think you’d so much spunk,” said Roaring Abel admiringly.
“And look at the nice ankles of her,” he added, as he stepped aside to
let her in.

If Cousin Stickles had heard this she would have been certain that
Valancy’s doom, earthly and unearthly, was sealed. But Abel’s
superannuated gallantry did not worry Valancy. Besides, this was the
first compliment she had ever received in her life and she found
herself liking it. She sometimes suspected she had nice ankles, but
nobody had ever mentioned it before. In the Stirling clan ankles were
among the unmentionables.

Roaring Abel took her into the kitchen, where Cissy Gay was lying on
the sofa, breathing quickly, with little scarlet spots on her hollow
cheeks. Valancy had not seen Cecilia Gay for years. Then she had been
such a pretty creature, a slight, blossom-like girl, with soft, golden
hair, clear-cut, almost waxen features, and large, beautiful blue eyes.
She was shocked at the change in her. Could this be sweet Cissy—this
pitiful little thing that looked like a tired, broken flower? She had
wept all the beauty out of her eyes; they looked too big—enormous—in
her wasted face. The last time Valancy had seen Cecilia Gay those
faded, piteous eyes had been limpid, shadowy blue pools aglow with
mirth. The contrast was so terrible that Valancy’s own eyes filled with
tears. She knelt down by Cissy and put her arms about her.

“Cissy dear, I’ve come to look after you. I’ll stay with you
till—till—as long as you want me.”

“Oh!” Cissy put her thin arms about Valancy’s neck. “Oh—_will_ you?
It’s been so—lonely. I can wait on myself—but it’s been so _lonely_.
It—would just be like—heaven—to have some one here—like you. You were
always—so sweet to me—long ago.”

Valancy held Cissy close. She was suddenly happy. Here was some one who
needed her—some one she could help. She was no longer a superfluity.
Old things had passed away; everything had become new.

“Most things are predestinated, but some are just darn sheer luck,”
said Roaring Abel, complacently smoking his pipe in the corner.




CHAPTER XVII


When Valancy had lived for a week at Roaring Abel’s she felt as if
years had separated her from her old life and all the people she had
known in it. They were beginning to seem remote—dream-like—far-away—and
as the days went on they seemed still more so, until they ceased to
matter altogether.

She was happy. Nobody ever bothered her with conundrums or insisted on
giving her Purple Pills. Nobody called her Doss or worried her about
catching cold. There were no quilts to piece, no abominable
rubber-plant to water, no ice-cold maternal tantrums to endure. She
could be alone whenever she liked, go to bed when she liked, sneeze
when she liked. In the long, wondrous, northern twilights, when Cissy
was asleep and Roaring Abel away, she could sit for hours on the shaky
back verandah steps, looking out over the barrens to the hills beyond,
covered with their fine, purple bloom, listening to the friendly wind
singing wild, sweet melodies in the little spruces, and drinking in the
aroma of the sunned grasses, until darkness flowed over the landscape
like a cool, welcome wave.

Sometimes of an afternoon, when Cissy was strong enough, the two girls
went into the barrens and looked at the wood-flowers. But they did not
pick any. Valancy had read to Cissy the gospel thereof according to
John Foster: “It is a pity to gather wood-flowers. They lose half their
witchery away from the green and the flicker. The way to enjoy
wood-flowers is to track them down to their remote haunts—gloat over
them—and then leave them with backward glances, taking with us only the
beguiling memory of their grace and fragrance.”

Valancy was in the midst of realities after a lifetime of unrealities.
And busy—very busy. The house had to be cleaned. Not for nothing had
Valancy been brought up in the Stirling habits of neatness and
cleanliness. If she found satisfaction in cleaning dirty rooms she got
her fill of it there. Roaring Abel thought she was foolish to bother
doing so much more than she was asked to do, but he did not interfere
with her. He was very well satisfied with his bargain. Valancy was a
good cook. Abel said she got a flavour into things. The only fault he
found with her was that she did not sing at her work.

“Folks should always sing at their work,” he insisted. “Sounds
cheerful-like.”

“Not always,” retorted Valancy. “Fancy a butcher singing at his work.
Or an undertaker.”

Abel burst into his great broad laugh.

“There’s no getting the better of you. You’ve got an answer every time.
I should think the Stirlings would be glad to be rid of you. _They_
don’t like being sassed back.”

During the day Abel was generally away from home—if not working, then
shooting or fishing with Barney Snaith. He generally came home at
nights—always very late and often very drunk. The first night they
heard him come howling into the yard, Cissy had told Valancy not to be
afraid.

“Father never does anything—he just makes a noise.”

Valancy, lying on the sofa in Cissy’s room, where she had elected to
sleep, lest Cissy should need attention in the night—Cissy would never
have called her—was not at all afraid, and said so. By the time Abel
had got his horses put away, the roaring stage had passed and he was in
his room at the end of the hall crying and praying. Valancy could still
hear his dismal moans when she went calmly to sleep. For the most part,
Abel was a good-natured creature, but occasionally he had a temper.
Once Valancy asked him coolly:

“What is the use of getting in a rage?”

“It’s such a d——d relief,” said Abel.

They both burst out laughing together.

“You’re a great little sport,” said Abel admiringly. “Don’t mind my bad
French. I don’t mean a thing by it. Jest habit. Say, I like a woman
that ain’t afraid to speak up to me. Sis there was always too meek—too
meek. That’s why she got adrift. I like you.”

“All the same,” said Valancy determinedly, “there is no use in sending
things to hell as you’re always doing. And I’m _not_ going to have you
tracking mud all over a floor I’ve just scrubbed. You _must_ use the
scraper whether you consign it to perdition or not.”

Cissy loved the cleanness and neatness. She had kept it so, too, until
her strength failed. She was very pitifully happy because she had
Valancy with her. It had been so terrible—the long, lonely days and
nights with no companionship save those dreadful old women who came to
work. Cissy had hated and feared them. She clung to Valancy like a
child.

There was no doubt that Cissy was dying. Yet at no time did she seem
alarmingly ill. She did not even cough a great deal. Most days she was
able to get up and dress—sometimes even to work about in the garden or
the barrens for an hour or two. For a few weeks after Valancy’s coming
she seemed so much better that Valancy began to hope she might get
well. But Cissy shook her head.

“No, I can’t get well. My lungs are almost gone. And I—don’t want to.
I’m so tired, Valancy. Only dying can rest me. But it’s lovely to have
you here—you’ll never know how much it means to me. But Valancy—you
work too hard. You don’t need to—Father only wants his meals cooked. I
don’t think you are strong yourself. You turn so pale sometimes. And
those drops you take. _Are_ you well, dear?”

“I’m all right,” said Valancy lightly. She would not have Cissy
worried. “And I’m not working hard. I’m glad to have some work to
do—something that really wants to be done.”

“Then”—Cissy slipped her hand wistfully into Valancy’s—“don’t let’s
talk any more about my being sick. Let’s just forget it. Let’s pretend
I’m a little girl again—and you have come here to play with me. I used
to wish that long ago—wish that you could come. I knew you couldn’t, of
course. But how I did wish it! You always seemed so different from the
other girls—so kind and sweet—and as if you had something in yourself
nobody knew about—some dear, pretty secret. _Had_ you, Valancy?”

“I had my Blue Castle,” said Valancy, laughing a little. She was
pleased that Cissy had thought of her like this. She had never
suspected that anybody liked or admired or wondered about her. She told
Cissy all about her Blue Castle. She had never told any one about it
before.

“Every one has a Blue Castle, I think,” said Cissy softly. “Only every
one has a different name for it. _I_ had mine—once.”

She put her two thin little hands over her face. She did not tell
Valancy—then—who had destroyed her Blue Castle. But Valancy knew that,
whoever it was, it was not Barney Snaith.




CHAPTER XVIII


Valancy was acquainted with Barney by now—well acquainted, it seemed,
though she had spoken to him only a few times. But then she had felt
just as well acquainted with him the first time they had met. She had
been in the garden at twilight, hunting for a few stalks of white
narcissus for Cissy’s room when she heard that terrible old Grey
Slosson coming down through the woods from Mistawis—one could hear it
miles away. Valancy did not look up as it drew near, thumping over the
rocks in that crazy lane. She had never looked up, though Barney had
gone racketting past every evening since she had been at Roaring
Abel’s. This time he did not racket past. The old Grey Slosson stopped
with even more terrible noises than it made going. Valancy was
conscious that Barney had sprung from it and was leaning over the
ramshackle gate. She suddenly straightened up and looked into his face.
Their eyes met—Valancy was suddenly conscious of a delicious weakness.
Was one of her heart attacks coming on?—But this was a new symptom.

His eyes, which she had always thought brown, now seen close, were deep
violet—translucent and intense. Neither of his eyebrows looked like the
other. He was thin—too thin—she wished she could feed him up a bit—she
wished she could sew the buttons on his coat—and make him cut his
hair—and shave every day. There was _something_ in his face—one hardly
knew what it was. Tiredness? Sadness? Disillusionment? He had dimples
in his thin cheeks when he smiled. All these thoughts flashed through
Valancy’s mind in that one moment while his eyes looked into hers.

“Good-evening, Miss Stirling.”

Nothing could be more commonplace and conventional. Any one might have
said it. But Barney Snaith had a way of saying things that gave them
poignancy. When he said good-evening you felt that it _was_ a good
evening and that it was partly his doing that it was. Also, you felt
that some of the credit was yours. Valancy felt all this vaguely, but
she couldn’t imagine why she was trembling from head to foot—it _must_
be her heart. If only he didn’t notice it!

“I’m going over to the Port,” Barney was saying. “Can I acquire merit
by getting or doing anything there for you or Cissy?”

“Will you get some salt codfish for us?” said Valancy. It was the only
thing she could think of. Roaring Abel had expressed a desire that day
for a dinner of boiled salt codfish. When her knights came riding to
the Blue Castle, Valancy had sent them on many a quest, but she had
never asked any of them to get her salt codfish.

“Certainly. You’re sure there’s nothing else? Lots of room in Lady Jane
Grey Slosson. And she always gets back _some_ time, does Lady Jane.”

“I don’t think there’s anything more,” said Valancy. She knew he would
bring oranges for Cissy anyhow—he always did.

Barney did not turn away at once. He was silent for a little. Then he
said, slowly and whimsically:

“Miss Stirling, you’re a brick! You’re a whole cartload of bricks. To
come here and look after Cissy—under the circumstances.”

“There’s nothing so bricky about that,” said Valancy. “I’d nothing else
to do. And—I like it here. I don’t feel as if I’d done anything
specially meritorious. Mr. Gay is paying me fair wages. I never earned
any money before—and I like it.” It seemed so easy to talk to Barney
Snaith, someway—this terrible Barney Snaith of the lurid tales and
mysterious past—as easy and natural as if talking to herself.

“All the money in the world couldn’t buy what you’re doing for Cissy
Gay,” said Barney. “It’s splendid and fine of you. And if there’s
anything I can do to help you in any way, you have only to let me know.
If Roaring Abel ever tries to annoy you——”

“He doesn’t. He’s lovely to me. I like Roaring Abel,” said Valancy
frankly.

“So do I. But there’s one stage of his drunkenness—perhaps you haven’t
encountered it yet—when he sings ribald songs——”

“Oh, yes. He came home last night like that. Cissy and I just went to
our room and shut ourselves in where we couldn’t hear him. He
apologised this morning. I’m not afraid of any of Roaring Abel’s
stages.”

“Well, I’m sure he’ll be decent to you, apart from his inebriated
yowls,” said Barney. “And I’ve told him he’s got to stop damning things
when you’re around.”

“Why?” asked Valancy slily, with one of her odd, slanted glances and a
sudden flake of pink on each cheek, born of the thought that Barney
Snaith had actually done so much for _her_. “I often feel like damning
things myself.”

For a moment Barney stared. Was this elfin girl the little, old-maidish
creature who had stood there two minutes ago? Surely there was magic
and devilry going on in that shabby, weedy old garden.

Then he laughed.

“It will be a relief to have some one to do it for you, then. So you
don’t want anything but salt codfish?”

“Not tonight. But I dare say I’ll have some errands for you very often
when you go to Port Lawrence. I can’t trust Mr. Gay to remember to
bring all the things I want.”

Barney had gone away, then, in his Lady Jane, and Valancy stood in the
garden for a long time.

Since then he had called several times, walking down through the
barrens, whistling. How that whistle of his echoed through the spruces
on those June twilights! Valancy caught herself listening for it every
evening—rebuked herself—then let herself go. Why shouldn’t she listen
for it?

He always brought Cissy fruit and flowers. Once he brought Valancy a
box of candy—the first box of candy she had ever been given. It seemed
sacrilege to eat it.

She found herself thinking of him in season and out of season. She
wanted to know if he ever thought about her when she wasn’t before his
eyes, and, if so, what. She wanted to see that mysterious house of his
back on the Mistawis island. Cissy had never seen it. Cissy, though she
talked freely of Barney and had known him for five years, really knew
little more of him than Valancy herself.

“But he isn’t bad,” said Cissy. “Nobody need ever tell me he is. He
_can’t_ have done a thing to be ashamed of.”

“Then why does he live as he does?” asked Valancy—to hear somebody
defend him.

“I don’t know. He’s a mystery. And of course there’s something behind
it, but I _know_ it isn’t disgrace. Barney Snaith simply couldn’t do
anything disgraceful, Valancy.”

Valancy was not so sure. Barney must have done _something_—sometime. He
was a man of education and intelligence. She had soon discovered that,
in listening to his conversations and wrangles with Roaring Abel—who
was surprisingly well read and could discuss any subject under the sun
when sober. Such a man wouldn’t bury himself for five years in Muskoka
and live and look like a tramp if there were not too good—or bad—a
reason for it. But it didn’t matter. All that mattered was that she was
sure now that he had never been Cissy Gay’s lover. There was nothing
like _that_ between them. Though he was very fond of Cissy and she of
him, as any one could see. But it was a fondness that didn’t worry
Valancy.

“You don’t know what Barney has been to me, these past two years,”
Cissy had said simply. “_Everything_ would have been unbearable without
him.”

“Cissy Gay is the sweetest girl I ever knew—and there’s a man somewhere
I’d like to shoot if I could find him,” Barney had said savagely.

Barney was an interesting talker, with a knack of telling a great deal
about his adventures and nothing at all about himself. There was one
glorious rainy day when Barney and Abel swapped yarns all the afternoon
while Valancy mended tablecloths and listened. Barney told weird tales
of his adventures with “shacks” on trains while hoboing it across the
continent. Valancy thought she ought to think his stealing rides quite
dreadful, but didn’t. The story of his working his way to England on a
cattle-ship sounded more legitimate. And his yarns of the Yukon
enthralled her—especially the one of the night he was lost on the
divide between Gold Run and Sulphur Valley. He had spent two years out
there. Where in all this was there room for the penitentiary and the
other things?

If he were telling the truth. But Valancy knew he was.

“Found no gold,” he said. “Came away poorer than when I went. But such
a place to live! Those silences at the back of the north wind _got_ me.
I’ve never belonged to myself since.”

Yet he was not a great talker. He told a great deal in a few
well-chosen words—how well-chosen Valancy did not realise. And he had a
knack of saying things without opening his mouth at all.

“I like a man whose eyes say more than his lips,” thought Valancy.

But then she liked everything about him—his tawny hair—his whimsical
smiles—the little glints of fun in his eyes—his loyal affection for
that unspeakable Lady Jane—his habit of sitting with his hands in his
pockets, his chin sunk on his breast, looking up from under his
mismated eyebrows. She liked his nice voice which sounded as if it
might become caressing or wooing with very little provocation. She was
at times almost afraid to let herself think these thoughts. They were
so vivid that she felt as if the others _must_ know what she was
thinking.

“I’ve been watching a woodpecker all day,” he said one evening on the
shaky old back verandah. His account of the woodpecker’s doings was
satisfying. He had often some gay or cunning little anecdote of the
wood folk to tell them. And sometimes he and Roaring Abel smoked
fiercely the whole evening and never said a word, while Cissy lay in
the hammock swung between the verandah posts and Valancy sat idly on
the steps, her hands clasped over her knees, and wondered dreamily if
she were really Valancy Stirling and if it were only three weeks since
she had left the ugly old house on Elm Street.

The barrens lay before her in a white moon splendour, where dozens of
little rabbits frisked. Barney, when he liked, could sit down on the
edge of the barrens and lure those rabbits right to him by some
mysterious sorcery he possessed. Valancy had once seen a squirrel leap
from a scrub pine to his shoulder and sit there chattering to him. It
reminded her of John Foster.

It was one of the delights of Valancy’s new life that she could read
John Foster’s books as often and as long as she liked. She could read
them in bed if she wanted to. She read them all to Cissy, who loved
them. She also tried to read them to Abel and Barney, who did not love
them. Abel was bored and Barney politely refused to listen at all.

“Piffle,” said Barney.




CHAPTER XIX


Of course, the Stirlings had not left the poor maniac alone all this
time or refrained from heroic efforts to rescue her perishing soul and
reputation. Uncle James, whose lawyer had helped him as little as his
doctor, came one day and, finding Valancy alone in the kitchen, as he
supposed, gave her a terrible talking-to—told her she was breaking her
mother’s heart and disgracing her family.

“But _why_?” said Valancy, not ceasing to scour her porridge pot
decently. “I’m doing honest work for honest pay. What is there in that
that is disgraceful?”

“Don’t quibble, Valancy,” said Uncle James solemnly. “This is no fit
place for you to be, and you know it. Why, I’m told that jail-bird,
Snaith, is hanging around here every evening.”

“Not _every_ evening,” said Valancy reflectively. “No, not quite every
evening.”

“It’s—it’s insufferable!” said Uncle James violently. “Valancy, you
_must_ come home. We won’t judge you harshly. I assure you we won’t.
We will overlook all this.”

“Thank you,” said Valancy.

“Have you no sense of shame?” demanded Uncle James.

“Oh, yes. But the things _I_ am ashamed of are not the things _you_ are
ashamed of.” Valancy proceeded to rinse her dishcloth meticulously.

Still was Uncle James patient. He gripped the sides of his chair and
ground his teeth.

“We know your mind isn’t just right. We’ll make allowances. But you
_must_ come home. You shall not stay here with that drunken,
blasphemous old scoundrel——”

“Were you by any chance referring to _me_, _Mister_ Stirling?” demanded
Roaring Abel, suddenly appearing in the doorway of the back verandah
where he had been smoking a peaceful pipe and listening to “old Jim
Stirling’s” tirade with huge enjoyment! His red beard fairly bristled
with indignation and his huge eyebrows quivered. But cowardice was not
among James Stirling’s shortcomings.

“I was. And, furthermore, I want to tell you that you have acted an
iniquitous part in luring this weak and unfortunate girl away from her
home and friends, and I will have you punished yet for it——”

James Stirling got no further. Roaring Abel crossed the kitchen at a
bound, caught him by his collar and his trousers, and hurled him
through the doorway and over the garden paling with as little apparent
effort as he might have employed in whisking a troublesome kitten out
of the way.

“The next time you come back here,” he bellowed, “I’ll throw you
through the window—and all the better if the window is shut! Coming
here, thinking yourself God to put the world to rights!”

Valancy candidly and unashamedly owned to herself that she had seen few
more satisfying sights than Uncle James’ coat-tails flying out into the
asparagus bed. She had once been afraid of this man’s judgment. Now she
saw clearly that he was nothing but a rather stupid little village
tin-god.

Roaring Abel turned with his great broad laugh.

“He’ll think of that for years when he wakes up in the night. The
Almighty made a mistake in making so many Stirlings. But since they are
made, we’ve got to reckon with them. Too many to kill out. But if they
come here bothering you I’ll shoo ’em off before a cat could lick its
ear.”

The next time they sent Dr. Stalling. Surely Roaring Abel would not
throw him into asparagus beds. Dr. Stalling was not so sure of this and
had no great liking for the task. He did not believe Valancy Stirling
was out of her mind. She had always been queer. He, Dr. Stalling, had
never been able to understand her. Therefore, beyond doubt, she was
queer. She was only just a little queerer than usual now. And Dr.
Stalling had his own reasons for disliking Roaring Abel. When Dr.
Stalling had first come to Deerwood he had had a liking for long hikes
around Mistawis and Muskoka. On one of these occasions he had got lost
and after much wandering had fallen in with Roaring Abel with his gun
over his shoulder.

Dr. Stalling had contrived to ask his question in about the most
idiotic manner possible. He said, “Can you tell me where I’m going?”

“How the devil should I know where you’re going, gosling?” retorted
Abel contemptuously.

Dr. Stalling was so enraged that he could not speak for a moment or two
and in that moment Abel had disappeared in the woods. Dr. Stalling had
eventually found his way home, but he had never hankered to encounter
Abel Gay again.

Nevertheless he came now to do his duty. Valancy greeted him with a
sinking heart. She had to own to herself that she was terribly afraid
of Dr. Stalling still. She had a miserable conviction that if he shook
his long, bony finger at her and told her to go home, she dared not
disobey.

“Mr. Gay,” said Dr. Stalling politely and condescendingly, “may I see
Miss Stirling alone for a few minutes?”

Roaring Abel was a little drunk—just drunk enough to be excessively
polite and very cunning. He had been on the point of going away when
Dr. Stalling arrived, but now he sat down in a corner of the parlour
and folded his arms.

“No, no, mister,” he said solemnly. “That wouldn’t do—wouldn’t do at
all. I’ve got the reputation of my household to keep up. I’ve got to
chaperone this young lady. Can’t have any sparkin’ going on here behind
my back.”

Outraged Dr. Stalling looked so terrible that Valancy wondered how Abel
could endure his aspect. But Abel was not worried at all.

“D’ye know anything about it, anyway?” he asked genially.

“About _what_?”

“Sparking,” said Abel coolly.

Poor Dr. Stalling, who had never married because he believed in a
celibate clergy, would not notice this ribald remark. He turned his
back on Abel and addressed himself to Valancy.

“Miss Stirling, I am here in response to your mother’s wishes. She
begged me to come. I am charged with some messages from her. Will
you”—he wagged his forefinger—“will you hear them?”

“Yes,” said Valancy faintly, eyeing the forefinger. It had a hypnotic
effect on her.

“The first is this. If you will leave this—this——”

“House,” interjected Roaring Abel. “H-o-u-s-e. Troubled with an
impediment in your speech, ain’t you, Mister?”

“—this _place_ and return to your home, Mr. James Stirling will himself
pay for a good nurse to come here and wait on Miss Gay.”

Back of her terror Valancy smiled in secret. Uncle James must indeed
regard the matter as desperate when he would loosen his purse-strings
like that. At any rate, her clan no longer despised her or ignored her.
She had become important to them.

“That’s _my_ business, Mister,” said Abel. “Miss Stirling can go if she
pleases, or stay if she pleases. I made a fair bargain with her, and
she’s free to conclude it when she likes. She gives me meals that stick
to my ribs. She don’t forget to put salt in the porridge. She never
slams doors, and when she has nothing to say she don’t talk. That’s
uncanny in a woman, you know, Mister. I’m satisfied. If she isn’t,
she’s free to go. But no woman comes here in Jim Stirling’s pay. If any
one does”—Abel’s voice was uncannily bland and polite—“I’ll spatter the
road with her brains. Tell him that with A. Gay’s compliments.”

“Dr. Stalling, a nurse is not what Cissy needs,” said Valancy
earnestly. “She isn’t so ill as that, yet. What she wants is
companionship—somebody she knows and likes just to live with her. You
can understand that, I’m sure.”

“I understand that your motive is quite—ahem—commendable.” Dr. Stalling
felt that he was very broad-minded indeed—especially as in his secret
soul he did not believe Valancy’s motive _was_ commendable. He hadn’t
the least idea what she was up to, but he was sure her motive was not
commendable. When he could not understand a thing he straightway
condemned it. Simplicity itself! “But your first duty is to your
mother. _She_ needs you. She implores you to come home—she will forgive
everything if you will only come home.”

“That’s a pretty little thought,” remarked Abel meditatively, as he
ground some tobacco up in his hand.

Dr. Stalling ignored him.

“She entreats, but I, Miss Stirling,”—Dr. Stalling remembered that he
was an ambassador of Jehovah—“_I command_. As your pastor and spiritual
guide, I command you to come home with me—this very day. Get your hat
and coat and come _now_.”

Dr. Stalling shook his finger at Valancy. Before that pitiless finger
she drooped and wilted visibly.

“She’s giving in,” thought Roaring Abel. “She’ll go with him. Beats
all, the power these preacher fellows have over women.”

Valancy _was_ on the point of obeying Dr. Stalling. She must go home
with him—and give up. She would lapse back to Doss Stirling again and
for her few remaining days or weeks be the cowed, futile creature she
had always been. It was her fate—typified by that relentless, uplifted
forefinger. She could no more escape from it than Roaring Abel from his
predestination. She eyed it as the fascinated bird eyes the snake.
Another moment—

“_Fear is the original sin_,” suddenly said a still, small voice away
back—back—back of Valancy’s consciousness. “_Almost all the evil in the
world has its origin in the fact that some one is afraid of
something_.”

Valancy stood up. She was still in the clutches of fear, but her soul
was her own again. She would not be false to that inner voice.

“Dr. Stalling,” she said slowly, “I do not at present owe _any_ duty to
my mother. She is quite well; she has all the assistance and
companionship she requires; she does not need me at all. I _am_ needed
here. I am going to stay here.”

“There’s spunk for you,” said Roaring Abel admiringly.

Dr. Stalling dropped his forefinger. One could not keep on shaking a
finger forever.

“Miss Stirling, is there _nothing_ that can influence you? Do you
remember your childhood days——”

“Perfectly. And hate them.”

“Do you realise what people will say? What they _are_ saying?”

“I can imagine it,” said Valancy, with a shrug of her shoulders. She
was suddenly free of fear again. “I haven’t listened to the gossip of
Deerwood teaparties and sewing circles twenty years for nothing. But,
Dr. Stalling, it doesn’t matter in the least to me what they say—not in
the least.”

Dr. Stalling went away then. A girl who cared nothing for public
opinion! Over whom sacred family ties had no restraining influence! Who
hated her childhood memories!

Then Cousin Georgiana came—on her own initiative, for nobody would have
thought it worth while to send her. She found Valancy alone, weeding
the little vegetable garden she had planted, and she made all the
platitudinous pleas she could think of. Valancy heard her patiently.
Cousin Georgiana wasn’t such a bad old soul. Then she said:

“And now that you have got all that out of your system, Cousin
Georgiana, can you tell me how to make creamed codfish so that it will
not be as thick as porridge and as salt as the Dead Sea?”

* * * * * * *

“We’ll just have to _wait_,” said Uncle Benjamin. “After all, Cissy Gay
can’t live long. Dr. Marsh tells me she may drop off any day.”

Mrs. Frederick wept. It would really have been so much easier to bear
if Valancy had died. She could have worn mourning then.




CHAPTER XX


When Abel Gay paid Valancy her first month’s wages—which he did
promptly, in bills reeking with the odour of tobacco and
whiskey—Valancy went into Deerwood and spent every cent of it. She got
a pretty green crêpe dress with a girdle of crimson beads, at a bargain
sale, a pair of silk stockings, to match, and a little crinkled green
hat with a crimson rose in it. She even bought a foolish little
beribboned and belaced nightgown.

She passed the house on Elm Street twice—Valancy never even thought
about it as “home”—but saw no one. No doubt her mother was sitting in
the room this lovely June evening playing solitaire—and cheating.
Valancy knew that Mrs. Frederick always cheated. She never lost a game.
Most of the people Valancy met looked at her seriously and passed her
with a cool nod. Nobody stopped to speak to her.

Valancy put on her green dress when she got home. Then she took it off
again. She felt so miserably undressed in its low neck and short
sleeves. And that low, crimson girdle around the hips seemed positively
indecent. She hung it up in the closet, feeling flatly that she had
wasted her money. She would never have the courage to wear that dress.
John Foster’s arraignment of fear had no power to stiffen her against
this. In this one thing habit and custom were still all-powerful. Yet
she sighed as she went down to meet Barney Snaith in her old
snuff-brown silk. That green thing had been very becoming—she had seen
so much in her one ashamed glance. Above it her eyes had looked like
odd brown jewels and the girdle had given her flat figure an entirely
different appearance. She wished she could have left it on. But there
were some things John Foster did not know.

Every Sunday evening Valancy went to the little Free Methodist church
in a valley on the edge of “up back”—a spireless little grey building
among the pines, with a few sunken graves and mossy gravestones in the
small, paling-encircled, grass-grown square beside it. She liked the
minister who preached there. He was so simple and sincere. An old man,
who lived in Port Lawrence and came out by the lake in a little
disappearing propeller boat to give a free service to the people of the
small, stony farms back of the hills, who would otherwise never have
heard any gospel message. She liked the simple service and the fervent
singing. She liked to sit by the open window and look out into the pine
woods. The congregation was always small. The Free Methodists were few
in number, poor and generally illiterate. But Valancy loved those
Sunday evenings. For the first time in her life she liked going to
church. The rumour reached Deerwood that she had “turned Free
Methodist” and sent Mrs. Frederick to bed for a day. But Valancy had
not turned anything. She went to the church because she liked it and
because in some inexplicable way it did her good. Old Mr. Towers
believed exactly what he preached and somehow it made a tremendous
difference.

Oddly enough, Roaring Abel disapproved of her going to the hill church
as strongly as Mrs. Frederick herself could have done. He had “no use
for Free Methodists. He was a Presbyterian.” But Valancy went in spite
of him.

“We’ll hear something worse than _that_ about her soon,” Uncle Benjamin
predicted gloomily.

They did.

Valancy could not quite explain, even to herself, just why she wanted
to go to that party. It was a dance “up back” at Chidley Corners; and
dances at Chidley Corners were not, as a rule, the sort of assemblies
where well-brought-up young ladies were found. Valancy knew it was
coming off, for Roaring Abel had been engaged as one of the fiddlers.

But the idea of going had never occurred to her until Roaring Abel
himself broached it at supper.

“You come with me to the dance,” he ordered. “It’ll do you good—put
some colour in your face. You look peaked—you want something to liven
you up.”

Valancy found herself suddenly wanting to go. She knew nothing at all
of what dances at Chidley Corners were apt to be like. Her idea of
dances had been fashioned on the correct affairs that went by that name
in Deerwood and Port Lawrence. Of course she knew the Corners’ dance
wouldn’t be just like them. Much more informal, of course. But so much
the more interesting. Why shouldn’t she go? Cissy was in a week of
apparent health and improvement. She wouldn’t mind staying alone in the
least. She entreated Valancy to go if she wanted to. And Valancy _did_
want to go.

She went to her room to dress. A rage against the snuff-brown silk
seized her. Wear that to a party! Never. She pulled her green crêpe
from its hanger and put it on feverishly. It was nonsense to feel
so—so—naked—just because her neck and arms were bare. That was just her
old maidishness. She would not be ridden by it. On went the dress—the
slippers.

It was the first time she had worn a pretty dress since the organdies
of her early teens. And _they_ had never made her look like this.

If she only had a necklace or something. She wouldn’t feel so bare
then. She ran down to the garden. There were clovers there—great
crimson things growing in the long grass. Valancy gathered handfuls of
them and strung them on a cord. Fastened above her neck they gave her
the comfortable sensation of a collar and were oddly becoming. Another
circlet of them went round her hair, dressed in the low puffs that
became her. Excitement brought those faint pink stains to her face. She
flung on her coat and pulled the little, twisty hat over her hair.

“You look so nice and—and—different, dear,” said Cissy. “Like a green
moonbeam with a gleam of red in it, if there could be such a thing.”

Valancy stooped to kiss her.

“I don’t feel right about leaving you alone, Cissy.”

“Oh, I’ll be all right. I feel better tonight than I have for a long
while. I’ve been feeling badly to see you sticking here so closely on
my account. I hope you’ll have a nice time. I never was at a party at
the Corners, but I used to go sometimes, long ago, to dances up back.
We always had good times. And you needn’t be afraid of Father being
drunk tonight. He never drinks when he engages to play for a party.
But—there may be—liquor. What will you do if it gets rough?”

“Nobody would molest me.”

“Not seriously, I suppose. Father would see to that. But it _might_ be
noisy and—and unpleasant.”

“I won’t mind. I’m only going as a looker-on. I don’t expect to dance.
I just want to _see_ what a party up back is like. I’ve never seen
anything except decorous Deerwood.”

Cissy smiled rather dubiously. She knew much better than Valancy what a
party “up back” might be like if there should be liquor. But again
there mightn’t be.

“I hope you’ll enjoy it, dear,” she repeated.

Valancy enjoyed the drive there. They went early, for it was twelve
miles to Chidley Corners, and they had to go in Abel’s old, ragged
top-buggy. The road was rough and rocky, like most Muskoka roads, but
full of the austere charm of northern woods. It wound through
beautiful, purring pines that were ranks of enchantment in the June
sunset, and over the curious jade-green rivers of Muskoka, fringed by
aspens that were always quivering with some supernal joy.

Roaring Abel was excellent company, too. He knew all the stories and
legends of the wild, beautiful “up back,” and he told them to Valancy
as they drove along. Valancy had several fits of inward laughter over
what Uncle Benjamin and Aunt Wellington, _et al._, would feel and think
and say if they saw her driving with Roaring Abel in that terrible
buggy to a dance at Chidley Corners.

At first the dance was quiet enough, and Valancy was amused and
entertained. She even danced twice herself, with a couple of nice “up
back” boys who danced beautifully and told her she did, too.

Another compliment came her way—not a very subtle one, perhaps, but
Valancy had had too few compliments in her life to be over-nice on that
point. She overheard two of the “up back” young men talking about her
in the dark “lean-to” behind her.

“Know who that girl in green is?”

“Nope. Guess she’s from out front. The Port, maybe. Got a stylish look
to her.”

“No beaut but cute-looking, I’ll say. ‘Jever see such eyes?”

The big room was decorated with pine and fir boughs, and lighted by
Chinese lanterns. The floor was waxed, and Roaring Abel’s fiddle,
purring under his skilled touch, worked magic. The “up back” girls were
pretty and prettily dressed. Valancy thought it the nicest party she
had ever attended.

By eleven o’clock she had changed her mind. A new crowd had arrived—a
crowd unmistakably drunk. Whiskey began to circulate freely. Very soon
almost all the men were partly drunk. Those in the porch and outside
around the door began howling “come-all-ye’s” and continued to howl
them. The room grew noisy and reeking. Quarrels started up here and
there. Bad language and obscene songs were heard. The girls, swung
rudely in the dances, became dishevelled and tawdry. Valancy, alone in
her corner, was feeling disgusted and repentant. Why had she ever come
to such a place? Freedom and independence were all very well, but one
should not be a little fool. She might have known what it would be
like—she might have taken warning from Cissy’s guarded sentences. Her
head was aching—she was sick of the whole thing. But what could she do?
She must stay to the end. Abel could not leave till then. And that
would probably be not till three or four in the morning.

The new influx of boys had left the girls far in the minority and
partners were scarce. Valancy was pestered with invitations to dance.
She refused them all shortly, and some of her refusals were not well
taken. There were muttered oaths and sullen looks. Across the room she
saw a group of the strangers talking together and glancing meaningly at
her. What were they plotting?

It was at this moment that she saw Barney Snaith looking in over the
heads of the crowd at the doorway. Valancy had two distinct
convictions—one was that she was quite safe now; the other was that
_this_ was why she had wanted to come to the dance. It had been such an
absurd hope that she had not recognised it before, but now she knew she
had come because of the possibility that Barney might be there, too.
She thought that perhaps she ought to be ashamed for this, but she
wasn’t. After her feeling of relief her next feeling was one of
annoyance with Barney for coming there unshaved. Surely he might have
enough self-respect to groom himself up decently when he went to a
party. There he was, bareheaded, bristly-chinned, in his old trousers
and his blue homespun shirt. Not even a coat. Valancy could have shaken
him in her anger. No wonder people believed everything bad of him.

But she was not afraid any longer. One of the whispering group left his
comrades and came across the room to her, through the whirling couples
that now filled it uncomfortably. He was a tall, broad-shouldered
fellow, not ill-dressed or ill-looking but unmistakably half drunk. He
asked Valancy to dance. Valancy declined civilly. His face turned
livid. He threw his arm about her and pulled her to him. His hot,
whiskied breath burned her face.

“We won’t have fine-lady airs here, my girl. If you ain’t too good to
come here you ain’t too good to dance with us. Me and my pals have been
watching you. You’ve got to give us each a turn and a kiss to boot.”

Valancy tried desperately and vainly to free herself. She was being
dragged out into the maze of shouting, stamping, yelling dancers. The
next moment the man who held her went staggering across the room from a
neatly planted blow on the jaw, knocking down whirling couples as he
went. Valancy felt her arm grasped.

“This way—quick,” said Barney Snaith. He swung her out through the open
window behind them, vaulted lightly over the sill and caught her hand.

“Quick—we must run for it—they’ll be after us.”

Valancy ran as she had never run before, clinging tight to Barney’s
hand, wondering why she did not drop dead in such a mad scamper.
Suppose she did! What a scandal it would make for her poor people. For
the first time Valancy felt a little sorry for them. Also, she felt
glad that she had escaped from that horrible row. Also, glad that she
was holding tight to Barney’s hand. Her feelings were badly mixed and
she had never had so many in such a brief time in her life.

They finally reached a quiet corner in the pine woods. The pursuit had
taken a different direction and the whoops and yells behind them were
growing faint. Valancy, out of breath, with a crazily beating heart,
collapsed on the trunk of a fallen pine.

“Thanks,” she gasped.

“What a goose you were to come to such a place!” said Barney.

“I—didn’t—know—it—would—be like this,” protested Valancy.

“You _should_ have known. Chidley Corners!”

“It—was—just—a name—to me.”

Valancy knew Barney could not realise how ignorant she was of the
regions “up back.” She had lived in Deerwood all her life and of course
he supposed she knew. He didn’t know how she had been brought up. There
was no use trying to explain.

“When I drifted in at Abel’s this evening and Cissy told me you’d come
here I was amazed. And downright scared. Cissy told me she was worried
about you but hadn’t liked to say anything to dissuade you for fear
you’d think she was thinking selfishly about herself. So I came on up
here instead of going to Deerwood.”

Valancy felt a sudden delightful glow irradiating soul and body under
the dark pines. So he had actually come up to look after her.

“As soon as they stop hunting for us we’ll sneak around to the Muskoka
road. I left Lady Jane down there. I’ll take you home. I suppose you’ve
had enough of your party.”

“Quite,” said Valancy meekly. The first half of the way home neither of
them said anything. It would not have been much use. Lady Jane made so
much noise they could not have heard each other. Anyway, Valancy did
not feel conversationally inclined. She was ashamed of the whole
affair—ashamed of her folly in going—ashamed of being found in such a
place by Barney Snaith. By Barney Snaith, reputed jail-breaker,
infidel, forger and defaulter. Valancy’s lips twitched in the darkness
as she thought of it. But she _was_ ashamed.

And yet she was enjoying herself—was full of a strange
exultation—bumping over that rough road beside Barney Snaith. The big
trees shot by them. The tall mulleins stood up along the road in stiff,
orderly ranks like companies of soldiers. The thistles looked like
drunken fairies or tipsy elves as their car-lights passed over them.
This was the first time she had even been in a car. After all, she
liked it. She was not in the least afraid, with Barney at the wheel.
Her spirits rose rapidly as they tore along. She ceased to feel
ashamed. She ceased to feel anything except that she was part of a
comet rushing gloriously through the night of space.

All at once, just where the pine woods frayed out to the scrub barrens,
Lady Jane became quiet—too quiet. Lady Jane slowed down quietly—and
stopped.

Barney uttered an aghast exclamation. Got out. Investigated. Came
apologetically back.

“I’m a doddering idiot. Out of gas. I knew I was short when I left
home, but I meant to fill up in Deerwood. Then I forgot all about it in
my hurry to get to the Corners.”

“What can we do?” asked Valancy coolly.

“I don’t know. There’s no gas nearer than Deerwood, nine miles away.
And I don’t dare leave you here alone. There are always tramps on this
road—and some of those crazy fools back at the Corners may come
straggling along presently. There were boys there from the Port. As far
as I can see, the best thing to do is for us just to sit patiently here
until some car comes along and lends us enough gas to get to Roaring
Abel’s with.”

“Well, what’s the matter with that?” said Valancy.

“We may have to sit here all night,” said Barney.

“I don’t mind,” said Valancy.

Barney gave a short laugh. “If you don’t, I needn’t. I haven’t any
reputation to lose.”

“Nor I,” said Valancy comfortably.




CHAPTER XXI


“We’ll just sit here,” said Barney, “and if we think of anything worth
while saying we’ll say it. Otherwise, not. Don’t imagine you’re bound
to talk to me.”

“John Foster says,” quoted Valancy, “‘If you can sit in silence with a
person for half an hour and yet be entirely comfortable, you and that
person can be friends. If you cannot, friends you’ll never be and you
need not waste time in trying.’”

“Evidently John Foster says a sensible thing once in a while,” conceded
Barney.

They sat in silence for a long while. Little rabbits hopped across the
road. Once or twice an owl laughed out delightfully. The road beyond
them was fringed with the woven shadow lace of trees. Away off to the
southwest the sky was full of silvery little cirrus clouds above the
spot where Barney’s island must be.

Valancy was perfectly happy. Some things dawn on you slowly. Some
things come by lightning flashes. Valancy had had a lightning flash.

She knew quite well now that she loved Barney. Yesterday she had been
all her own. Now she was this man’s. Yet he had done nothing—said
nothing. He had not even looked at her as a woman. But that didn’t
matter. Nor did it matter what he was or what he had done. She loved
him without any reservations. Everything in her went out wholly to him.
She had no wish to stifle or disown her love. She seemed to be his so
absolutely that thought apart from him—thought in which he did not
predominate—was an impossibility.

She had realised, quite simply and fully, that she loved him, in the
moment when he was leaning on the car door, explaining that Lady Jane
had no gas. She had looked deep into his eyes in the moonlight and had
known. In just that infinitesimal space of time everything was changed.
Old things passed away and all things became new.

She was no longer unimportant, little, old maid Valancy Stirling. She
was a woman, full of love and therefore rich and significant—justified
to herself. Life was no longer empty and futile, and death could cheat
her of nothing. Love had cast out her last fear.

Love! What a searing, torturing, intolerably sweet thing it was—this
possession of body, soul and mind! With something at its core as fine
and remote and purely spiritual as the tiny blue spark in the heart of
the unbreakable diamond. No dream had ever been like this. She was no
longer solitary. She was one of a vast sisterhood—all the women who had
ever loved in the world.

Barney need never know it—though she would not in the least have minded
his knowing. But _she_ knew it and it made a tremendous difference to
her. Just to love! She did not ask to be loved. It was rapture enough
just to sit there beside him in silence, alone in the summer night in
the white splendour of moonshine, with the wind blowing down on them
out of the pine woods. She had always envied the wind. So free. Blowing
where it listed. Through the hills. Over the lakes. What a tang, what a
zip it had! What a magic of adventure! Valancy felt as if she had
exchanged her shop-worn soul for a fresh one, fire-new from the
workshop of the gods. As far back as she could look, life had been
dull—colourless—savourless. Now she had come to a little patch of
violets, purple and fragrant—hers for the plucking. No matter who or
what had been in Barney’s past—no matter who or what might be in his
future—no one else could ever have this perfect hour. She surrendered
herself utterly to the charm of the moment.

“Ever dream of ballooning?” said Barney suddenly.

“No,” said Valancy.

“I do—often. Dream of sailing through the clouds—seeing the glories of
sunset—spending hours in the midst of a terrific storm with lightning
playing above and below you—skimming above a silver cloud floor under a
full moon—wonderful!”

“It does sound so,” said Valancy. “I’ve stayed on earth in my dreams.”

She told him about her Blue Castle. It was so easy to tell Barney
things. One felt he understood everything—even the things you didn’t
tell him. And then she told him a little of her existence before she
came to Roaring Abel’s. She wanted him to see why she had gone to the
dance “up back.”

“You see—I’ve never had any real life,” she said. “I’ve just—breathed.
Every door has always been shut to me.”

“But you’re still young,” said Barney.

“Oh, I know. Yes, I’m ‘still young’—but that’s so different from
_young_,” said Valancy bitterly. For a moment she was tempted to tell
Barney why her years had nothing to do with her future; but she did
not. She was not going to think of death tonight.

“Though I never was really young,” she went on—“until tonight,” she
added in her heart. “I never had a life like other girls. You couldn’t
understand. Why,”—she had a desperate desire that Barney should know
the worst about her—“I didn’t even love my mother. Isn’t it awful that
I don’t love my mother?”

“Rather awful—for her,” said Barney drily.

“Oh, she didn’t know it. She took my love for granted. And I wasn’t any
use or comfort to her or anybody. I was just a—a—vegetable. And I got
tired of it. That’s why I came to keep house for Mr. Gay and look after
Cissy.”

“And I suppose your people thought you’d gone mad.”

“They did—and do—literally,” said Valancy. “But it’s a comfort to them.
They’d rather believe me mad than bad. There’s no other alternative.
But I’ve been _living_ since I came to Mr. Gay’s. It’s been a
delightful experience. I suppose I’ll pay for it when I have to go
back—but I’ll have _had_ it.”

“That’s true,” said Barney. “If you buy your experience it’s your own.
So it’s no matter how much you pay for it. Somebody else’s experience
can never be yours. Well, it’s a funny old world.”

“Do you think it really is old?” asked Valancy dreamily. “I never
believe _that_ in June. It seems so young tonight—somehow. In that
quivering moonlight—like a young, white girl—waiting.”

“Moonlight here on the verge of up back is different from moonlight
anywhere else,” agreed Barney. “It always makes me feel so clean,
somehow—body and soul. And of course the age of gold always comes back
in spring.”

It was ten o’clock now. A dragon of black cloud ate up the moon. The
spring air grew chill—Valancy shivered. Barney reached back into the
innards of Lady Jane and clawed up an old, tobacco-scented overcoat.

“Put that on,” he ordered.

“Don’t you want it yourself?” protested Valancy.

“No. I’m not going to have you catching cold on my hands.”

“Oh, I won’t catch cold. I haven’t had a cold since I came to Mr.
Gay’s—though I’ve done the foolishest things. It’s funny, too—I used to
have them all the time. I feel so selfish taking your coat.”

“You’ve sneezed three times. No use winding up your ‘experience’ up
back with grippe or pneumonia.”

He pulled it up tight about her throat and buttoned it on her. Valancy
submitted with secret delight. How nice it was to have some one look
after you so! She snuggled down into the tobaccoey folds and wished the
night could last forever.

Ten minutes later a car swooped down on them from “up back.” Barney
sprang from Lady Jane and waved his hand. The car came to a stop beside
them. Valancy saw Uncle Wellington and Olive gazing at her in horror
from it.

So Uncle Wellington had got a car! And he must have been spending the
evening up at Mistawis with Cousin Herbert. Valancy almost laughed
aloud at the expression on his face as he recognised her. The pompous,
bewhiskered old humbug!

“Can you let me have enough gas to take me to Deerwood?” Barney was
asking politely. But Uncle Wellington was not attending to him.

“Valancy, how came you _here_!” he said sternly.

“By chance or God’s grace,” said Valancy.

“With this jail-bird—at ten o’clock at night!” said Uncle Wellington.

Valancy turned to Barney. The moon had escaped from its dragon and in
its light her eyes were full of deviltry.

“_Are_ you a jail-bird?”

“Does it matter?” said Barney, gleams of fun in _his_ eyes.

“Not to me. I only asked out of curiosity,” continued Valancy.

“Then I won’t tell you. I never satisfy curiosity.” He turned to Uncle
Wellington and his voice changed subtly.

“Mr. Stirling, I asked you if you could let me have some gas. If you
can, well and good. If not, we are only delaying you unnecessarily.”

Uncle Wellington was in a horrible dilemma. To give gas to this
shameless pair! But not to give it to them! To go away and leave them
there in the Mistawis woods—until daylight, likely. It was better to
give it to them and let them get out of sight before any one else saw
them.

“Got anything to get gas in?” he grunted surlily.

Barney produced a two-gallon measure from Lady Jane. The two men went
to the rear of the Stirling car and began manipulating the tap. Valancy
stole sly glances at Olive over the collar of Barney’s coat. Olive was
sitting grimly staring straight ahead with an outraged expression. She
did not mean to take any notice of Valancy. Olive had her own secret
reasons for feeling outraged. Cecil had been in Deerwood lately and of
course had heard all about Valancy. He agreed that her mind was
deranged and was exceedingly anxious to find out whence the derangement
had been inherited. It was a serious thing to have in the family—a very
serious thing. One had to think of one’s—descendants.

“She got it from the Wansbarras,” said Olive positively. “There’s
nothing like that in the Stirlings—nothing!”

“I hope not—I certainly hope not,” Cecil had responded dubiously. “But
then—to go out as a servant—for that is what it practically amounts to.
Your cousin!”

Poor Olive felt the implication. The Port Lawrence Prices were not
accustomed to ally themselves with families whose members “worked out.”

Valancy could not resist temptation. She leaned forward.

“Olive, does it hurt?”

Olive bit—stiffly.

“Does _what_ hurt?”

“Looking like that.”

For a moment Olive resolved she would take no further notice of
Valancy. Then duty came uppermost. She must not miss the opportunity.

“Doss,” she implored, leaning forward also, “won’t you come home—come
home tonight?”

Valancy yawned.

“You sound like a revival meeting,” she said. “You really do.”

“If you will come back——”

“All will be forgiven.”

“Yes,” said Olive eagerly. Wouldn’t it be splendid if _she_ could
induce the prodigal daughter to return? “We’ll never cast it up to you.
Doss, there are nights when I cannot sleep for thinking of you.”

“And me having the time of my life,” said Valancy, laughing.

“Doss, I can’t believe you’re bad. I’ve always said you couldn’t be
bad——”

“I don’t believe I can be,” said Valancy. “I’m afraid I’m hopelessly
proper. I’ve been sitting here for three hours with Barney Snaith and
he hasn’t even tried to kiss me. I wouldn’t have minded if he had,
Olive.”

Valancy was still leaning forward. Her little hat with its crimson rose
was tilted down over one eye. Olive stared. In the moonlight Valancy’s
eyes—Valancy’s smile—what had happened to Valancy! She looked—not
pretty—Doss couldn’t be pretty—but provocative, fascinating—yes,
abominably so. Olive drew back. It was beneath her dignity to say more.
After all, Valancy must be both mad _and_ bad.

“Thanks—that’s enough,” said Barney behind the car. “Much obliged, Mr.
Stirling. Two gallons—seventy cents. Thank you.”

Uncle Wellington climbed foolishly and feebly into his car. He wanted
to give Snaith a piece of his mind, but dared not. Who knew what the
creature might do if provoked? No doubt he carried firearms.

Uncle Wellington looked indecisively at Valancy. But Valancy had turned
her back on him and was watching Barney pour the gas into Lady Jane’s
maw.

“Drive on,” said Olive decisively. “There’s no use in waiting here. Let
me tell you what she said to me.”

“The little hussy! The shameless little hussy!” said Uncle Wellington.




CHAPTER XXII


The next thing the Stirlings heard was that Valancy had been seen with
Barney Snaith in a movie theatre in Port Lawrence and after it at
supper in a Chinese restaurant there. This was quite true—and no one
was more surprised at it than Valancy herself. Barney had come along in
Lady Jane one dim twilight and told Valancy unceremoniously if she
wanted a drive to hop in.

“I’m going to the Port. Will you go there with me?”

His eyes were teasing and there was a bit of defiance in his voice.
Valancy, who did not conceal from herself that she would have gone
anywhere with him to any place, “hopped in” without more ado. They tore
into and through Deerwood. Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles, taking a
little air on the verandah, saw them whirl by in a cloud of dust and
sought comfort in each other’s eyes. Valancy, who in some dim
pre-existence had been afraid of a car, was hatless and her hair was
blowing wildly round her face. She would certainly come down with
bronchitis—and die at Roaring Abel’s. She wore a low-necked dress and
her arms were bare. That Snaith creature was in his shirt-sleeves,
smoking a pipe. They were going at the rate of forty miles an
hour—sixty, Cousin Stickles averred. Lady Jane could hit the pike when
she wanted to. Valancy waved her hand gaily to her relatives. As for
Mrs. Frederick, she was wishing she knew how to go into hysterics.

“Was it for this,” she demanded in hollow tones, “that I suffered the
pangs of motherhood?”

“I will not believe,” said Cousin Stickles solemnly, “that our prayers
will not yet be answered.”

“Who—_who_ will protect that unfortunate girl when I am gone?” moaned
Mrs. Frederick.

As for Valancy, she was wondering if it could really be only a few
weeks since she had sat there with them on that verandah. Hating the
rubber-plant. Pestered with teasing questions like black flies. Always
thinking of appearances. Cowed because of Aunt Wellington’s teaspoons
and Uncle Benjamin’s money. Poverty-stricken. Afraid of everybody.
Envying Olive. A slave to moth-eaten traditions. Nothing to hope for or
expect.

And now every day was a gay adventure.

Lady Jane flew over the fifteen miles between Deerwood and the
Port—through the Port. The way Barney went past traffic policemen was
not holy. The lights were beginning to twinkle out like stars in the
clear, lemon-hued twilight air. This was the only time Valancy ever
really liked the town, and she was crazy with the delight of speeding.
Was it possible she had ever been afraid of a car? She was perfectly
happy, riding beside Barney. Not that she deluded herself into thinking
it had any significance. She knew quite well that Barney had asked her
to go on the impulse of the moment—an impulse born of a feeling of pity
for her and her starved little dreams. She was looking tired after a
wakeful night with a heart attack, followed by a busy day. She had so
little fun. He’d give her an outing for once. Besides, Abel was in the
kitchen, at the point of drunkenness where he was declaring he did not
believe in God and beginning to sing ribald songs. It was just as well
she should be out of the way for a while. Barney knew Roaring Abel’s
repertoire.

They went to the movie—Valancy had never been to a movie. And then,
finding a nice hunger upon them, they went and had fried
chicken—unbelievably delicious—in the Chinese restaurant. After which
they rattled home again, leaving a devastating trail of scandal behind
them. Mrs. Frederick gave up going to church altogether. She could not
endure her friends’ pitying glances and questions. But Cousin Stickles
went every Sunday. She said they had been given a cross to bear.




CHAPTER XXIII


On one of Cissy’s wakeful nights, she told Valancy her poor little
story. They were sitting by the open window. Cissy could not get her
breath lying down that night. An inglorious gibbous moon was hanging
over the wooded hills and in its spectral light Cissy looked frail and
lovely and incredibly young. A child. It did not seem possible that she
could have lived through all the passion and pain and shame of her
story.

“He was stopping at the hotel across the lake. He used to come over in
his canoe at night—we met in the pines down the shore. He was a young
college student—his father was a rich man in Toronto. Oh, Valancy, I
didn’t mean to be bad—I didn’t, indeed. But I loved him so—I love him
yet—I’ll always love him. And I—didn’t know—some things. I
didn’t—understand. Then his father came and took him away. And—after a
little—I found out—oh, Valancy,—I was so frightened. I didn’t know what
to do. I wrote him—and he came. He—he said he would marry me, Valancy.”

“And why—and why?——”

“Oh, Valancy, he didn’t love me any more. I saw that at a glance. He—he
was just offering to marry me because he thought he ought to—because he
was sorry for me. He wasn’t bad—but he was so young—and what was I that
he should keep on loving me?”

“Never mind making excuses for him,” said Valancy a bit shortly. “So
you wouldn’t marry him?”

“I couldn’t—not when he didn’t love me any more. Somehow—I can’t
explain—it seemed a worse thing to do than—the other. He—he argued a
little—but he went away. Do you think I did right, Valancy?”

“Yes, I do. _You_ did right. But he——”

“Don’t blame him, dear. Please don’t. Let’s not talk about him at all.
There’s no need. I wanted to tell you how it was—I didn’t want you to
think me bad——”

“I never did think so.”

“Yes, I felt that—whenever you came. Oh, Valancy, what you’ve been to
me! I can never tell you—but God will bless you for it. I know He
will—‘with what measure ye mete.’”

Cissy sobbed for a few minutes in Valancy’s arms. Then she wiped her
eyes.

“Well, that’s almost all. I came home. I wasn’t really so very unhappy.
I suppose I should have been—but I wasn’t. Father wasn’t hard on me.
And my baby was so sweet while he lived. I was even happy—I loved him
so much, the dear little thing. He was so sweet, Valancy—with such
lovely blue eyes—and little rings of pale gold hair like silk floss—and
tiny dimpled hands. I used to bite his satin-smooth little face all
over—softly, so as not to hurt him, you know——”

“I know,” said Valancy, wincing. “I know—a woman _always_ knows—and
dreams——”

“And he was _all_ mine. Nobody else had any claim on him. When he died,
oh, Valancy, I thought I must die too—I didn’t see how anybody could
endure such anguish and live. To see his dear little eyes and know he
would never open them again—to miss his warm little body nestled
against mine at night and think of him sleeping alone and cold, his wee
face under the hard frozen earth. It was so awful for the first
year—after that it was a little easier, one didn’t keep thinking ‘this
day last year’—but I was so glad when I found out I was dying.”

“‘Who could endure life if it were not for the hope of death?’”
murmured Valancy softly—it was of course a quotation from some book of
John Foster’s.

“I’m glad I’ve told you all about it,” sighed Cissy. “I wanted you to
know.”

Cissy died a few nights after that. Roaring Abel was away. When Valancy
saw the change that had come over Cissy’s face she wanted to telephone
for the doctor. But Cissy wouldn’t let her.

“Valancy, why should you? He can do nothing for me. I’ve known for
several days that—this—was near. Let me die in peace, dear—just holding
your hand. Oh, I’m so glad you’re here. Tell Father good-bye for me.
He’s always been as good to me as he knew how—and Barney. Somehow, I
think that Barney——”

But a spasm of coughing interrupted and exhausted her. She fell asleep
when it was over, still holding to Valancy’s hand. Valancy sat there in
the silence. She was not frightened—or even sorry. At sunrise Cissy
died. She opened her eyes and looked past Valancy at
something—something that made her smile suddenly and happily. And,
smiling, she died.

Valancy crossed Cissy’s hands on her breast and went to the open
window. In the eastern sky, amid the fires of sunrise, an old moon was
hanging—as slender and lovely as a new moon. Valancy had never seen an
old, old moon before. She watched it pale and fade until it paled and
faded out of sight in the living rose of day. A little pool in the
barrens shone in the sunrise like a great golden lily.

But the world suddenly seemed a colder place to Valancy. Again nobody
needed her. She was not in the least sorry Cecilia was dead. She was
only sorry for all her suffering in life. But nobody could ever hurt
her again. Valancy had always thought death dreadful. But Cissy had
died so quietly—so pleasantly. And at the very last—something—had made
up to her for everything. She was lying there now, in her white sleep,
looking like a child. Beautiful! All the lines of shame and pain gone.

Roaring Abel drove in, justifying his name. Valancy went down and told
him. The shock sobered him at once. He slumped down on the seat of his
buggy, his great head hanging.

“Cissy dead—Cissy dead,” he said vacantly. “I didn’t think it would ‘a’
come so soon. Dead. She used to run down the lane to meet me with a
little white rose stuck in her hair. Cissy used to be a pretty little
girl. And a good little girl.”

“She has always been a good little girl,” said Valancy.




CHAPTER XXIV


Valancy herself made Cissy ready for burial. No hands but hers should
touch that pitiful, wasted little body. The old house was spotless on
the day of the funeral. Barney Snaith was not there. He had done all he
could to help Valancy before it—he had shrouded the pale Cecilia in
white roses from the garden—and then had gone back to his island. But
everybody else was there. All Deerwood and “up back” came. They forgave
Cissy splendidly at last. Mr. Bradly gave a very beautiful funeral
address. Valancy had wanted her old Free Methodist man, but Roaring
Abel was obdurate. He was a Presbyterian and no one but a Presbyterian
minister should bury _his_ daughter. Mr. Bradly was very tactful. He
avoided all dubious points and it was plain to be seen he hoped for the
best. Six reputable citizens of Deerwood bore Cecilia Gay to her grave
in decorous Deerwood cemetery. Among them was Uncle Wellington.

The Stirlings all came to the funeral, men and women. They had had a
family conclave over it. Surely now that Cissy Gay was dead Valancy
would come home. She simply could not stay there with Roaring Abel.
That being the case, the wisest course—decreed Uncle James—was to
attend the funeral—legitimise the whole thing, so to speak—show
Deerwood that Valancy had really done a most creditable deed in going
to nurse poor Cecilia Gay and that her family backed her up in it.
Death, the miracle worker, suddenly made the thing quite respectable.
If Valancy would return to home and decency while public opinion was
under its influence all might yet be well. Society was suddenly
forgetting all Cecilia’s wicked doings and remembering what a pretty,
modest little thing she had been—“and motherless, you know—motherless!”
It was the psychological moment—said Uncle James.

So the Stirlings went to the funeral. Even Cousin Gladys’ neuritis
allowed her to come. Cousin Stickles was there, her bonnet dripping all
over her face, crying as woefully as if Cissy had been her nearest and
dearest. Funerals always brought Cousin Stickles’ “own sad bereavement”
back.

And Uncle Wellington was a pall-bearer.

Valancy, pale, subdued-looking, her slanted eyes smudged with purple,
in her snuff-brown dress, moving quietly about, finding seats for
people, consulting in undertones with minister and undertaker,
marshalling the “mourners” into the parlour, was so decorous and proper
and Stirlingish that her family took heart of grace. This was not—could
not be—the girl who had sat all night in the woods with Barney
Snaith—who had gone tearing bareheaded through Deerwood and Port
Lawrence. This was the Valancy they knew. Really, surprisingly capable
and efficient. Perhaps she had always been kept down a bit too
much—Amelia really was rather strict—hadn’t had a chance to show what
was in her. So thought the Stirlings. And Edward Beck, from the Port
road, a widower with a large family who was beginning to take notice,
took notice of Valancy and thought she might make a mighty fine second
wife. No beauty—but a fifty-year-old widower, Mr. Beck told himself
very reasonably, couldn’t expect everything. Altogether, it seemed that
Valancy’s matrimonial chances were never so bright as they were at
Cecilia Gay’s funeral.

What the Stirlings and Edward Beck would have thought had they known
the back of Valancy’s mind must be left to the imagination. Valancy was
hating the funeral—hating the people who came to stare with curiosity
at Cecilia’s marble-white face—hating the smugness—hating the dragging,
melancholy singing—hating Mr. Bradly’s cautious platitudes. If she
could have had her absurd way, there would have been no funeral at all.
She would have covered Cissy over with flowers, shut her away from
prying eyes, and buried her beside her nameless little baby in the
grassy burying-ground under the pines of the “up back” church, with a
bit of kindly prayer from the old Free Methodist minister. She
remembered Cissy saying once, “I wish I could be buried deep in the
heart of the woods where nobody would ever come to say, ‘Cissy Gay is
buried here,’ and tell over my miserable story.”

But this! However, it would soon be over. Valancy knew, if the
Stirlings and Edward Beck didn’t, exactly what she intended to do then.
She had lain awake all the preceding night thinking about it and
finally deciding on it.

When the funeral procession had left the house, Mrs. Frederick sought
out Valancy in the kitchen.

“My child,” she said tremulously, “you’ll come home _now_?”

“Home,” said Valancy absently. She was getting on an apron and
calculating how much tea she must put to steep for supper. There would
be several guests from “up back”—distant relatives of the Gays’ who had
not remembered them for years. And she was so tired she wished she
could borrow a pair of legs from the cat.

“Yes, home,” said Mrs. Frederick, with a touch of asperity. “I suppose
you won’t dream of staying here _now_—alone with Roaring Abel.”

“Oh, no, I’m not going to stay _here_,” said Valancy. “Of course, I’ll
have to stay for a day or two, to put the house in order generally. But
that will be all. Excuse me, Mother, won’t you? I’ve a frightful lot to
do—all those “up back” people will be here to supper.”

Mrs. Frederick retreated in considerable relief, and the Stirlings went
home with lighter hearts.

“We will just treat her as if nothing had happened when she comes
back,” decreed Uncle Benjamin. “That will be the best plan. Just as if
nothing had happened.”




CHAPTER XXV


On the evening of the day after the funeral Roaring Abel went off for a
spree. He had been sober for four whole days and could endure it no
longer. Before he went, Valancy told him she would be going away the
next day. Roaring Abel was sorry, and said so. A distant cousin from
“up back” was coming to keep house for him—quite willing to do so now
since there was no sick girl to wait on—but Abel was not under any
delusions concerning her.

“She won’t be like you, my girl. Well, I’m obliged to you. You helped
me out of a bad hole and I won’t forget it. And I won’t forget what you
did for Cissy. I’m your friend, and if you ever want any of the
Stirlings spanked and sot in a corner send for me. I’m going to wet my
whistle. Lord, but I’m dry! Don’t reckon I’ll be back afore tomorrow
night, so if you’re going home tomorrow, good-bye now.”

“I _may_ go home tomorrow,” said Valancy, “but I’m not going back to
Deerwood.”

“Not going——”

“You’ll find the key on the woodshed nail,” interrupted Valancy,
politely and unmistakably. “The dog will be in the barn and the cat in
the cellar. Don’t forget to feed her till your cousin comes. The pantry
is full and I made bread and pies today. Good-bye, Mr. Gay. You have
been very kind to me and I appreciate it.”

“We’ve had a d——d decent time of it together, and that’s a fact,” said
Roaring Abel. “You’re the best small sport in the world, and your
little finger is worth the whole Stirling clan tied together. Good-bye
and good-luck.”

Valancy went out to the garden. Her legs trembled a little, but
otherwise she felt and looked composed. She held something tightly in
her hand. The garden was lying in the magic of the warm, odorous July
twilight. A few stars were out and the robins were calling through the
velvety silences of the barrens. Valancy stood by the gate expectantly.
Would he come? If he did not——

He was coming. Valancy heard Lady Jane Grey far back in the woods. Her
breath came a little more quickly. Nearer—and nearer—she could see Lady
Jane now—bumping down the lane—nearer—nearer—he was there—he had sprung
from the car and was leaning over the gate, looking at her.

“Going home, Miss Stirling?”

“I don’t know—yet,” said Valancy slowly. Her mind was made up, with no
shadow of turning, but the moment was very tremendous.

“I thought I’d run down and ask if there was anything I could do for
you,” said Barney.

Valancy took it with a canter.

“Yes, there is something you can do for me,” she said, evenly and
distinctly. “Will you marry me?”

For a moment Barney was silent. There was no particular expression on
his face. Then he gave an odd laugh.

“Come, now! I knew luck was just waiting around the corner for me. All
the signs have been pointing that way today.”

“Wait.” Valancy lifted her hand. “I’m in earnest—but I want to get my
breath after that question. Of course, with my bringing up, I realise
perfectly well that this is one of the things ‘a lady should not do.’”

“But why—why?”

“For two reasons.” Valancy was still a little breathless, but she
looked Barney straight in the eyes, while all the dead Stirlings
revolved rapidly in their graves and the living ones did nothing
because they did not know that Valancy was at that moment proposing
lawful marriage to the notorious Barney Snaith. “The first reason is,
I—I”—Valancy tried to say “I love you” but could not. She had to take
refuge in a pretended flippancy. “I’m crazy about you. The second
is—this.”

She handed him Dr. Trent’s letter.

Barney opened it with the air of a man thankful to find some safe, sane
thing to do. As he read it his face changed. He understood—more perhaps
than Valancy wanted him to.

“Are you sure nothing can be done for you?”

Valancy did not misunderstand the question.

“Yes. You know Dr. Trent’s reputation in regard to heart disease. I
haven’t long to live—perhaps only a few months—a few weeks. I want to
_live_ them. I can’t go back to Deerwood—you know what my life was like
there. And”—she managed it this time—“I love you. I want to spend the
rest of my life with you. That’s all.”

Barney folded his arms on the gate and looked gravely enough at a
white, saucy star that was winking at him just over Roaring Abel’s
kitchen chimney.

“You don’t know anything about me. I may be a—murderer.”

“No, I don’t. You _may_ be something dreadful. Everything they say of
you may be true. But it doesn’t matter to me.”

“You care that much for me, Valancy?” said Barney incredulously,
looking away from the star and into her eyes—her strange, mysterious
eyes.

“I care—that much,” said Valancy in a low voice. She was trembling. He
had called her by her name for the first time. It was sweeter than
another man’s caress could have been just to hear him say her name like
that.

“If we are going to get married,” said Barney, speaking suddenly in a
casual, matter-of-fact voice, “some things must be understood.”

“Everything must be understood,” said Valancy.

“I have things I want to hide,” said Barney coolly. “You are not to ask
me about them.”

“I won’t,” said Valancy.

“You must never ask to see my mail.”

“Never.”

“And we are never to pretend anything to each other.”

“We won’t,” said Valancy. “You won’t even have to pretend you like me.
If you marry me I know you’re only doing it out of pity.”

“And we’ll never tell a lie to each other about anything—a big lie or a
petty lie.”

“Especially a petty lie,” agreed Valancy.

“And you’ll have to live back on my island. I won’t live anywhere
else.”

“That’s partly why I want to marry you,” said Valancy.

Barney peered at her.

“I believe you mean it. Well—let’s get married, then.”

“Thank you,” said Valancy, with a sudden return of primness. She would
have been much less embarrassed if he had refused her.

“I suppose I haven’t any right to make conditions. But I’m going to
make one. You are never to refer to my heart or my liability to sudden
death. You are never to urge me to be careful. You are to
forget—absolutely forget—that I’m not perfectly healthy. I have written
a letter to my mother—here it is—you are to keep it. I have explained
everything in it. If I drop dead suddenly—as I likely will do——”

“It will exonerate me in the eyes of your kindred from the suspicion of
having poisoned you,” said Barney with a grin.

“Exactly.” Valancy laughed gaily. “Dear me, I’m glad this is over. It
has been—a bit of an ordeal. You see, I’m not in the habit of going
about asking men to marry me. It is so nice of you not to refuse me—or
offer to be a brother!”

“I’ll go to the Port tomorrow and get a license. We can be married
tomorrow evening. Dr. Stalling, I suppose?”

“Heavens, no.” Valancy shuddered. “Besides, he wouldn’t do it. He’d
shake his forefinger at me and I’d jilt you at the altar. No, I want my
old Mr. Towers to marry me.”

“Will you marry me as I stand?” demanded Barney. A passing car, full of
tourists, honked loudly—it seemed derisively. Valancy looked at him.
Blue homespun shirt, nondescript hat, muddy overalls. Unshaved!

“Yes,” she said.

Barney put his hands over the gate and took her little, cold ones
gently in his.

“Valancy,” he said, trying to speak lightly, “of course I’m not in love
with you—never thought of such a thing as being in love. But, do you
know, I’ve always thought you were a bit of a dear.”




CHAPTER XXVI


The next day passed for Valancy like a dream. She could not make
herself or anything she did seem real. She saw nothing of Barney,
though she expected he must go rattling past on his way to the Port for
a license.

Perhaps he had changed his mind.

But at dusk the lights of Lady Jane suddenly swooped over the crest of
the wooded hill beyond the lane. Valancy was waiting at the gate for
her bridegroom. She wore her green dress and her green hat because she
had nothing else to wear. She did not look or feel at all
bride-like—she really looked like a wild elf strayed out of the
greenwood. But that did not matter. Nothing at all mattered except that
Barney was coming for her.

“Ready?” said Barney, stopping Lady Jane with some new, horrible
noises.

“Yes.” Valancy stepped in and sat down. Barney was in his blue shirt
and overalls. But they were clean overalls. He was smoking a
villainous-looking pipe and he was bareheaded. But he had a pair of
oddly smart boots on under his shabby overalls. And he was shaved. They
clattered into Deerwood and through Deerwood and hit the long, wooded
road to the Port.

“Haven’t changed your mind?” said Barney.

“No. Have you?”

“No.”

That was their whole conversation on the fifteen miles. Everything was
more dream-like than ever. Valancy didn’t know whether she felt happy.
Or terrified. Or just plain fool.

Then the lights of Port Lawrence were about them. Valancy felt as if
she were surrounded by the gleaming, hungry eyes of hundreds of great,
stealthy panthers. Barney briefly asked where Mr. Towers lived, and
Valancy as briefly told him. They stopped before the shabby little
house in an unfashionable street. They went in to the small, shabby
parlour. Barney produced his license. So he _had_ got it. Also a ring.
This thing was real. She, Valancy Stirling, was actually on the point
of being married.

They were standing up together before Mr. Towers. Valancy heard Mr.
Towers and Barney saying things. She heard some other person saying
things. She herself was thinking of the way she had once planned to be
married—away back in her early teens when such a thing had not seemed
impossible. White silk and tulle veil and orange-blossoms; no
bridesmaid. But one flower girl, in a frock of cream shadow lace over
pale pink, with a wreath of flowers in her hair, carrying a basket of
roses and lilies-of-the-valley. And the groom, a noble-looking
creature, irreproachably clad in whatever the fashion of the day
decreed. Valancy lifted her eyes and saw herself and Barney in the
little, slanting, distorting mirror over the mantelpiece. She in her
odd, unbridal green hat and dress; Barney in shirt and overalls. But it
was Barney. That was all that mattered. No veil—no flowers—no guests—no
presents—no wedding-cake—but just Barney. For all the rest of her life
there would be Barney.

“Mrs. Snaith, I hope you will be very happy,” Mr. Towers was saying.

He had not seemed surprised at their appearance—not even at Barney’s
overalls. He had seen plenty of queer weddings “up back.” He did not
know Valancy was one of the Deerwood Stirlings—he did not even know
there _were_ Deerwood Stirlings. He did not know Barney Snaith was a
fugitive from justice. Really, he was an incredibly ignorant old man.
Therefore he married them and gave them his blessing very gently and
solemnly and prayed for them that night after they had gone away. His
conscience did not trouble him at all.

“What a nice way to get married!” Barney was saying as he put Lady Jane
in gear. “No fuss and flub-dub. I never supposed it was half so easy.”

“For heaven’s sake,” said Valancy suddenly, “let’s forget we _are_
married and talk as if we weren’t. I can’t stand another drive like the
one we had coming in.”

Barney howled and threw Lady Jane into high with an infernal noise.

“And I thought I was making it easy for you,” he said. “You didn’t seem
to want to talk.”

“I didn’t. But I wanted you to talk. I don’t want you to make love to
me, but I want you to act like an ordinary human being. Tell me about
this island of yours. What sort of a place is it?”

“The jolliest place in the world. You’re going to love it. The first
time I saw it I loved it. Old Tom MacMurray owned it then. He built the
little shack on it, lived there in winter and rented it to Toronto
people in summer. I bought it from him—became by that one simple
transaction a landed proprietor owning a house and an island. There is
something so satisfying in owning a whole island. And isn’t an
uninhabited island a charming idea? I’d wanted to own one ever since
I’d read _Robinson Crusoe_. It seemed too good to be true. And beauty!
Most of the scenery belongs to the government, but they don’t tax you
for looking at it, and the moon belongs to everybody. You won’t find my
shack very tidy. I suppose you’ll want to make it tidy.”

“Yes,” said Valancy honestly. “I _have_ to be tidy. I don’t really
_want_ to be. But untidiness hurts me. Yes, I’ll have to tidy up your
shack.”

“I was prepared for that,” said Barney, with a hollow groan.

“But,” continued Valancy relentingly, “I won’t insist on your wiping
your feet when you come in.”

“No, you’ll only sweep up after me with the air of a martyr,” said
Barney. “Well, anyway, you can’t tidy the lean-to. You can’t even enter
it. The door will be locked and I shall keep the key.”

“Bluebeard’s chamber,” said Valancy. “I shan’t even think of it. I
don’t care how many wives you have hanging up in it. So long as they’re
really dead.”

“Dead as door-nails. You can do as you like in the rest of the house.
There’s not much of it—just one big living-room and one small bedroom.
Well built, though. Old Tom loved his job. The beams of our house are
cedar and the rafters fir. Our living-room windows face west and east.
It’s wonderful to have a room where you can see both sunrise and
sunset. I have two cats there. Banjo and Good Luck. Adorable animals.
Banjo is a big, enchanting, grey devil-cat. Striped, of course. I don’t
care a hang for any cat that hasn’t stripes. I never knew a cat who
could swear as genteelly and effectively as Banjo. His only fault is
that he snores horribly when he is asleep. Luck is a dainty little cat.
Always looking wistfully at you, as if he wanted to tell you something.
Maybe he will pull it off sometime. Once in a thousand years, you know,
one cat is allowed to speak. My cats are philosophers—neither of them
ever cries over spilt milk.

“Two old crows live in a pine-tree on the point and are reasonably
neighbourly. Call ’em Nip and Tuck. And I have a demure little tame
owl. Name, Leander. I brought him up from a baby and he lives over on
the mainland and chuckles to himself o’ nights. And bats—it’s a great
place for bats at night. Scared of bats?”

“No; I like them.”

“So do I. Nice, queer, uncanny, mysterious creatures. Coming from
nowhere—going nowhere. Swoop! Banjo likes ’em, too. Eats ’em. I have a
canoe and a disappearing propeller boat. Went to the Port in it today
to get my license. Quieter than Lady Jane.”

“I thought you hadn’t gone at all—that you _had_ changed your mind,”
admitted Valancy.

Barney laughed—the laugh Valancy did not like—the little, bitter,
cynical laugh.

“I never change my mind,” he said shortly.

They went back through Deerwood. Up the Muskoka road. Past Roaring
Abel’s. Over the rocky, daisied lane. The dark pine woods swallowed
them up. Through the pine woods, where the air was sweet with the
incense of the unseen, fragile bells of the linnæas that carpeted the
banks of the trail. Out to the shore of Mistawis. Lady Jane must be
left here. They got out. Barney led the way down a little path to the
edge of the lake.

“There’s our island,” he said gloatingly.

Valancy looked—and looked—and looked again. There was a diaphanous,
lilac mist on the lake, shrouding the island. Through it the two
enormous pine-trees that clasped hands over Barney’s shack loomed out
like dark turrets. Behind them was a sky still rose-hued in the
afterlight, and a pale young moon.

Valancy shivered like a tree the wind stirs suddenly. Something seemed
to sweep over her soul.

“My Blue Castle!” she said. “Oh, my Blue Castle!”

They got into the canoe and paddled out to it. They left behind the
realm of everyday and things known and landed on a realm of mystery and
enchantment where anything might happen—anything might be true. Barney
lifted Valancy out of the canoe and swung her to a lichen-covered rock
under a young pine-tree. His arms were about her and suddenly his lips
were on hers. Valancy found herself shivering with the rapture of her
first kiss.

“Welcome home, dear,” Barney was saying.




CHAPTER XXVII


Cousin Georgiana came down the lane leading up to her little house. She
lived half a mile out of Deerwood and she wanted to go in to Amelia’s
and find out if Doss had come home yet. Cousin Georgiana was anxious to
see Doss. She had something very important to tell her. Something, she
was sure, Doss would be delighted to hear. Poor Doss! She _had_ had
rather a dull life of it. Cousin Georgiana owned to herself that _she_
would not like to live under Amelia’s thumb. But that would be all
changed now. Cousin Georgiana felt tremendously important. For the time
being, she quite forgot to wonder which of them would go next.

And here was Doss herself, coming along the road from Roaring Abel’s in
such a queer green dress and hat. Talk about luck. Cousin Georgiana
would have a chance to impart her wonderful secret right away, with
nobody else about to interrupt. It was, you might say, a Providence.

Valancy, who had been living for four days on her enchanted island, had
decided that she might as well go in to Deerwood and tell her relatives
that she was married. Otherwise, finding that she had disappeared from
Roaring Abel’s, they might get out a search warrant for her. Barney had
offered to drive her in, but she had preferred to go alone. She smiled
very radiantly at Cousin Georgiana, who, she remembered, as of some one
known a long time ago, had really been not a bad little creature.
Valancy was so happy that she could have smiled at anybody—even Uncle
James. She was not averse to Cousin Georgiana’s company. Already, since
the houses along the road were becoming numerous, she was conscious
that curious eyes were looking at her from every window.

“I suppose you’re going home, dear Doss?” said Cousin Georgiana as she
shook hands—furtively eyeing Valancy’s dress and wondering if she had
_any_ petticoat on at all.

“Sooner or later,” said Valancy cryptically.

“Then I’ll go along with you. I’ve been wanting to see you very
especially, Doss dear. I’ve something quite _wonderful_ to tell you.”

“Yes?” said Valancy absently. What on earth was Cousin Georgiana
looking so mysterious and important about? But did it matter? No.
Nothing mattered but Barney and the Blue Castle up back in Mistawis.

“Who do you suppose called to see me the other day?” asked Cousin
Georgiana archly.

Valancy couldn’t guess.

“Edward Beck.” Cousin Georgiana lowered her voice almost to a whisper.
“_Edward Beck_.”

Why the italics? And _was_ Cousin Georgiana blushing?

“Who on earth is Edward Beck?” asked Valancy indifferently.

Cousin Georgiana stared.

“Surely you remember Edward Beck,” she said reproachfully. “He lives in
that lovely house on the Port Lawrence road and he comes to our
church—regularly. You _must_ remember him.”

“Oh, I think I do now,” said Valancy, with an effort of memory. “He’s
that old man with a wen on his forehead and dozens of children, who
always sits in the pew by the door, isn’t he?”

“Not dozens of children, dear—oh, no, not dozens. Not even _one_ dozen.
Only nine. At least only nine that count. The rest are dead. He isn’t
old—he’s only about forty-eight—the prime of life, Doss—and what does
it matter about a wen?”

“Nothing, of course,” agreed Valancy quite sincerely. It certainly did
not matter to her whether Edward Beck had a wen or a dozen wens or no
wen at all. But Valancy was getting vaguely suspicious. There was
certainly an air of suppressed triumph about Cousin Georgiana. Could it
be possible that Cousin Georgiana was thinking of marrying again?
Marrying Edward Beck? Absurd. Cousin Georgiana was sixty-five if she
were a day and her little anxious face was as closely covered with fine
wrinkles as if she had been a hundred. But still——

“My dear,” said Cousin Georgiana, “Edward Beck wants to marry _you_.”

Valancy stared at Cousin Georgiana for a moment. Then she wanted to go
off into a peal of laughter. But she only said:

“Me?”

“Yes, you. He fell in love with you at the funeral. And he came to
consult me about it. I was such a friend of his first wife, you know.
He is very much in earnest, Dossie. And it’s a wonderful chance for
you. He’s very well off—and you know—you—you——”

“Am not so young as I once was,” agreed Valancy. “‘To her that hath
shall be given.’ Do you really think I would make a good stepmother,
Cousin Georgiana?”

“I’m sure you would. You were always so fond of children.”

“But nine is such a family to start with,” objected Valancy gravely.

“The two oldest are grown up and the third almost. That leaves only six
that really count. And most of them are boys. So much easier to bring
up than girls. There’s an excellent book—‘Health Care of the Growing
Child’—Gladys has a copy, I think. It would be such a help to you. And
there are books about morals. You’d manage nicely. Of course I told Mr.
Beck that I thought you would—would——”

“Jump at him,” supplied Valancy.

“Oh, no, no, dear. I wouldn’t use such an indelicate expression. I told
him I thought you would consider his proposal favourably. And you will,
won’t you, dearie?”

“There’s only one obstacle,” said Valancy dreamily. “You see, I’m
married already.”

“Married!” Cousin Georgiana stopped stock-still and stared at Valancy.
“Married!”

“Yes. I was married to Barney Snaith last Tuesday evening in Port
Lawrence.”

There was a convenient gate-post hard by. Cousin Georgiana took firm
hold of it.

“Doss, dear—I’m an old woman—are you trying to make fun of me?”

“Not at all. I’m only telling you the truth. For heaven’s sake, Cousin
Georgiana,”—Valancy was alarmed by certain symptoms—“don’t go crying
here on the public road!”

Cousin Georgiana choked back the tears and gave a little moan of
despair instead.

“Oh, Doss, _what_ have you done? What _have_ you done?”

“I’ve just been telling you. I’ve got married,” said Valancy, calmly
and patiently.

“To that—that—aw—that—_Barney Snaith_. Why, they say he’s had a dozen
wives already.”

“I’m the only one round at present,” said Valancy.

“What will your poor mother say?” moaned Cousin Georgiana.

“Come along with me and hear, if you want to know,” said Valancy. “I’m
on my way to tell her now.”

Cousin Georgiana let go the gate-post cautiously and found that she
could stand alone. She meekly trotted on beside Valancy—who suddenly
seemed quite a different person in her eyes. Cousin Georgiana had a
tremendous respect for a married woman. But it was terrible to think of
what the poor girl had done. So rash. So reckless. Of course Valancy
must be stark mad. But she seemed so happy in her madness that Cousin
Georgiana had a momentary conviction that it would be a pity if the
clan tried to scold her back to sanity. She had never seen that look in
Valancy’s eyes before. But what _would_ Amelia say? And Ben?

“To marry a man you know nothing about,” thought Cousin Georgiana
aloud.

“I know more about him than I know of Edward Beck,” said Valancy.

“Edward Beck _goes to church_,” said Cousin Georgiana. “Does Bar—does
your husband?”

“He has promised that he will go with me on fine Sundays,” said
Valancy.

When they turned in at the Stirling gate Valancy gave an exclamation of
surprise.

“Look at my rosebush! Why, it’s blooming!”

It was. Covered with blossoms. Great, crimson, velvety blossoms.
Fragrant. Glowing. Wonderful.

“My cutting it to pieces must have done it good,” said Valancy,
laughing. She gathered a handful of the blossoms—they would look well
on the supper-table of the verandah at Mistawis—and went, still
laughing, up the walk, conscious that Olive was standing on the steps,
Olive, goddess-like in loveliness, looking down with a slight frown on
her forehead. Olive, beautiful, insolent. Her full form voluptuous in
its swathings of rose silk and lace. Her golden-brown hair curling
richly under her big, white-frilled hat. Her colour ripe and melting.

“Beautiful,” thought Valancy coolly, “but”—as if she suddenly saw her
cousin through new eyes—“without the slightest touch of distinction.”

So Valancy had come home, thank goodness, thought Olive. But Valancy
was not looking like a repentant, returned prodigal. This was the cause
of Olive’s frown. She was looking triumphant—graceless! That outlandish
dress—that queer hat—those hands full of blood-red roses. Yet there was
something about both dress and hat, as Olive instantly felt, that was
entirely lacking in her own attire. This deepened the frown. She put
out a condescending hand.

“So you’re back, Doss? Very warm day, isn’t it? Did you walk in?”

“Yes. Coming in?”

“Oh, no. I’ve just been in. I’ve come often to comfort poor Aunty.
She’s been so lonesome. I’m going to Mrs. Bartlett’s tea. I have to
help pour. She’s giving it for her cousin from Toronto. Such a charming
girl. You’d have loved meeting her, Doss. I think Mrs. Bartlett did
send you a card. Perhaps you’ll drop in later on.”

“No, I don’t think so,” said Valancy indifferently. “I’ll have to be
home to get Barney’s supper. We’re going for a moonlit canoe ride
around Mistawis tonight.”

“Barney? Supper?” gasped Olive. “What _do_ you mean, Valancy Stirling?”

“Valancy Snaith, by the grace of God.”

Valancy flaunted her wedding-ring in Olive’s stricken face. Then she
nimbly stepped past her and into the house. Cousin Georgiana followed.
She would not miss a moment of the great scene, even though Olive did
look as if she were going to faint.

Olive did not faint. She went stupidly down the street to Mrs.
Bartlett’s. _What_ did Doss mean? She couldn’t have—that ring—oh, what
fresh scandal was that wretched girl bringing on her defenceless family
now? She should have been—shut up—long ago.

Valancy opened the sitting-room door and stepped unexpectedly right
into a grim assemblage of Stirlings. They had not come together of
malice prepense. Aunt Wellington and Cousin Gladys and Aunt Mildred and
Cousin Sarah had just called in on their way home from a meeting of the
missionary society. Uncle James had dropped in to give Amelia some
information regarding a doubtful investment. Uncle Benjamin had called,
apparently, to tell them it was a hot day and ask them what was the
difference between a bee and a donkey. Cousin Stickles had been
tactless enough to know the answer—“one gets all the honey, the other
all the whacks”—and Uncle Benjamin was in a bad humour. In all of their
minds, unexpressed, was the idea of finding out if Valancy had yet come
home, and, if not, what steps must be taken in the matter.

Well, here was Valancy at last, a poised, confident thing, not humble
and deprecating as she should have been. And so oddly, improperly
young-looking. She stood in the doorway and looked at them, Cousin
Georgiana timorous, expectant, behind her. Valancy was so happy she
didn’t hate her people any more. She could even see a number of good
qualities in them that she had never seen before. And she was sorry for
them. Her pity made her quite gentle.

“Well, Mother,” she said pleasantly.

“So you’ve come home at last!” said Mrs. Frederick, getting out a
handkerchief. She dared not be outraged, but she did not mean to be
cheated of her tears.

“Well, not exactly,” said Valancy. She threw her bomb. “I thought I
ought to drop in and tell you I was married. Last Tuesday night. To
Barney Snaith.”

Uncle Benjamin bounced up and sat down again.

“God bless my soul!” he said dully. The rest seemed turned to stone.
Except Cousin Gladys, who turned faint. Aunt Mildred and Uncle
Wellington had to help her out to the kitchen.

“She would have to keep up the Victorian traditions,” said Valancy,
with a grin. She sat down, uninvited, on a chair. Cousin Stickles had
begun to sob.

“Is there _one_ day in your life that you haven’t cried?” asked Valancy
curiously.

“Valancy,” said Uncle James, being the first to recover the power of
utterance, “did you mean what you said just now?”

“I did.”

“Do you mean to say that you have actually gone and
married—_married_—that notorious Barney
Snaith—that—that—criminal—that——”

“I have.”

“Then,” said Uncle James violently, “you are a shameless creature, lost
to all sense of propriety and virtue, and I wash my hands entirely of
you. I do not want ever to see your face again.”

“What have you left to say when I commit murder?” asked Valancy.

Uncle Benjamin again appealed to God to bless his soul.

“That drunken outlaw—that——”

A dangerous spark appeared in Valancy’s eyes. They might say what they
liked to and of her but they should not abuse Barney.

“Say ‘damn’ and you’ll feel better,” she suggested.

“I can express my feelings without blasphemy. And I tell you have
covered yourself with eternal disgrace and infamy by marrying that
drunkard——”

“_You_ would be more endurable if you got drunk occasionally. Barney is
_not_ a drunkard.”

“He was seen drunk in Port Lawrence—pickled to the gills,” said Uncle
Benjamin.

“If that is true—and I don’t believe it—he had a good reason for it.
Now I suggest that you all stop looking tragic and accept the
situation. I’m married—you can’t undo that. And I’m perfectly happy.”

“I suppose we ought to be thankful he has really married her,” said
Cousin Sarah, by way of trying to look on the bright side.

“If he really has,” said Uncle James, who had just washed his hands of
Valancy. “Who married you?”

“Mr. Towers, of Port Lawrence.”

“By a Free Methodist!” groaned Mrs. Frederick—as if to have been
married by an imprisoned Methodist would have been a shade less
disgraceful. It was the first thing she had said. Mrs. Frederick didn’t
know _what_ to say. The whole thing was too horrible—too nightmarish.
She was sure she must wake up soon. After all their bright hopes at the
funeral!

“It makes me think of those what-d’ye-call-’ems,” said Uncle Benjamin
helplessly. “Those yarns—you know—of fairies taking babies out of their
cradles.”

“Valancy could hardly be a changeling at twenty-nine,” said Aunt
Wellington satirically.

“She was the oddest-looking baby I ever saw, anyway,” averred Uncle
Benjamin. “I said so at the time—you remember, Amelia? I said I had
never seen such eyes in a human head.”

“I’m glad _I_ never had any children,” said Cousin Sarah. “If they
don’t break your heart in one way they do it in another.”

“Isn’t it better to have your heart broken than to have it wither up?”
queried Valancy. “Before it could be broken it must have felt something
splendid. _That_ would be worth the pain.”

“Dippy—clean dippy,” muttered Uncle Benjamin, with a vague,
unsatisfactory feeling that somebody had said something like that
before.

“Valancy,” said Mrs. Frederick solemnly, “do you ever pray to be
forgiven for disobeying your mother?”

“I _should_ pray to be forgiven for obeying you so long,” said Valancy
stubbornly. “But I don’t pray about that at all. I just thank God every
day for my happiness.”

“I would rather,” said Mrs. Frederick, beginning to cry rather
belatedly, “see you dead before me than listen to what you have told me
today.”

Valancy looked at her mother and aunts, and wondered if they could ever
have known anything of the real meaning of love. She felt sorrier for
them than ever. They were so very pitiable. And they never suspected
it.

“Barney Snaith is a scoundrel to have deluded you into marrying him,”
said Uncle James violently.

“Oh, _I_ did the deluding. I asked _him_ to marry me,” said Valancy,
with a wicked smile.

“Have you _no_ pride?” demanded Aunt Wellington.

“Lots of it. I am proud that I have achieved a husband by my own
unaided efforts. Cousin Georgiana here wanted to help me to Edward
Beck.”

“Edward Beck is worth twenty thousand dollars and has the finest house
between here and Port Lawrence,” said Uncle Benjamin.

“That sounds very fine,” said Valancy scornfully, “but it isn’t worth
_that_“—she snapped her fingers—“compared to feeling Barney’s arms
around me and his cheek against mine.”

“_Oh_, Doss!” said Cousin Stickles. Cousin Sarah said, “Oh, _Doss_!”
Aunt Wellington said, “Valancy, you need not be indecent.”

“Why, it surely isn’t indecent to like to have your husband put his arm
around you? I should think it would be indecent if you didn’t.”

“Why expect decency from her?” inquired Uncle James sarcastically. “She
has cut herself off from decency forevermore. She has made her bed. Let
her lie on it.”

“Thanks,” said Valancy very gratefully. “How you would have enjoyed
being Torquemada! Now, I must really be getting back. Mother, may I
have those three woollen cushions I worked last winter?”

“Take them—take everything!” said Mrs. Frederick.

“Oh, I don’t want everything—or much. I don’t want my Blue Castle
cluttered. Just the cushions. I’ll call for them some day when we motor
in.”

Valancy rose and went to the door. There she turned. She was sorrier
than ever for them all. _They_ had no Blue Castle in the purple
solitudes of Mistawis.

“The trouble with you people is that you don’t laugh enough,” she said.

“Doss, dear,” said Cousin Georgiana mournfully, “some day you will
discover that blood is thicker than water.”

“Of course it is. But who wants water to be thick?” parried Valancy.
“We want water to be thin—sparkling—crystal-clear.”

Cousin Stickles groaned.

Valancy would not ask any of them to come and see her—she was afraid
they _would_ come out of curiosity. But she said:

“Do you mind if I drop in and see you once in a while, Mother?”

“My house will always be open to you,” said Mrs. Frederick, with a
mournful dignity.

“You should never recognise her again,” said Uncle James sternly, as
the door closed behind Valancy.

“I cannot quite forget that I am a mother,” said Mrs. Frederick. “My
poor, unfortunate girl!”

“I dare say the marriage isn’t legal,” said Uncle James comfortingly.
“He has probably been married half a dozen times before. But _I_ am
through with her. I have done all I could, Amelia. I think you will
admit that. Henceforth”—Uncle James was terribly solemn about
it—“Valancy is to me as one dead.”

“Mrs. Barney Snaith,” said Cousin Georgiana, as if trying it out to see
how it would sound.

“He has a score of aliases, no doubt,” said Uncle Benjamin. “For my
part, I believe the man is half Indian. I haven’t a doubt they’re
living in a wigwam.”

“If he has married her under the name of Snaith and it isn’t his real
name wouldn’t that make the marriage null and void?” asked Cousin
Stickles hopefully.

Uncle James shook his head.

“No, it is the man who marries, not the name.”

“You know,” said Cousin Gladys, who had recovered and returned but was
still shaky, “I had a distinct premonition of this at Herbert’s silver
dinner. I remarked it at the time. When she was defending Snaith. You
remember, of course. It came over me like a revelation. I spoke to
David when I went home about it.”

“What—_what_,” demanded Aunt Wellington of the universe, “has come over
Valancy? _Valancy_!”

The universe did not answer but Uncle James did.

“Isn’t there something coming up of late about secondary personalities
cropping out? I don’t hold with many of those new-fangled notions, but
there may be something in this one. It would account for her
incomprehensible conduct.”

“Valancy is so fond of mushrooms,” sighed Cousin Georgiana. “I’m afraid
she’ll get poisoned eating toadstools by mistake living up back in the
woods.”

“There are worse things than death,” said Uncle James, believing that
it was the first time in the world that such a statement had been made.

“Nothing can ever be the same again!” sobbed Cousin Stickles.

Valancy, hurrying along the dusty road, back to cool Mistawis and her
purple island, had forgotten all about them—just as she had forgotten
that she might drop dead at any moment if she hurried.




CHAPTER XXVIII


Summer passed by. The Stirling clan—with the insignificant exception of
Cousin Georgiana—had tacitly agreed to follow Uncle James’ example and
look upon Valancy as one dead. To be sure, Valancy had an unquiet,
ghostly habit of recurring resurrections when she and Barney clattered
through Deerwood and out to the Port in that unspeakable car. Valancy,
bareheaded, with stars in her eyes. Barney, bareheaded, smoking his
pipe. But shaved. Always shaved now, if any of them had noticed it.
They even had the audacity to go in to Uncle Benjamin’s store to buy
groceries. Twice Uncle Benjamin ignored them. Was not Valancy one of
the dead? While Snaith had never existed. But the third time he told
Barney he was a scoundrel who should be hung for luring an unfortunate,
weak-minded girl away from her home and friends.

Barney’s one straight eyebrow went up.

“I have made her happy,” he said coolly, “and she was miserable with
her friends. So that’s that.”

Uncle Benjamin stared. It had never occurred to him that women had to
be, or ought to be, “made happy.”

“You—you pup!” he said.

“Why be so unoriginal?” queried Barney amiably. “Anybody could call me
a pup. Why not think of something worthy of the Stirlings? Besides, I’m
not a pup. I’m really quite a middle-aged dog. Thirty-five, if you’re
interested in knowing.”

Uncle Benjamin remembered just in time that Valancy was dead. He turned
his back on Barney.

Valancy _was_ happy—gloriously and entirely so. She seemed to be living
in a wonderful house of life and every day opened a new, mysterious
room. It was in a world which had nothing in common with the one she
had left behind—a world where time was not—which was young with
immortal youth—where there was neither past nor future but only the
present. She surrendered herself utterly to the charm of it.

The absolute freedom of it all was unbelievable. They could do exactly
as they liked. No Mrs. Grundy. No traditions. No relatives. Or in-laws.
“Peace, perfect peace, with loved ones far away,” as Barney quoted
shamelessly.

Valancy had gone home once and got her cushions. And Cousin Georgiana
had given her one of her famous candlewick spreads of most elaborate
design. “For your spare-room bed, dear,” she said.

“But I haven’t got any spare-room,” said Valancy.

Cousin Georgiana looked horrified. A house without a spare-room was
monstrous to her.

“But it’s a lovely spread,” said Valancy, with a kiss, “and I’m so glad
to have it. I’ll put it on my own bed. Barney’s old patch-work quilt is
getting ragged.”

“I don’t see how you can be contented to live up back,” sighed Cousin
Georgiana. “It’s so out of the world.”

“Contented!” Valancy laughed. What was the use of trying to explain to
Cousin Georgiana. “It is,” she agreed, “most gloriously and entirely
out of the world.”

“And you are really happy, dear?” asked Cousin Georgiana wistfully.

“I really am,” said Valancy gravely, her eyes dancing.

“Marriage is such a serious thing,” sighed Cousin Georgiana.

“When it’s going to last long,” agreed Valancy.

Cousin Georgiana did not understand this at all. But it worried her and
she lay awake at nights wondering what Valancy meant by it.

Valancy loved her Blue Castle and was completely satisfied with it. The
big living-room had three windows, all commanding exquisite views of
exquisite Mistawis. The one in the end of the room was an oriel
window—which Tom MacMurray, Barney explained, had got out of some
little, old “up back” church that had been sold. It faced the west and
when the sunsets flooded it Valancy’s whole being knelt in prayer as if
in some great cathedral. The new moons always looked down through it,
the lower pine boughs swayed about the top of it, and all through the
nights the soft, dim silver of the lake dreamed through it.

There was a stone fireplace on the other side. No desecrating gas
imitation but a real fireplace where you could burn real logs. With a
big grizzly bearskin on the floor before it, and beside it a hideous,
red-plush sofa of Tom MacMurray’s régime. But its ugliness was hidden
by silver-grey timber wolf skins, and Valancy’s cushions made it gay
and comfortable. In a corner a nice, tall, lazy old clock ticked—the
right kind of a clock. One that did not hurry the hours away but ticked
them off deliberately. It was the jolliest looking old clock. A fat,
corpulent clock with a great, round, man’s face painted on it, the
hands stretching out of its nose and the hours encircling it like a
halo.

There was a big glass case of stuffed owls and several deer
heads—likewise of Tom MacMurray’s vintage. Some comfortable old chairs
that asked to be sat upon. A squat little chair with a cushion was
prescriptively Banjo’s. If anybody else dared sit on it Banjo glared
him out of it with his topaz-hued, black-ringed eyes. Banjo had an
adorable habit of hanging over the back of it, trying to catch his own
tail. Losing his temper because he couldn’t catch it. Giving it a
fierce bite for spite when he _did_ catch it. Yowling malignantly with
pain. Barney and Valancy laughed at him until they ached. But it was
Good Luck they loved. They were both agreed that Good Luck was so
lovable that he practically amounted to an obsession.

One side of the wall was lined with rough, homemade book-shelves filled
with books, and between the two side windows hung an old mirror in a
faded gilt frame, with fat cupids gamboling in the panel over the
glass. A mirror, Valancy thought, that must be like the fabled mirror
into which Venus had once looked and which thereafter reflected as
beautiful every woman who looked into it. Valancy thought she was
almost pretty in that mirror. But that may have been because she had
shingled her hair.

This was before the day of bobs and was regarded as a wild, unheard-of
proceeding—unless you had typhoid. When Mrs. Frederick heard of it she
almost decided to erase Valancy’s name from the family Bible. Barney
cut the hair, square off at the back of Valancy’s neck, bringing it
down in a short black fringe over her forehead. It gave a meaning and a
purpose to her little, three-cornered face that it never had possessed
before. Even her nose ceased to irritate her. Her eyes were bright, and
her sallow skin had cleared to the hue of creamy ivory. The old family
joke had come true—she was really fat at last—anyway, no longer skinny.
Valancy might never be beautiful, but she was of the type that looks
its best in the woods—elfin—mocking—alluring.

Her heart bothered her very little. When an attack threatened she was
generally able to head it off with Dr. Trent’s prescription. The only
bad one she had was one night when she was temporarily out of medicine.
And it _was_ a bad one. For the time being, Valancy realised keenly
that death was actually waiting to pounce on her any moment. But the
rest of the time she would not—did not—let herself remember it at all.




CHAPTER XXIX


Valancy toiled not, neither did she spin. There was really very little
work to do. She cooked their meals on a coal-oil stove, performing all
her little domestic rites carefully and exultingly, and they ate out on
the verandah that almost overhung the lake. Before them lay Mistawis,
like a scene out of some fairy tale of old time. And Barney smiling his
twisted, enigmatical smile at her across the table.

“What a view old Tom picked out when he built this shack!” Barney would
say exultantly.

Supper was the meal Valancy liked best. The faint laughter of winds was
always about them and the colours of Mistawis, imperial and spiritual,
under the changing clouds were something that cannot be expressed in
mere words. Shadows, too. Clustering in the pines until a wind shook
them out and pursued them over Mistawis. They lay all day along the
shores, threaded by ferns and wild blossoms. They stole around the
headlands in the glow of the sunset, until twilight wove them all into
one great web of dusk.

The cats, with their wise, innocent little faces, would sit on the
verandah railing and eat the tidbits Barney flung them. And how good
everything tasted! Valancy, amid all the romance of Mistawis, never
forgot that men had stomachs. Barney paid her no end of compliments on
her cooking.

“After all,” he admitted, “there’s something to be said for square
meals. I’ve mostly got along by boiling two or three dozen eggs hard at
once and eating a few when I got hungry, with a slice of bacon once in
a while and a jorum of tea.”

Valancy poured tea out of Barney’s little battered old pewter teapot of
incredible age. She had not even a set of dishes—only Barney’s
mismatched chipped bits—and a dear, big, pobby old jug of robin’s-egg
blue.

After the meal was over they would sit there and talk for hours—or sit
and say nothing, in all the languages of the world, Barney pulling away
at his pipe, Valancy dreaming idly and deliciously, gazing at the
far-off hills beyond Mistawis where the spires of firs came out against
the sunset. The moonlight would begin to silver the Mistawis dusk. Bats
would begin to swoop darkly against the pale, western gold. The little
waterfall that came down on the high bank not far away would, by some
whim of the wildwood gods, begin to look like a wonderful white woman
beckoning through the spicy, fragrant evergreens. And Leander would
begin to chuckle diabolically on the mainland shore. How sweet it was
to sit there and do nothing in the beautiful silence, with Barney at
the other side of the table, smoking!

There were plenty of other islands in sight, though none were near
enough to be troublesome as neighbours. There was one little group of
islets far off to the west which they called the Fortunate Isles. At
sunrise they looked like a cluster of emeralds, at sunset like a
cluster of amethysts. They were too small for houses; but the lights on
the larger islands would bloom out all over the lake, and bonfires
would be lighted on their shores, streaming up into the wood shadows
and throwing great, blood-red ribbons over the waters. Music would
drift to them alluringly from boats here and there, or from the
verandahs on the big house of the millionaire on the biggest island.

“Would you like a house like that, Moonlight?” Barney asked once,
waving his hand at it. He had taken to calling her Moonlight, and
Valancy loved it.

“No,” said Valancy, who had once dreamed of a mountain castle ten times
the size of the rich man’s “cottage” and now pitied the poor
inhabitants of palaces. “No. It’s too elegant. I would have to carry it
with me everywhere I went. On my back like a snail. It would own
me—possess me, body and soul. I like a house I can love and cuddle and
boss. Just like ours here. I don’t envy Hamilton Gossard ‘the finest
summer residence in Canada.’ It is magnificent, but it isn’t my Blue
Castle.”

Away down at the far end of the lake they got every night a glimpse of
a big, continental train rushing through a clearing. Valancy liked to
watch its lighted windows flash by and wonder who was on it and what
hopes and fears it carried. She also amused herself by picturing Barney
and herself going to the dances and dinners in the houses on the
islands, but she did not want to go in reality. Once they did go to a
masquerade dance in the pavilion at one of the hotels up the lake, and
had a glorious evening, but slipped away in their canoe, before
unmasking time, back to the Blue Castle.

“It was lovely—but I don’t want to go again,” said Valancy.

So many hours a day Barney shut himself up in Bluebeard’s Chamber.
Valancy never saw the inside of it. From the smells that filtered
through at times she concluded he must be conducting chemical
experiments—or counterfeiting money. Valancy supposed there must be
smelly processes in making counterfeit money. But she did not trouble
herself about it. She had no desire to peer into the locked chambers of
Barney’s house of life. His past and his future concerned her not. Only
this rapturous present. Nothing else mattered.

Once he went away and stayed away two days and nights. He had asked
Valancy if she would be afraid to stay alone and she had said she would
not. He never told her where he had been. She was not afraid to be
alone, but she was horribly lonely. The sweetest sound she had ever
heard was Lady Jane’s clatter through the woods when Barney returned.
And then his signal whistle from the shore. She ran down to the landing
rock to greet him—to nestle herself into his eager arms—they _did_ seem
eager.

“Have you missed me, Moonlight?” Barney was whispering.

“It seems a hundred years since you went away,” said Valancy.

“I won’t leave you again.”

“You must,” protested Valancy, “if you want to. I’d be miserable if I
thought you wanted to go and didn’t, because of me. I want you to feel
perfectly free.”

Barney laughed—a little cynically.

“There is no such thing as freedom on earth,” he said. “Only different
kinds of bondages. And comparative bondages. _You_ think you are free
now because you’ve escaped from a peculiarly unbearable kind of
bondage. But are you? You love me—_that’s_ a bondage.”

“Who said or wrote that ‘the prison unto which we doom ourselves no
prison is’?” asked Valancy dreamily, clinging to his arm as they
climbed up the rock steps.

“Ah, now you have it,” said Barney. “That’s all the freedom we can hope
for—the freedom to choose our prison. But, Moonlight,”—he stopped at
the door of the Blue Castle and looked about him—at the glorious lake,
the great, shadowy woods, the bonfires, the twinkling
lights—“Moonlight, I’m glad to be home again. When I came down through
the woods and saw my home lights—mine—gleaming out under the old
pines—something I’d never seen before—oh, girl, I was glad—glad!”

But in spite of Barney’s doctrine of bondage, Valancy thought they were
splendidly free. It was amazing to be able to sit up half the night and
look at the moon if you wanted to. To be late for meals if you wanted
to—she who had always been rebuked so sharply by her mother and so
reproachfully by Cousin Stickles if she were one minute late. Dawdle
over meals as long as you wanted to. Leave your crusts if you wanted
to. Not come home at all for meals if you wanted to. Sit on a sun-warm
rock and paddle your bare feet in the hot sand if you wanted to. Just
sit and do nothing in the beautiful silence if you wanted to. In short,
do any fool thing you wanted to whenever the notion took you. If _that_
wasn’t freedom, what was?




CHAPTER XXX


They didn’t spend all their days on the island. They spent more than
half of them wandering at will through the enchanted Muskoka country.
Barney knew the woods as a book and he taught their lore and craft to
Valancy. He could always find trail and haunt of the shy wood people.
Valancy learned the different fairy-likenesses of the mosses—the charm
and exquisiteness of woodland blossoms. She learned to know every bird
at sight and mimic its call—though never so perfectly as Barney. She
made friends with every kind of tree. She learned to paddle a canoe as
well as Barney himself. She liked to be out in the rain and she never
caught cold.

Sometimes they took a lunch with them and went berrying—strawberries
and blueberries. How pretty blueberries were—the dainty green of the
unripe berries, the glossy pinks and scarlets of the half ripes, the
misty blue of the fully matured! And Valancy learned the real flavour
of the strawberry in its highest perfection. There was a certain sunlit
dell on the banks of Mistawis along which white birches grew on one
side and on the other still, changeless ranks of young spruces. There
were long grasses at the roots of the birches, combed down by the winds
and wet with morning dew late into the afternoons. Here they found
berries that might have graced the banquets of Lucullus, great
ambrosial sweetnesses hanging like rubies to long, rosy stalks. They
lifted them by the stalk and ate them from it, uncrushed and virgin,
tasting each berry by itself with all its wild fragrance ensphered
therein. When Valancy carried any of these berries home that elusive
essence escaped and they became nothing more than the common berries of
the market-place—very kitchenly good indeed, but not as they would have
been, eaten in their birch dell until her fingers were stained as pink
as Aurora’s eyelids.

Or they went after water-lilies. Barney knew where to find them in the
creeks and bays of Mistawis. Then the Blue Castle was glorious with
them, every receptacle that Valancy could contrive filled with the
exquisite things. If not water lilies then cardinal flowers, fresh and
vivid from the swamps of Mistawis, where they burned like ribbons of
flame.

Sometimes they went trouting on little nameless rivers or hidden brooks
on whose banks Naiads might have sunned their white, wet limbs. Then
all they took with them were some raw potatoes and salt. They roasted
the potatoes over a fire and Barney showed Valancy how to cook the
trout by wrapping them in leaves, coating them with mud and baking them
in a bed of hot coals. Never were such delicious meals. Valancy had
such an appetite it was no wonder she put flesh on her bones.

Or they just prowled and explored through woods that always seemed to
be expecting something wonderful to happen. At least, that was the way
Valancy felt about them. Down the next hollow—over the next hill—you
would find it.

“We don’t know where we’re going, but isn’t it fun to go?” Barney used
to say.

Once or twice night overtook them, too far from their Blue Castle to
get back. But Barney made a fragrant bed of bracken and fir boughs and
they slept on it dreamlessly, under a ceiling of old spruces with moss
hanging from them, while beyond them moonlight and the murmur of pines
blended together so that one could hardly tell which was light and
which was sound.

There were rainy days, of course, when Muskoka was a wet green land.
Days when showers drifted across Mistawis like pale ghosts of rain and
they never thought of staying in because of it. Days when it rained in
right good earnest and they had to stay in. Then Barney shut himself up
in Bluebeard’s Chamber and Valancy read, or dreamed on the wolfskins
with Good Luck purring beside her and Banjo watching them suspiciously
from his own peculiar chair. On Sunday evenings they paddled across to
a point of land and walked from there through the woods to the little
Free Methodist church. One felt really too happy for Sunday. Valancy
had never really liked Sundays before.

And always, Sundays and weekdays, she was with Barney. Nothing else
really mattered. And what a companion he was! How understanding! How
jolly! How—how Barney-like! That summed it all up.

Valancy had taken some of her two hundred dollars out of the bank and
spent it in pretty clothes. She had a little smoke-blue chiffon which
she always put on when they spent the evening at home—smoke-blue with
touches of silver about it. It was after she began wearing it that
Barney began calling her Moonlight.

“Moonlight and blue twilight—that is what you look like in that dress.
I like it. It belongs to you. You aren’t exactly pretty, but you have
some adorable beauty-spots. Your eyes. And that little kissable dent
just between your collar bones. You have the wrist and ankle of an
aristocrat. That little head of yours is beautifully shaped. And when
you look backward over your shoulder you’re maddening—especially in
twilight or moonlight. An elf maiden. A wood sprite. You belong to the
woods, Moonlight—you should never be out of them. In spite of your
ancestry, there is something wild and remote and untamed about you. And
you have such a nice, sweet, throaty, summery voice. Such a nice voice
for love-making.”

“Shure an’ ye’ve kissed the Blarney Stone,” scoffed Valancy. But she
tasted these compliments for weeks.

She got a pale green bathing-suit, too—a garment which would have given
her clan their deaths if they had ever seen her in it. Barney taught
her how to swim. Sometimes she put her bathing-dress on when she got up
and didn’t take it off until she went to bed—running down to the water
for a plunge whenever she felt like it and sprawling on the sun-warm
rocks to dry.

She had forgotten all the old humiliating things that used to come up
against her in the night—the injustices and the disappointments. It was
as if they had all happened to some other person—not to her, Valancy
Snaith, who had always been happy.

“I understand now what it means to be born again,” she told Barney.

Holmes speaks of grief “staining backward” through the pages of life;
but Valancy found her happiness had stained backward likewise and
flooded with rose-colour her whole previous drab existence. She found
it hard to believe that she had ever been lonely and unhappy and
afraid.

“When death comes, I shall have lived,” thought Valancy. “I shall have
had my hour.”

And her dust-pile!

One day Valancy had heaped up the sand in the little island cove in a
tremendous cone and stuck a gay little Union Jack on top of it.

“What are you celebrating?” Barney wanted to know.

“I’m just exorcising an old demon,” Valancy told him.




CHAPTER XXXI


Autumn came. Late September with cool nights. They had to forsake the
verandah; but they kindled a fire in the big fireplace and sat before
it with jest and laughter. They left the doors open, and Banjo and Good
Luck came and went at pleasure. Sometimes they sat gravely on the
bearskin rug between Barney and Valancy; sometimes they slunk off into
the mystery of the chill night outside. The stars smouldered in the
horizon mists through the old oriel. The haunting, persistent croon of
the pine-trees filled the air. The little waves began to make soft,
sobbing splashes on the rocks below them in the rising winds. They
needed no light but the firelight that sometimes leaped up and revealed
them—sometimes shrouded them in shadow. When the night wind rose higher
Barney would shut the door and light a lamp and read to her—poetry and
essays and gorgeous, dim chronicles of ancient wars. Barney never would
read novels: he vowed they bored him. But sometimes she read them
herself, curled up on the wolf skins, laughing aloud in peace. For
Barney was not one of those aggravating people who can never hear you
smiling audibly over something you’ve read without inquiring placidly,
“What is the joke?”

October—with a gorgeous pageant of color around Mistawis, into which
Valancy plunged her soul. Never had she imagined anything so splendid.
A great, tinted peace. Blue, wind-winnowed skies. Sunlight sleeping in
the glades of that fairyland. Long dreamy purple days paddling idly in
their canoe along shores and up the rivers of crimson and gold. A
sleepy, red hunter’s moon. Enchanted tempests that stripped the leaves
from the trees and heaped them along the shores. Flying shadows of
clouds. What had all the smug, opulent lands out front to compare with
this?

November—with uncanny witchery in its changed trees. With murky red
sunsets flaming in smoky crimson behind the westering hills. With dear
days when the austere woods were beautiful and gracious in a dignified
serenity of folded hands and closed eyes—days full of a fine, pale
sunshine that sifted through the late, leafless gold of the
juniper-trees and glimmered among the grey beeches, lighting up
evergreen banks of moss and washing the colonnades of the pines. Days
with a high-sprung sky of flawless turquoise. Days when an exquisite
melancholy seemed to hang over the landscape and dream about the lake.
But days, too, of the wild blackness of great autumn storms, followed
by dank, wet, streaming nights when there was witch-laughter in the
pines and fitful moans among the mainland trees. What cared they? Old
Tom had built his roof well, and his chimney drew.

“Warm fire—books—comfort—safety from storm—our cats on the rug.
Moonlight,” said Barney, “would you be any happier now if you had a
million dollars?”

“No—nor half so happy. I’d be bored by conventions and obligations
then.”

December. Early snows and Orion. The pale fires of the Milky Way. It
was really winter now—wonderful, cold, starry winter. How Valancy had
always hated winter! Dull, brief, uneventful days. Long, cold,
companionless nights. Cousin Stickles with her back that had to be
rubbed continually. Cousin Stickles making weird noises gargling her
throat in the mornings. Cousin Stickles whining over the price of coal.
Her mother, probing, questioning, ignoring. Endless colds and
bronchitis—or the dread of it. Redfern’s Liniment and Purple Pills.

But now she loved winter. Winter was beautiful “up back”—almost
intolerably beautiful. Days of clear brilliance. Evenings that were
like cups of glamour—the purest vintage of winter’s wine. Nights with
their fire of stars. Cold, exquisite winter sunrises. Lovely ferns of
ice all over the windows of the Blue Castle. Moonlight on birches in a
silver thaw. Ragged shadows on windy evenings—torn, twisted, fantastic
shadows. Great silences, austere and searching. Jewelled, barbaric
hills. The sun suddenly breaking through grey clouds over long, white
Mistawis. Icy-grey twilights, broken by snow-squalls, when their cosy
living-room, with its goblins of firelight and inscrutable cats seemed
cosier than ever. Every hour brought a new revelation and wonder.

Barney ran Lady Jane into Roaring Abel’s barn and taught Valancy how to
snowshoe—Valancy, who ought to be laid up with bronchitis. But Valancy
had not even a cold. Later on in the winter Barney had a terrible one
and Valancy nursed him through it with a dread of pneumonia in her
heart. But Valancy’s colds seemed to have gone where old moons go.
Which was luck—for she hadn’t even Redfern’s Liniment. She had
thoughtfully bought a bottle at the Port and Barney had hurled it into
frozen Mistawis with a scowl.

“Bring no more of that devilish stuff here,” he had ordered briefly. It
was the first and last time he had spoken harshly to her.

They went for long tramps through the exquisite reticence of winter
woods and the silver jungles of frosted trees, and found loveliness
everywhere.

At times they seemed to be walking through a spellbound world of
crystal and pearl, so white and radiant were clearings and lakes and
sky. The air was so crisp and clear that it was half intoxicating.

Once they stood in a hesitation of ecstasy at the entrance of a narrow
path between ranks of birches. Every twig and spray was outlined in
snow. The undergrowth along its sides was a little fairy forest cut out
of marble. The shadows cast by the pale sunshine were fine and
spiritual.

“Come away,” said Barney, turning. “We must not commit the desecration
of tramping through there.”

One evening they came upon a snowdrift far back in an old clearing
which was in the exact likeness of a beautiful woman’s profile. Seen
too close by, the resemblance was lost, as in the fairy-tale of the
Castle of St. John. Seen from behind, it was a shapeless oddity. But at
just the right distance and angle the outline was so perfect that when
they came suddenly upon it, gleaming out against the dark background of
spruce in the glow of that winter sunset they both exclaimed in
amazement. There was a low, noble brow, a straight, classic nose, lips
and chin and cheek-curve modelled as if some goddess of old time had
sat to the sculptor, and a breast of such cold, swelling purity as the
very spirit of the winter woods might display.

“‘All the beauty that old Greece and Rome, sung painted, taught,’”
quoted Barney.

“And to think no human eyes save ours have seen or will see it,”
breathed Valancy, who felt at times as if she were living in a book by
John Foster. As she looked around her she recalled some passages she
had marked in the new Foster book Barney had brought her from the
Port—with an adjuration not to expect _him_ to read or listen to it.

“‘All the tintings of winter woods are extremely delicate and
elusive,’” recalled Valancy. “‘When the brief afternoon wanes and the
sun just touches the tops of the hills, there seems to be all over the
woods an abundance, not of colour, but of the spirit of colour. There
is really nothing but pure white after all, but one has the impression
of fairy-like blendings of rose and violet, opal and heliotrope on the
slopes—in the dingles and along the curves of the forest-land. You feel
sure the tint is there, but when you look at it directly it is gone.
From the corner of your eye you are aware that it is lurking over
yonder in a spot where there was nothing but pale purity a moment ago.
Only just when the sun is setting is there a fleeting moment of real
colour. Then the redness streams out over the snow and incarnadines the
hills and rivers and smites the crest of the pines with flame. Just a
few minutes of transfiguration and revelation—and it is gone.’

“I wonder if John Foster ever spent a winter in Mistawis,” said
Valancy.

“Not likely,” scoffed Barney. “People who write tosh like that
generally write it in a warm house on some smug city street.”

“You are too hard on John Foster,” said Valancy severely. “No one could
have written that little paragraph I read you last night without having
seen it first—you know he couldn’t.”

“I didn’t listen to it,” said Barney morosely. “You know I told you I
wouldn’t.”

“Then you’ve got to listen to it now,” persisted Valancy. She made him
stand still on his snowshoes while she repeated it.

“‘She is a rare artist, this old Mother Nature, who works “for the joy
of working” and not in any spirit of vain show. Today the fir woods are
a symphony of greens and greys, so subtle that you cannot tell where
one shade begins to be the other. Grey trunk, green bough, grey-green
moss above the white, grey-shadowed floor. Yet the old gypsy doesn’t
like unrelieved monotones. She must have a dash of colour. See it. A
broken dead fir bough, of a beautiful red-brown, swinging among the
beards of moss.’”

“Good Lord, do you learn all that fellow’s books by heart?” was
Barney’s disgusted reaction as he strode off.

“John Foster’s books were all that saved my soul alive the past five
years,” averred Valancy. “Oh, Barney, look at that exquisite filigree
of snow in the furrows of that old elm-tree trunk.”

When they came out to the lake they changed from snowshoes to skates
and skated home. For a wonder Valancy had learned, when she was a
little schoolgirl, to skate on the pond behind the Deerwood school. She
never had any skates of her own, but some of the other girls had lent
her theirs and she seemed to have a natural knack of it. Uncle Benjamin
had once promised her a pair of skates for Christmas, but when
Christmas came he had given her rubbers instead. She had never skated
since she grew up, but the old trick came back quickly, and glorious
were the hours she and Barney spent skimming over the white lakes and
past the dark islands where the summer cottages were closed and silent.
Tonight they flew down Mistawis before the wind, in an exhilaration
that crimsoned Valancy’s cheeks under her white tam. And at the end was
her dear little house, on the island of pines, with a coating of snow
on its roof, sparkling in the moonlight. Its windows glinted impishly
at her in the stay gleams.

“Looks exactly like a picture-book, doesn’t it?” said Barney.

They had a lovely Christmas. No rush. No scramble. No niggling attempts
to make ends meet. No wild effort to remember whether she hadn’t given
the same kind of present to the same person two Christmases before—no
mob of last-minute shoppers—no dreary family “reunions” where she sat
mute and unimportant—no attacks of “nerves.” They decorated the Blue
Castle with pine boughs, and Valancy made delightful little tinsel
stars and hung them up amid the greenery. She cooked a dinner to which
Barney did full justice, while Good Luck and Banjo picked the bones.

“A land that can produce a goose like that is an admirable land,” vowed
Barney. “Canada forever!” And they drank to the Union Jack a bottle of
dandelion wine that Cousin Georgiana had given Valancy along with the
bedspread.

“One never knows,” Cousin Georgiana had said solemnly, “when one may
need a little stimulant.”

Barney had asked Valancy what she wanted for a Christmas present.

“Something frivolous and unnecessary,” said Valancy, who had got a pair
of goloshes last Christmas and two long-sleeved, woolen undervests the
year before. And so on back.

To her delight, Barney gave her a necklace of pearl beads. Valancy had
wanted a string of milky pearl beads—like congealed moonshine—all her
life. And these were so pretty. All that worried her was that they were
really too good. They must have cost a great deal—fifteen dollars, at
least. Could Barney afford that? She didn’t know a thing about his
finances. She had refused to let him buy any of her clothes—she had
enough for that, she told him, as long as she would need clothes. In a
round, black jar on the chimney-piece Barney put money for their
household expenses—always enough. The jar was never empty, though
Valancy never caught him replenishing it. He couldn’t have much, of
course, and that necklace—but Valancy tossed care aside. She would wear
it and enjoy it. It was the first pretty thing she had ever had.




CHAPTER XXXII


New Year. The old, shabby, inglorious outlived calendar came down. The
new one went up. January was a month of storms. It snowed for three
weeks on end. The thermometer went miles below zero and stayed there.
But, as Barney and Valancy pointed out to each other, there were no
mosquitoes. And the roar and crackle of their big fire drowned the
howls of the north wind. Good Luck and Banjo waxed fat and developed
resplendent coats of thick, silky fur. Nip and Tuck had gone.

“But they’ll come back in spring,” promised Barney.

There was no monotony. Sometimes they had dramatic little private spats
that never even thought of becoming quarrels. Sometimes Roaring Abel
dropped in—for an evening or a whole day—with his old tartan cap and
his long red beard coated with snow. He generally brought his fiddle
and played for them, to the delight of all except Banjo, who would go
temporarily insane and retreat under Valancy’s bed. Sometimes Abel and
Barney talked while Valancy made candy for them; sometimes they sat and
smoked in silence _à la_ Tennyson and Carlyle, until the Blue Castle
reeked and Valancy fled to the open. Sometimes they played checkers
fiercely and silently the whole night through. Sometimes they all ate
the russet apples Abel had brought, while the jolly old clock ticked
the delightful minutes away.

“A plate of apples, an open fire, and ‘a jolly goode booke whereon to
looke’ are a fair substitute for heaven,” vowed Barney. “Any one can
have the streets of gold. Let’s have another whack at Carman.”

It was easier now for the Stirlings to believe Valancy of the dead. Not
even dim rumours of her having been over at the Port came to trouble
them, though she and Barney used to skate there occasionally to see a
movie and eat hot dogs shamelessly at the corner stand afterwards.
Presumably none of the Stirlings ever thought about her—except Cousin
Georgiana, who used to lie awake worrying about poor Doss. Did she have
enough to eat? Was that dreadful creature good to her? Was she warm
enough at nights?

Valancy was quite warm at nights. She used to wake up and revel
silently in the cosiness of those winter nights on that little island
in the frozen lake. The nights of other winters had been so cold and
long. Valancy hated to wake up in them and think about the bleakness
and emptiness of the day that had passed and the bleakness and
emptiness of the day that would come. Now, she almost counted that
night lost on which she didn’t wake up and lie awake for half an hour
just being happy, while Barney’s regular breathing went on beside her,
and through the open door the smouldering brands in the fireplace
winked at her in the gloom. It was very nice to feel a little Lucky cat
jump up on your bed in the darkness and snuggle down at your feet,
purring; but Banjo would be sitting dourly by himself out in front of
the fire like a brooding demon. At such moments Banjo was anything but
canny, but Valancy loved his uncanniness.

The side of the bed had to be right against the window. There was no
other place for it in the tiny room. Valancy, lying there, could look
out of the window, through the big pine boughs that actually touched
it, away up Mistawis, white and lustrous as a pavement of pearl, or
dark and terrible in the storm. Sometimes the pine boughs tapped
against the panes with friendly signals. Sometimes she heard the little
hissing whisper of snow against them right at her side. Some nights the
whole outer world seemed given over to the empery of silence; then came
nights when there would be a majestic sweep of wind in the pines;
nights of dear starlight when it whistled freakishly and joyously
around the Blue Castle; brooding nights before storm when it crept
along the floor of the lake with a low, wailing cry of boding and
mystery. Valancy wasted many perfectly good sleeping hours in these
delightful communings. But she could sleep as long in the morning as
she wanted to. Nobody cared. Barney cooked his own breakfast of bacon
and eggs and then shut himself up in Bluebeard’s Chamber till supper
time. Then they had an evening of reading and talk. They talked about
everything in this world and a good many things in other worlds. They
laughed over their own jokes until the Blue Castles re-echoed.

“You _do_ laugh beautifully,” Barney told her once. “It makes me want
to laugh just to hear you laugh. There’s a trick about your laugh—as if
there were so much more fun back of it that you wouldn’t let out. Did
you laugh like that before you came to Mistawis, Moonlight?”

“I never laughed at all—really. I used to giggle foolishly when I felt
I was expected to. But now—the laugh just comes.”

It struck Valancy more than once that Barney himself laughed a great
deal oftener than he used to and that his laugh had changed. It had
become wholesome. She rarely heard the little cynical note in it now.
Could a man laugh like that who had crimes on his conscience? Yet
Barney _must_ have done something. Valancy had indifferently made up
her mind as to what he had done. She concluded he was a defaulting bank
cashier. She had found in one of Barney’s books an old clipping cut
from a Montreal paper in which a vanished, defaulting cashier was
described. The description applied to Barney—as well as to half a dozen
other men Valancy knew—and from some casual remarks he had dropped from
time to time she concluded he knew Montreal rather well. Valancy had it
all figured out in the back of her mind. Barney had been in a bank. He
was tempted to take some money to speculate—meaning, of course, to put
it back. He had got in deeper and deeper, until he found there was
nothing for it but flight. It had happened so to scores of men. He had,
Valancy was absolutely certain, never meant to do wrong. Of course, the
name of the man in the clipping was Bernard Craig. But Valancy had
always thought Snaith was an alias. Not that it mattered.

Valancy had only one unhappy night that winter. It came in late March
when most of the snow had gone and Nip and Tuck had returned. Barney
had gone off in the afternoon for a long, woodland tramp, saying he
would be back by dark if all went well. Soon after he had gone it had
begun to snow. The wind rose and presently Mistawis was in the grip of
one of the worst storms of the winter. It tore up the lake and struck
at the little house. The dark angry woods on the mainland scowled at
Valancy, menace in the toss of their boughs, threats in their windy
gloom, terror in the roar of their hearts. The trees on the island
crouched in fear. Valancy spent the night huddled on the rug before the
fire, her face buried in her hands, when she was not vainly peering
from the oriel in a futile effort to see through the furious smoke of
wind and snow that had once been blue-dimpled Mistawis. Where was
Barney? Lost on the merciless lakes? Sinking exhausted in the drifts of
the pathless woods? Valancy died a hundred deaths that night and paid
in full for all the happiness of her Blue Castle. When morning came the
storm broke and cleared; the sun shone gloriously over Mistawis; and at
noon Barney came home. Valancy saw him from the oriel as he came around
a wooded point, slender and black against the glistening white world.
She did not run to meet him. Something happened to her knees and she
dropped down on Banjo’s chair. Luckily Banjo got out from under in
time, his whiskers bristling with indignation. Barney found her there,
her head buried in her hands.

“Barney, I thought you were dead,” she whispered.

Barney hooted.

“After two years of the Klondike did you think a baby storm like this
could get me? I spent the night in that old lumber shanty over by
Muskoka. A bit cold but snug enough. Little goose! Your eyes look like
burnt holes in a blanket. Did you sit up here all night worrying over
an old woodsman like me?”

“Yes,” said Valancy. “I—couldn’t help it. The storm seemed so wild.
Anybody might have been lost in it. When—I saw you—come round the
point—there—something happened to me. I don’t know what. It was as if I
had died and come back to life. I can’t describe it any other way.”




CHAPTER XXXIII


Spring. Mistawis black and sullen for a week or two, then flaming in
sapphire and turquoise, lilac and rose again, laughing through the
oriel, caressing its amethyst islands, rippling under winds soft as
silk. Frogs, little green wizards of swamp and pool, singing everywhere
in the long twilights and long into the nights; islands fairy-like in a
green haze; the evanescent beauty of wild young trees in early leaf;
frost-like loveliness of the new foliage of juniper-trees; the woods
putting on a fashion of spring flowers, dainty, spiritual things akin
to the soul of the wilderness; red mist on the maples; willows decked
out with glossy silver pussies; all the forgotten violets of Mistawis
blooming again; lure of April moons.

“Think how many thousands of springs have been here on Mistawis—and all
of them beautiful,” said Valancy. “Oh, Barney, look at that wild plum!
I will—I must quote from John Foster. There’s a passage in one of his
books—I’ve re-read it a hundred times. He must have written it before a
tree just like that:

“‘Behold the young wild plum-tree which has adorned herself after
immemorial fashion in a wedding-veil of fine lace. The fingers of wood
pixies must have woven it, for nothing like it ever came from an
earthly loom. I vow the tree is conscious of its loveliness. It is
bridling before our very eyes—as if its beauty were not the most
ephemeral thing in the woods, as it is the rarest and most exceeding,
for today it is and tomorrow it is not. Every south wind purring
through the boughs will winnow away a shower of slender petals. But
what matter? Today it is queen of the wild places and it is always
today in the woods.’”

“I’m sure you feel much better since you’ve got that out of your
system,” said Barney heartlessly.

“Here’s a patch of dandelions,” said Valancy, unsubdued. “Dandelions
shouldn’t grow in the woods, though. They haven’t any sense of the
fitness of things at all. They are too cheerful and self-satisfied.
They haven’t any of the mystery and reserve of the real wood-flowers.”

“In short, they’ve no secrets,” said Barney. “But wait a bit. The woods
will have their own way even with those obvious dandelions. In a little
while all that obtrusive yellowness and complacency will be gone and
we’ll find here misty, phantom-like globes hovering over those long
grasses in full harmony with the traditions of the forest.”

“That sounds John Fosterish,” teased Valancy.

“What have I done that deserved a slam like that?” complained Barney.

One of the earliest signs of spring was the renaissance of Lady Jane.
Barney put her on roads that no other car would look at, and they went
through Deerwood in mud to the axles. They passed several Stirlings,
who groaned and reflected that now spring was come they would encounter
that shameless pair everywhere. Valancy, prowling about Deerwood shops,
met Uncle Benjamin on the street; but he did not realise until he had
gone two blocks further on that the girl in the scarlet-collared
blanket coat, with cheeks reddened in the sharp April air and the
fringe of black hair over laughing, slanted eyes, was Valancy. When he
did realise it, Uncle Benjamin was indignant. What business had Valancy
to look like—like—like a young girl? The way of the transgressor was
hard. Had to be. Scriptural and proper. Yet Valancy’s path couldn’t be
hard. She wouldn’t look like that if it were. There was something
wrong. It was almost enough to make a man turn modernist.

Barney and Valancy clanged on to the Port, so that it was dark when
they went through Deerwood again. At her old home Valancy, seized with
a sudden impulse, got out, opened the little gate and tiptoed around to
the sitting-room window. There sat her mother and Cousin Stickles
drearily, grimly knitting. Baffling and inhuman as ever. If they had
looked the least bit lonesome Valancy would have gone in. But they did
not. Valancy would not disturb them for worlds.




CHAPTER XXXIV


Valancy had two wonderful moments that spring.

One day, coming home through the woods, with her arms full of trailing
arbutus and creeping spruce, she met a man who she knew must be Allan
Tierney. Allan Tierney, the celebrated painter of beautiful women. He
lived in New York in winter, but he owned an island cottage at the
northern end of Mistawis to which he always came the minute the ice was
out of the lake. He was reputed to be a lonely, eccentric man. He never
flattered his sitters. There was no need to, for he would not paint any
one who required flattery. To be painted by Allan Tierney was all the
_cachet_ of beauty a woman could desire. Valancy had heard so much
about him that she couldn’t help turning her head back over her
shoulder for another shy, curious look at him. A shaft of pale spring
sunlight fell through a great pine athwart her bare black head and her
slanted eyes. She wore a pale green sweater and had bound a fillet of
linnæa vine about her hair. The feathery fountain of trailing spruce
overflowed her arms and fell around her. Allan Tierney’s eyes lighted
up.

“I’ve had a caller,” said Barney the next afternoon, when Valancy had
returned from another flower quest.

“Who?” Valancy was surprised but indifferent. She began filling a
basket with arbutus.

“Allan Tierney. He wants to paint you, Moonlight.”

“Me!” Valancy dropped her basket and her arbutus. “You’re laughing at
me, Barney.”

“I’m not. That’s what Tierney came for. To ask my permission to paint
my wife—as the Spirit of Muskoka, or something like that.”

“But—but—” stammered Valancy, “Allan Tierney never paints any but—any
but——”

“Beautiful women,” finished Barney. “Conceded. Q. E. D., Mistress
Barney Snaith is a beautiful woman.”

“Nonsense,” said Valancy, stooping to retrieve her arbutus. “You _know_
that’s nonsense, Barney. I know I’m a heap better-looking than I was a
year ago, but I’m not beautiful.”

“Allan Tierney never makes a mistake,” said Barney. “You forget,
Moonlight, that there are different kinds of beauty. Your imagination
is obsessed by the very obvious type of your cousin Olive. Oh, I’ve
seen her—she’s a stunner—but you’d never catch Allan Tierney wanting to
paint her. In the horrible but expressive slang phrase, she keeps all
her goods in the shop-window. But in your subconscious mind you have a
conviction that nobody can be beautiful who doesn’t look like Olive.
Also, you remember your face as it was in the days when your soul was
not allowed to shine through it. Tierney said something about the curve
of your cheek as you looked back over your shoulder. You know I’ve
often told you it was distracting. And he’s quite batty about your
eyes. If I wasn’t absolutely sure it was solely professional—he’s
really a crabbed old bachelor, you know—I’d be jealous.”

“Well, I don’t want to be painted,” said Valancy. “I hope you told him
that.”

“I couldn’t tell him that. I didn’t know what _you_ wanted. But I told
him _I_ didn’t want my wife painted—hung up in a salon for the mob to
stare at. Belonging to another man. For of course I couldn’t buy the
picture. So even if you had wanted to be painted, Moonlight, your
tyrannous husband would not have permitted it. Tierney was a bit
squiffy. He isn’t used to being turned down like that. His requests are
almost like royalty’s.”

“But we are outlaws,” laughed Valancy. “We bow to no decrees—we
acknowledge no sovereignty.”

In her heart she thought unashamedly:

“I wish Olive could know that Allan Tierney wanted to paint me. _Me_!
Little-old-maid-Valancy-Stirling-that-was.”

Her second wonder-moment came one evening in May. She realised that
Barney actually liked her. She had always hoped he did, but sometimes
she had a little, disagreeable, haunting dread that he was just kind
and nice and chummy out of pity; knowing that she hadn’t long to live
and determined she should have a good time as long as she did live; but
away back in his mind rather looking forward to freedom again, with no
intrusive woman creature in his island fastness and no chattering thing
beside him in his woodland prowls. She knew he could never love her.
She did not even want him to. If he loved her he would be unhappy when
she died—Valancy never flinched from the plain word. No “passing away”
for her. And she did not want him to be the least unhappy. But neither
did she want him to be glad—or relieved. She wanted him to like her and
miss her as a good chum. But she had never been sure until this night
that he did.

They had walked over the hills in the sunset. They had the delight of
discovering a virgin spring in a ferny hollow and had drunk together
from it out of a birch-bark cup; they had come to an old tumble-down
rail fence and sat on it for a long time. They didn’t talk much, but
Valancy had a curious sense of _oneness_. She knew that she couldn’t
have felt that if he hadn’t liked her.

“You nice little thing,” said Barney suddenly. “Oh, you nice little
thing! Sometimes I feel you’re too nice to be real—that I’m just
dreaming you.”

“Why can’t I die now—this very minute—when I am so happy!” thought
Valancy.

Well, it couldn’t be so very long now. Somehow, Valancy had always felt
she would live out the year Dr. Trent had allotted. She had not been
careful—she had never tried to be. But, somehow, she had always counted
on living out her year. She had not let herself think about it at all.
But now, sitting here beside Barney, with her hand in his, a sudden
realisation came to her. She had not had a heart attack for a long
while—two months at least. The last one she had had was two or three
nights before Barney was out in the storm. Since then she had not
remembered she had a heart. Well, no doubt, it betokened the nearness
of the end. Nature had given up the struggle. There would be no more
pain.

“I’m afraid heaven will be very dull after this past year,” thought
Valancy. “But perhaps one will not remember. Would that be—nice? No,
no. I don’t want to forget Barney. I’d rather be miserable in heaven
remembering him than happy forgetting him. And I’ll always remember
through all eternity—that he really, _really_ liked me.”




CHAPTER XXXV


Thirty seconds can be very long sometimes. Long enough to work a
miracle or a revolution. In thirty seconds life changed wholly for
Barney and Valancy Snaith.

They had gone around the lake one June evening in their disappearing
propeller, fished for an hour in a little creek, left their boat there,
and walked up through the woods to Port Lawrence two miles away.
Valancy prowled a bit in the shops and got herself a new pair of
sensible shoes. Her old pair had suddenly and completely given out, and
this evening she had been compelled to put on the little fancy pair of
patent-leather with rather high, slender heels, which she had bought in
a fit of folly one day in the winter because of their beauty and
because she wanted to make one foolish, extravagant purchase in her
life. She sometimes put them on of an evening in the Blue Castle, but
this was the first time she had worn them outside. She had not found it
any too easy walking up through the woods in them, and Barney guyed her
unmercifully about them. But in spite of the inconvenience, Valancy
secretly rather liked the look of her trim ankles and high instep above
those pretty, foolish shoes and did not change them in the shop as she
might have done.

The sun was hanging low above the pines when they left Port Lawrence.
To the north of it the woods closed around the town quite suddenly.
Valancy always had a sense of stepping from one world to another—from
reality to fairyland—when she went out of Port Lawrence and in a
twinkling found it shut off behind her by the armies of the pines.

A mile and a half from Port Lawrence there was a small railroad station
with a little station-house which at this hour of the day was deserted,
since no local train was due. Not a soul was in sight when Barney and
Valancy emerged from the woods. Off to the left a sudden curve in the
track hid it from view, but over the tree-tops beyond, the long plume
of smoke betokened the approach of a through train. The rails were
vibrating to its thunder as Barney stepped across the switch. Valancy
was a few steps behind him, loitering to gather June-bells along the
little, winding path. But there was plenty of time to get across before
the train came. She stepped unconcernedly over the first rail.

She could never tell how it happened. The ensuing thirty seconds always
seemed in her recollection like a chaotic nightmare in which she
endured the agony of a thousand lifetimes.

The heel of her pretty, foolish shoe caught in a crevice of the switch.
She could not pull it loose.

“Barney—Barney!” she called in alarm.

Barney turned—saw her predicament—saw her ashen face—dashed back. He
tried to pull her clear—he tried to wrench her foot from the prisoning
hold. In vain. In a moment the train would sweep around the curve—would
be on them.

“Go—go—quick—you’ll be killed, Barney!” shrieked Valancy, trying to
push him away.

Barney dropped on his knees, ghost-white, frantically tearing at her
shoe-lace. The knot defied his trembling fingers. He snatched a knife
from his pocket and slashed at it. Valancy still strove blindly to push
him away. Her mind was full of the hideous thought that Barney was
going to be killed. She had no thought for her own danger.

“Barney—go—go—for God’s sake—go!”

“Never!” muttered Barney between his set teeth. He gave one mad wrench
at the lace. As the train thundered around the curve he sprang up and
caught Valancy—dragging her clear, leaving the shoe behind her. The
wind from the train as it swept by turned to icy cold the streaming
perspiration on his face.

“Thank God!” he breathed.

For a moment they stood stupidly staring at each other, two white,
shaken, wild-eyed creatures. Then they stumbled over to the little seat
at the end of the station-house and dropped on it. Barney buried his
face in his hands and said not a word. Valancy sat, staring straight
ahead of her with unseeing eyes at the great pine woods, the stumps of
the clearing, the long, gleaming rails. There was only one thought in
her dazed mind—a thought that seemed to burn it as a shaving of fire
might burn her body.

Dr. Trent had told her over a year ago that she had a serious form of
heart-disease—that any excitement might be fatal.

If that were so, why was she not dead now? This very minute? She had
just experienced as much and as terrible excitement as most people
experience in a lifetime, crowded into that endless thirty seconds. Yet
she had not died of it. She was not an iota the worse for it. A little
wobbly at the knees, as any one would have been; a quicker heart-beat,
as any one would have; nothing more.

Why!

_Was it possible Dr. Trent had made a mistake?_

Valancy shivered as if a cold wind had suddenly chilled her to the
soul. She looked at Barney, hunched up beside her. His silence was very
eloquent. Had the same thought occurred to him? Did he suddenly find
himself confronted by the appalling suspicion that he was married, not
for a few months or a year, but for good and all to a woman he did not
love and who had foisted herself upon him by some trick or lie? Valancy
turned sick before the horror of it. It could not be. It would be too
cruel—too devilish. Dr. Trent _couldn’t_ have made a mistake.
Impossible. He was one of the best heart specialists in Ontario. She
was foolish—unnerved by the recent horror. She remembered some of the
hideous spasms of pain she had had. There must be something serious the
matter with her heart to account for them.

But she had not had any for nearly three months.

Why?

Presently Barney bestirred himself. He stood up, without looking at
Valancy, and said casually:

“I suppose we’d better be hiking back. Sun’s getting low. Are you good
for the rest of the road?”

“I think so,” said Valancy miserably.

Barney went across the clearing and picked up the parcel he had
dropped—the parcel containing her new shoes. He brought it to her and
let her take out the shoes and put them on without any assistance,
while he stood with his back to her and looked out over the pines.

They walked in silence down the shadowy trail to the lake. In silence
Barney steered his boat into the sunset miracle that was Mistawis. In
silence they went around feathery headlands and across coral bays and
silver rivers where canoes were slipping up and down in the afterglow.
In silence they went past cottages echoing with music and laughter. In
silence drew up at the landing-place below the Blue Castle.

Valancy went up the rock steps and into the house. She dropped
miserably on the first chair she came to and sat there staring through
the oriel, oblivious of Good Luck’s frantic purrs of joy and Banjo’s
savage glares of protest at her occupancy of his chair.

Barney came in a few minutes later. He did not come near her, but he
stood behind her and asked gently if she felt any the worse for her
experience. Valancy would have given her year of happiness to have been
able honestly to answer “Yes.”

“No,” she said flatly.

Barney went into Bluebeard’s Chamber and shut the door. She heard him
pacing up and down—up and down. He had never paced like that before.

And an hour ago—only an hour ago—she had been so happy!




CHAPTER XXXVI


Finally Valancy went to bed. Before she went she re-read Dr. Trent’s
letter. It comforted her a little. So positive. So assured. The writing
so black and steady. Not the writing of a man who didn’t know what he
was writing about. But she could not sleep. She pretended to be asleep
when Barney came in. Barney pretended to go to sleep. But Valancy knew
perfectly well he wasn’t sleeping any more than she was. She knew he
was lying there, staring through the darkness. Thinking of what? Trying
to face—what?

Valancy, who had spent so many happy wakeful hours of night lying by
that window, now paid the price of them all in this one night of
misery. A horrible, portentous fact was slowly looming out before her
from the nebula of surmise and fear. She could not shut her eyes to
it—push it away—ignore it.

There could be nothing seriously wrong with her heart, no matter what
Dr. Trent had said. If there had been, those thirty seconds would have
killed her. It was no use to recall Dr. Trent’s letter and reputation.
The greatest specialists made mistakes sometimes. Dr. Trent had made
one.

Towards morning Valancy fell into a fitful dose with ridiculous dreams.
One of them was of Barney taunting her with having tricked him. In her
dream she lost her temper and struck him violently on the head with her
rolling-pin. He proved to be made of glass and shivered into splinters
all over the floor. She woke with a cry of horror—a gasp of relief—a
short laugh over the absurdity of her dream—a miserable sickening
recollection of what had happened.

Barney was gone. Valancy knew, as people sometimes know
things—inescapably, without being told—that he was not in the house or
in Bluebeard’s Chamber either. There was a curious silence in the
living-room. A silence with something uncanny about it. The old clock
had stopped. Barney must have forgotten to wind it up, something he had
never done before. The room without it was dead, though the sunshine
streamed in through the oriel and dimples of light from the dancing
waves beyond quivered over the walls.

The canoe was gone but Lady Jane was under the mainland trees. So
Barney had betaken himself to the wilds. He would not return till
night—perhaps not even then. He must be angry with her. That furious
silence of his must mean anger—cold, deep, justifiable resentment.
Well, Valancy knew what she must do first. She was not suffering very
keenly now. Yet the curious numbness that pervaded her being was in a
way worse than pain. It was as if something in her had died. She forced
herself to cook and eat a little breakfast. Mechanically she put the
Blue Castle in perfect order. Then she put on her hat and coat, locked
the door and hid the key in the hollow of the old pine and crossed to
the mainland in the motor boat. She was going into Deerwood to see Dr.
Trent. She must _know_.




CHAPTER XXXVII


Dr. Trent looked at her blankly and fumbled among his recollections.

“Er—Miss—Miss—”

“Mrs. Snaith,” said Valancy quietly. “I was Miss Valancy Stirling when
I came to you last May—over a year ago. I wanted to consult you about
my heart.”

Dr. Trent’s face cleared.

“Oh, of course. I remember now. I’m really not to blame for not knowing
you. You’ve changed—splendidly. And married. Well, well, it has agreed
with you. You don’t look much like an invalid now, hey? I remember that
day. I was badly upset. Hearing about poor Ned bowled me over. But
Ned’s as good as new and you, too, evidently. I told you so, you
know—told you there was nothing to worry over.”

Valancy looked at him.

“You told me, in your letter,” she said slowly, with a curious feeling
that some one else was talking through her lips, “that I had angina
pectoris—in the last stages—complicated with an aneurism. That I might
die any minute—that I couldn’t live longer than a year.”

Dr. Trent stared at her.

“Impossible!” he said blankly. “I couldn’t have told you that!”

Valancy took his letter from her bag and handed it to him.

“Miss Valancy Stirling,” he read. “Yes—yes. Of course I wrote you—on
the train—that night. But I _told_ you there was nothing serious——”

“Read your letter,” insisted Valancy.

Dr. Trent took it out—unfolded it—glanced over it. A dismayed look came
into his face. He jumped to his feet and strode agitatedly about the
room.

“Good heavens! This is the letter I meant for old Miss Jane Sterling.
From Port Lawrence. She was here that day, too. I sent you the wrong
letter. What unpardonable carelessness! But I was beside myself that
night. My God, and you believed that—you believed—but you didn’t—you
went to another doctor——”

Valancy stood up, turned round, looked foolishly about her and sat down
again.

“I believed it,” she said faintly. “I didn’t go to any other doctor.
I—I—it would take too long to explain. But I believed I was going to
die soon.”

Dr. Trent halted before her.

“I can never forgive myself. What a year you must have had! But you
don’t look—I can’t understand!”

“Never mind,” said Valancy dully. “And so there’s nothing the matter
with my heart?”

“Well, nothing serious. You had what is called pseudo-angina. It’s
never fatal—passes away completely with proper treatment. Or sometimes
with a shock of joy. Have you been troubled much with it?”

“Not at all since March,” answered Valancy. She remembered the
marvellous feeling of re-creation she had had when she saw Barney
coming home safe after the storm. Had that “shock of joy” cured her?

“Then likely you’re all right. I told you what to do in the letter you
should have got. _And_ of course I supposed you’d go to another doctor.
Child, why didn’t you?”

“I didn’t want anybody to know.”

“Idiot,” said Dr. Trent bluntly. “I can’t understand such folly. And
poor old Miss Sterling. She must have got your letter—telling her there
was nothing serious the matter. Well, well, it couldn’t have made any
difference. Her case was hopeless. Nothing that she could have done or
left undone could have made any difference. I was surprised she lived
as long as she did—two months. She was here that day—not long before
you. I hated to tell her the truth. You think I’m a blunt old
curmudgeon—and my letters _are_ blunt enough. I can’t soften things.
But I’m a snivelling coward when it comes to telling a woman face to
face that she’s got to die soon. I told her I’d look up some features
of the case I wasn’t quite sure of and let her know next day. But you
got her letter—look here, ‘Dear Miss S-t-_e_-r-l-i-n-g.’”

“Yes. I noticed that. But I thought it a mistake. I didn’t know there
were any Sterlings in Port Lawrence.”

“She was the only one. A lonely old soul. Lived by herself with only a
little home girl. She died two months after she was here—died in her
sleep. My mistake couldn’t have made any difference to her. But you! I
can’t forgive myself for inflicting a year’s misery on you. It’s time I
retired, all right, when I do things like that—even if my son was
supposed to be fatally injured. Can you ever forgive me?”

A year of misery! Valancy smiled a tortured smile as she thought of all
the happiness Dr. Trent’s mistake had bought her. But she was paying
for it now—oh, she was paying. If to feel was to live she was living
with a vengeance.

She let Dr. Trent examine her and answered all his questions. When he
told her she was fit as a fiddle and would probably live to be a
hundred, she got up and went away silently. She knew that there were a
great many horrible things outside waiting to be thought over. Dr.
Trent thought she was odd. Anybody would have thought, from her
hopeless eyes and woebegone face, that he had given her a sentence of
death instead of life. Snaith? Snaith? Who the devil had she married?
He had never heard of Snaiths in Deerwood. And she had been such a
sallow, faded, little old maid. Gad, but marriage _had_ made a
difference in her, anyhow, whoever Snaith was. Snaith? Dr. Trent
remembered. That rapscallion “up back!” Had Valancy Stirling married
_him_? And her clan had let her! Well, probably that solved the
mystery. She had married in haste and repented at leisure, and that was
why she wasn’t overjoyed at learning she was a good insurance prospect,
after all. Married! To God knew whom! Or what! Jail-bird? Defaulter?
Fugitive from justice? It must be pretty bad if she had looked to death
as a release, poor girl. But why were women such fools? Dr. Trent
dismissed Valancy from his mind, though to the day of his death he was
ashamed of putting those letters into the wrong envelopes.




CHAPTER XXXVIII


Valancy walked quickly through the back streets and through Lover’s
Lane. She did not want to meet any one she knew. She didn’t want to
meet even people she didn’t know. She hated to be seen. Her mind was so
confused, so torn, so messy. She felt that her appearance must be the
same. She drew a sobbing breath of relief as she left the village
behind and found herself on the “up back” road. There was little fear
of meeting any one she knew here. The cars that fled by her with
raucous shrieks were filled with strangers. One of them was packed with
young people who whirled past her singing uproariously:

“My wife has the fever, O then,
My wife has the fever, O then,
My wife has the fever,
Oh, I hope it won’t leave her,
For I want to be single again.”


Valancy flinched as if one of them had leaned from the car and cut her
across the face with a whip.

She had made a covenant with death and death had cheated her. Now life
stood mocking her. She had trapped Barney. Trapped him into marrying
her. And divorce was so hard to get in Ontario. So expensive. And
Barney was poor.

With life, fear had come back into her heart. Sickening fear. Fear of
what Barney would think. Would say. Fear of the future that must be
lived without him. Fear of her insulted, repudiated clan.

She had had one draught from a divine cup and now it was dashed from
her lips. With no kind, friendly death to rescue her. She must go on
living and longing for it. Everything was spoiled, smirched, defaced.
Even that year in the Blue Castle. Even her unashamed love for Barney.
It had been beautiful because death waited. Now it was only sordid
because death was gone. How could any one bear an unbearable thing?

She must go back and tell him. Make him believe she had not meant to
trick him—she _must_ make him believe that. She must say good-bye to
her Blue Castle and return to the brick house on Elm Street. Back to
everything she had thought left behind forever. The old bondage—the old
fears. But that did not matter. All that mattered now was that Barney
must somehow be made to believe she had not consciously tricked him.

When Valancy reached the pines by the lake she was brought out of her
daze of pain by a startling sight. There, parked by the side of old,
battered ragged Lady Jane, was another car. A wonderful car. A purple
car. Not a dark, royal purple but a blatant, screaming purple. It shone
like a mirror and its interior plainly indicated the car caste of Vere
de Vere. On the driver’s seat sat a haughty chauffeur in livery. And in
the tonneau sat a man who opened the door and bounced out nimbly as
Valancy came down the path to the landing-place. He stood under the
pines waiting for her and Valancy took in every detail of him.

A stout, short, pudgy man, with a broad, rubicund, good-humoured face—a
clean-shaven face, though an unparalysed little imp at the back of
Valancy’s paralysed mind suggested the thought, “Such a face should
have a fringe of white whisker around it.” Old-fashioned, steel-rimmed
spectacles on prominent blue eyes. A pursey mouth; a little round,
knobby nose. Where—where—where, groped Valancy, had she seen that face
before? It seemed as familiar to her as her own.

The stranger wore a green hat and a light fawn overcoat over a suit of
a loud check pattern. His tie was a brilliant green of lighter shade;
on the plump hand he outstretched to intercept Valancy an enormous
diamond winked at her. But he had a pleasant, fatherly smile, and in
his hearty, unmodulated voice was a ring of something that attracted
her.

“Can you tell me, Miss, if that house yonder belongs to a Mr. Redfern?
And if so, how can I get to it?”

Redfern! A vision of bottles seemed to dance before Valancy’s eyes—long
bottles of bitters—round bottles of hair tonic—square bottles of
liniment—short, corpulent little bottles of purple pills—and all of
them bearing that very prosperous, beaming moon-face and steel-rimmed
spectacles on the label.

Dr. Redfern!

“No,” said Valancy faintly. “No—that house belongs to Mr. Snaith.”

Dr. Redfern nodded.

“Yes, I understand Bernie’s been calling himself Snaith. Well, it’s his
middle name—was his poor mother’s. Bernard Snaith Redfern—that’s him.
And now, Miss, you can tell me how to get over to that island? Nobody
seems to be home there. I’ve done some waving and yelling. Henry,
there, wouldn’t yell. He’s a one-job man. But old Doc Redfern can yell
with the best of them yet, and ain’t above doing it. Raised nothing but
a couple of crows. Guess Bernie’s out for the day.”

“He was away when I left this morning,” said Valancy. “I suppose he
hasn’t come home yet.”

She spoke flatly and tonelessly. This last shock had temporarily bereft
her of whatever little power of reasoning had been left her by Dr.
Trent’s revelation. In the back of her mind the aforesaid little imp
was jeeringly repeating a silly old proverb, “It never rains but it
pours.” But she was not trying to think. What was the use?

Dr. Redfern was gazing at her in perplexity.

“When you left this morning? Do you live—over there?”

He waved his diamond at the Blue Castle.

“Of course,” said Valancy stupidly. “I’m his wife.”

Dr. Redfern took out a yellow silk handkerchief, removed his hat and
mopped his brow. He was very bald, and Valancy’s imp whispered, “Why be
bald? Why lose your manly beauty? Try Redfern’s Hair Vigor. It keeps
you young.”

“Excuse me,” said Dr. Redfern. “This is a bit of a shock.”

“Shocks seem to be in the air this morning.” The imp said this out loud
before Valancy could prevent it.

“I didn’t know Bernie was—married. I didn’t think he _would_ have got
married without telling his old dad.”

Were Dr. Redfern’s eyes misty? Amid her own dull ache of misery and
fear and dread, Valancy felt a pang of pity for him.

“Don’t blame him,” she said hurriedly. “It—it wasn’t his fault. It—was
all my doing.”

“You didn’t ask him to marry you, I suppose,” twinkled Dr. Redfern. “He
might have let me know. I’d have got acquainted with my daughter-in-law
before this if he had. But I’m glad to meet you now, my dear—very glad.
You look like a sensible young woman. I used to sorter fear Barney’d
pick out some pretty bit of fluff just because she was good-looking.
They were all after him, of course. Wanted his money? Eh? Didn’t like
the pills and the bitters but liked the dollars. Eh? Wanted to dip
their pretty little fingers in old Doc’s millions. Eh?”

“Millions!” said Valancy faintly. She wished she could sit down
somewhere—she wished she could have a chance to think—she wished she
and the Blue Castle could sink to the bottom of Mistawis and vanish
from human sight forevermore.

“Millions,” said Dr. Redfern complacently. “And Bernie chucks them
for—that.” Again he shook the diamond contemptuously at the Blue
Castle. “Wouldn’t you think he’d have more sense? And all on account of
a white bit of a girl. He must have got over _that_ feeling, anyhow,
since he’s married. You must persuade him to come back to civilisation.
All nonsense wasting his life like this. Ain’t you going to take me
over to your house, my dear? I suppose you’ve some way of getting
there.”

“Of course,” said Valancy stupidly. She led the way down to the little
cove where the disappearing propeller boat was snuggled.

“Does your—your man want to come, too?”

“Who? Henry. Not he. Look at him sitting there disapproving.
Disapproves of the whole expedition. The trail up from the road nearly
gave him a conniption. Well, it _was_ a devilish road to put a car on.
Whose old bus is that up there?”

“Barney’s.”

“Good Lord! Does Bernie Redfern ride in a thing like that? It looks
like the great-great-grand-mother of all the Fords.”

“It isn’t a Ford. It’s a Grey Slosson,” said Valancy spiritedly. For
some occult reason, Dr. Redfern’s good-humoured ridicule of dear old
Lady Jane stung her to life. A life that was all pain but still _life_.
Better than the horrible half-dead-and-half-aliveness of the past few
minutes—or years. She waved Dr. Redfern curtly into the boat and took
him over to the Blue Castle. The key was still in the old pine—the
house still silent and deserted. Valancy took the doctor through the
living-room to the western verandah. She must at least be out where
there was air. It was still sunny, but in the southwest a great
thundercloud, with white crests and gorges of purple shadow, was slowly
rising over Mistawis. The doctor dropped with a gasp on a rustic chair
and mopped his brow again.

“Warm, eh? Lord, what a view! Wonder if it would soften Henry if he
could see it.”

“Have you had dinner?” asked Valancy.

“Yes, my dear—had it before we left Port Lawrence. Didn’t know what
sort of wild hermit’s hollow we were coming to, you see. Hadn’t any
idea I was going to find a nice little daughter-in-law here all ready
to toss me up a meal. Cats, eh? Puss, puss! See that. Cats love me.
Bernie was always fond of cats! It’s about the only thing he took from
me. He’s his poor mother’s boy.”

Valancy had been thinking idly that Barney must resemble his mother.
She had remained standing by the steps, but Dr. Redfern waved her to
the swing seat.

“Sit down, dear. Never stand when you can sit. I want to get a good
look at Barney’s wife. Well, well, I like your face. No beauty—you
don’t mind my saying that—you’ve sense enough to know it, I reckon. Sit
down.”

Valancy sat down. To be obliged to sit still when mental agony urges us
to stride up and down is the refinement of torture. Every nerve in her
being was crying out to be alone—to be hidden. But she had to sit and
listen to Dr. Redfern, who didn’t mind talking at all.

“When do you think Bernie will be back?”

“I don’t know—not before night probably.”

“Where did he go?”

“I don’t know that either. Likely to the woods—up back.”

“So he doesn’t tell you his comings and goings, either? Bernie was
always a secretive young devil. Never understood him. Just like his
poor mother. But I thought a lot of him. It hurt me when he disappeared
as he did. Eleven years ago. I haven’t seen my boy for eleven years.”

“Eleven years.” Valancy was surprised. “It’s only six since he came
here.”

“Oh, he was in the Klondike before that—and all over the world. He used
to drop me a line now and then—never give any clue to where he was but
just a line to say he was all right. I s’pose he’s told you all about
it.”

“No. I know nothing of his past life,” said Valancy with sudden
eagerness. She wanted to know—she must know now. It hadn’t mattered
before. Now she must know all. And she could never hear it from Barney.
She might never even see him again. If she did, it would not be to talk
of his past.

“What happened? Why did he leave his home? Tell me. Tell me.”

“Well, it ain’t much of a story. Just a young fool gone mad because of
a quarrel with his girl. Only Bernie was a stubborn fool. Always
stubborn. You never could make that boy do anything he didn’t want to
do. From the day he was born. Yet he was always a quiet, gentle little
chap, too. Good as gold. His poor mother died when he was only two
years old. I’d just begun to make money with my Hair Vigor. I’d dreamed
the formula for it, you see. Some dream that. The cash rolled in.
Bernie had everything he wanted. I sent him to the best schools—private
schools. I meant to make a gentleman of him. Never had any chance
myself. Meant he should have every chance. He went through McGill. Got
honours and all that. I wanted him to go in for law. He hankered after
journalism and stuff like that. Wanted me to buy a paper for him—or
back him in publishing what he called a ‘real, worthwhile,
honest-to-goodness Canadian Magazine.’ I s’pose I’d have done it—I
always did what he wanted me to do. Wasn’t he all I had to live for? I
wanted him to be happy. And he never was happy. Can you believe it? Not
that he said so. But I’d always a feeling that he wasn’t happy.
Everything he wanted—all the money he could spend—his own bank
account—travel—seeing the world—but he wasn’t happy. Not till he fell
in love with Ethel Traverse. Then he was happy for a little while.”

The cloud had reached the sun and a great, chill, purple shadow came
swiftly over Mistawis. It touched the Blue Castle—rolled over it.
Valancy shivered.

“Yes,” she said, with painful eagerness, though every word was cutting
her to the heart. “What—was—she—like?”

“Prettiest girl in Montreal,” said Dr. Redfern. “Oh, she was a looker,
all right. Eh? Gold hair—shiny as silk—great, big, soft, black
eyes—skin like milk and roses. Don’t wonder Bernie fell for her. And
brains as well. _She_ wasn’t a bit of fluff. B. A. from McGill. A
thoroughbred, too. One of the best families. But a bit lean in the
purse. Eh! Bernie was mad about her. Happiest young fool you ever saw.
Then—the bust-up.”

“What happened?” Valancy had taken off her hat and was absently
thrusting a pin in and out of it. Good Luck was purring beside her.
Banjo was regarding Dr. Redfern with suspicion. Nip and Tuck were
lazily cawing in the pines. Mistawis was beckoning. Everything was the
same. Nothing was the same. It was a hundred years since yesterday.
Yesterday, at this time, she and Barney had been eating a belated
dinner here with laughter. Laughter? Valancy felt that she had done
with laughter forever. And with tears, for that matter. She had no
further use for either of them.

“Blest if I know, my dear. Some fool quarrel, I suppose. Bernie just
lit out—disappeared. He wrote me from the Yukon. Said his engagement
was broken and he wasn’t coming back. And not to try to hunt him up
because he was never coming back. I didn’t. What was the use? I knew
Bernie. I went on piling, up money because there wasn’t anything else
to do. But I was mighty lonely. All I lived for was them little notes
now and then from Bernie—Klondike—England—South
Africa—China—everywhere. I thought maybe he’d come back some day to his
lonesome old dad. Then six years ago even the letters stopped. I didn’t
hear a word of or from him till last Christmas.”

“Did he write?”

“No. But he drew a check for fifteen thousand dollars on his bank
account. The bank manager is a friend of mine—one of my biggest
shareholders. He’d always promised me he’d let me know if Bernie drew
any checks. Bernie had fifty thousand there. And he’d never touched a
cent of it till last Christmas. The check was made out to Aynsley’s,
Toronto——”

“Aynsley’s?” Valancy heard herself saying Aynsley’s! She had a box on
her dressing-table with the Aynsley trademark.

“Yes. The big jewellery house there. After I’d thought it over a while,
I got brisk. I wanted to locate Bernie. Had a special reason for it. It
was time he gave up his fool hoboing and come to his senses. Drawing
that fifteen told me there was something in the wind. The manager
communicated with the Aynsleys—his wife was an Aynsley—and found out
that Bernard Redfern had bought a pearl necklace there. His address was
given as Box 444, Port Lawrence, Muskoka, Ont. First I thought I’d
write. Then I thought I’d wait till the open season for cars and come
down myself. Ain’t no hand at writing. I’ve motored from Montreal. Got
to Port Lawrence yesterday. Enquired at the post-office. Told me they
knew nothing of any Bernard Snaith Redfern, but there was a Barney
Snaith had a P. O. box there. Lived on an island out here, they said.
So here I am. And where’s Barney?”

Valancy was fingering her necklace. She was wearing fifteen thousand
dollars around her neck. And she had worried lest Barney had paid
fifteen dollars for it and couldn’t afford it. Suddenly she laughed in
Dr. Redfern’s face.

“Excuse me. It’s so—amusing,” said poor Valancy.

“Isn’t it?” said Dr. Redfern, seeing a joke—but not exactly hers. “Now,
you seem like a sensible young woman, and I dare say you’ve lots of
influence over Bernie. Can’t you get him to come back to civilisation
and live like other people? I’ve a house up there. Big as a castle.
Furnished like a palace. I want company in it—Bernie’s wife—Bernie’s
children.”

“Did Ethel Traverse ever marry?” queried Valancy irrelevantly.

“Bless you, yes. Two years after Bernie levanted. But she’s a widow
now. Pretty as ever. To be frank, that was my special reason for
wanting to find Bernie. I thought they’d make it up, maybe. But, of
course, that’s all off now. Doesn’t matter. Bernie’s choice of a wife
is good enough for me. It’s my boy I want. Think he’ll soon be back?”

“I don’t know. But I don’t think he’ll come before night. Quite late,
perhaps. And perhaps not till tomorrow. But I can put you up
comfortably. He’ll certainly be back tomorrow.”

Dr. Redfern shook his head.

“Too damp. I’ll take no chances with rheumatism.”

“Why suffer that ceaseless anguish? Why not try Redfern’s Liniment?”
quoted the imp in the back of Valancy’s mind.

“I must get back to Port Lawrence before rain starts. Henry goes quite
mad when he gets mud on the car. But I’ll come back tomorrow. Meanwhile
you talk Bernie into reason.”

He shook her hand and patted her kindly on the shoulder. He looked as
if he would have kissed her, with a little encouragement, but Valancy
did not give it. Not that she would have minded. He was rather dreadful
and loud—and—and—dreadful. But there was something about him she liked.
She thought dully that she might have liked being his daughter-in-law
if he had not been a millionaire. A score of times over. And Barney was
his son—and heir.

She took him over in the motor boat and watched the lordly purple car
roll away through the woods with Henry at the wheel looking things not
lawful to be uttered. Then she went back to the Blue Castle. What she
had to do must be done quickly. Barney _might_ return at any moment.
And it was certainly going to rain. She was thankful she no longer felt
very bad. When you are bludgeoned on the head repeatedly, you naturally
and mercifully become more or less insensible and stupid.

She stood briefly like a faded flower bitten by frost, by the hearth,
looking down on the white ashes of the last fire that had blazed in the
Blue Castle.

“At any rate,” she thought wearily, “Barney isn’t poor. He will be able
to afford a divorce. Quite nicely.”




CHAPTER XXXIX


She must write a note. The imp in the back of her mind laughed. In
every story she had ever read when a runaway wife decamped from home
she left a note, generally on the pin-cushion. It was not a very
original idea. But one had to leave something intelligible. What was
there to do but write a note? She looked vaguely about her for
something to write with. Ink? There was none. Valancy had never written
anything since she had come to the Blue Castle, save memoranda of
household necessaries for Barney. A pencil sufficed for them, but now
the pencil was not to be found. Valancy absently crossed to the door of
Bluebeard’s Chamber and tried it. She vaguely expected to find it
locked, but it opened unresistingly. She had never tried it before, and
did not know whether Barney habitually kept it locked or not. If he
did, he must have been badly upset to leave it unlocked. She did not
realise that she was doing something he had told her not to do. She was
only looking for something to write with. All her faculties were
concentrated on deciding just what she would say and how she would say
it. There was not the slightest curiosity in her as she went into the
lean-to.

There were no beautiful women hanging by their hair on the walls. It
seemed a very harmless apartment, with a commonplace little sheet-iron
stove in the middle of it, its pipe sticking out through the roof. At
one end was a table or counter crowded with odd-looking utensils. Used
no doubt by Barney in his smelly operations. Chemical experiments,
probably, she reflected dully. At the other end was a big writing desk
and swivel-chair. The side walls were lined with books.

Valancy went blindly to the desk. There she stood motionless for a few
minutes, looking down at something that lay on it. A bundle of
galley-proofs. The page on top bore the title _Wild Honey_, and under
the title were the words “by John Foster.”

The opening sentence—“Pines are the trees of myth and legend. They
strike their roots deep into the traditions of an older world, but wind
and star love their lofty tops. What music when old Æolus draws his bow
across the branches of the pines—” She had heard Barney say that one
day when they walked under them.

So Barney was John Foster!

Valancy was not excited. She had absorbed all the shocks and sensations
that she could compass for one day. This affected her neither one way
nor the other. She only thought:

“So this explains it.”

“It” was a small matter that had, somehow, stuck in her mind more
persistently than its importance seemed to justify. Soon after Barney
had brought her John Foster’s latest book she had been in a Port
Lawrence bookshop and heard a customer ask the proprietor for John
Foster’s new book. The proprietor had said curtly, “Not out yet. Won’t
be out till next week.”

Valancy had opened her lips to say, “Oh, yes, it _is_ out,” but closed
them again. After all, it was none of her business. She supposed the
proprietor wanted to cover up his negligence in not getting the book in
promptly. Now she knew. The book Barney had given her had been one of
the author’s complimentary copies, sent in advance.

Well! Valancy pushed the proofs indifferently aside and sat down in the
swivel-chair. She took up Barney’s pen—and a vile one it was—pulled a
sheet of paper to her and began to write. She could not think of
anything to say except bald facts.


“Dear Barney:—

I went to Dr. Trent this morning and found out he had sent me the wrong
letter by mistake. There never was anything serious the matter with my
heart and I am quite well now.

I did not mean to trick you. Please believe that. I could not bear it
if you did not believe that. I am very sorry for the mistake. But
surely you can get a divorce if I leave you. Is desertion a ground for
divorce in Canada? Of course if there is anything I can do to help or
hasten it I will do it gladly, if your lawyer will let me know.

I thank you for all your kindness to me. I shall never forget it. Think
as kindly of me as you can, because I did not mean to trap you.
Good-bye.

Yours gratefully,

VALANCY.”


It was very cold and stiff, she knew. But to try to say anything else
would be dangerous—like tearing away a dam. She didn’t know what
torrent of wild incoherences and passionate anguish might pour out. In
a postscript she added:


“Your father was here today. He is coming back tomorrow. He told me
everything. I think you should go back to him. He is very lonely for
you.”


She put the letter in an envelope, wrote “Barney” across it, and left
it on the desk. On it she laid the string of pearls. If they had been
the beads she believed them she would have kept them in memory of that
wonderful year. But she could not keep the fifteen thousand dollar gift
of a man who had married her out of pity and whom she was now leaving.
It hurt her to give up her pretty bauble. That was an odd thing, she
reflected. The fact that she was leaving Barney did not hurt her—yet.
It lay at her heart like a cold, insensible thing. If it came to
life—Valancy shuddered and went out——

She put on her hat and mechanically fed Good Luck and Banjo. She locked
the door and carefully hid the key in the old pine. Then she crossed to
the mainland in the disappearing propeller. She stood for a moment on
the bank, looking at her Blue Castle. The rain had not yet come, but
the sky was dark, and Mistawis grey and sullen. The little house under
the pines looked very pathetic—a casket rifled of its jewels—a lamp
with its flame blown out.

“I shall never again hear the wind crying over Mistawis at night,”
thought Valancy. This hurt her, too. She could have laughed to think
that such a trifle could hurt her at such a time.




CHAPTER XL


Valancy paused a moment on the porch of the brick house in Elm Street.
She felt that she ought to knock like a stranger. Her rosebush, she
idly noticed, was loaded with buds. The rubber-plant stood beside the
prim door. A momentary horror overcame her—a horror of the existence to
which she was returning. Then she opened the door and walked in.

“I wonder if the Prodigal Son ever felt really at home again,” she
thought.

Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles were in the sitting-room. Uncle
Benjamin was there, too. They looked blankly at Valancy, realising at
once that something was wrong. This was not the saucy, impudent thing
who had laughed at them in this very room last summer. This was a
grey-faced woman with the eyes of a creature who had been stricken by a
mortal blow.

Valancy looked indifferently around the room. She had changed so
much—and it had changed so little. The same pictures hung on the walls.
The little orphan who knelt at her never-finished prayer by the bed
whereon reposed the black kitten that never grew up into a cat. The
grey “steel engraving” of Quatre Bras, where the British regiment
forever stood at bay. The crayon enlargement of the boyish father she
had never known. There they all hung in the same places. The green
cascade of “Wandering Jew” still tumbled out of the old granite
saucepan on the window-stand. The same elaborate, never-used pitcher
stood at the same angle on the sideboard shelf. The blue and gilt vases
that had been among her mother’s wedding-presents still primly adorned
the mantelpiece, flanking the china clock of berosed and besprayed ware
that never went. The chairs in exactly the same places. Her mother and
Cousin Stickles, likewise unchanged, regarding her with stony
unwelcome.

Valancy had to speak first.

“I’ve come home, Mother,” she said tiredly.

“So I see.” Mrs. Frederick’s voice was very icy. She had resigned
herself to Valancy’s desertion. She had almost succeeded in forgetting
there was a Valancy. She had rearranged and organised her systematic
life without any reference to an ungrateful, rebellious child. She had
taken her place again in a society which ignored the fact that she had
ever had a daughter and pitied her, if it pitied her at all, only in
discreet whispers and asides. The plain truth was that, by this time,
Mrs. Frederick did not want Valancy to come back—did not want ever to
see or hear of her again.

And now, of course, Valancy was here. With tragedy and disgrace and
scandal trailing after her visibly. “So I see,” said Mrs. Frederick.
“May I ask why?”

“Because—I’m—not—going to die,” said Valancy huskily.

“God bless my soul!” said Uncle Benjamin. “Who said you were going to
die?”

“I suppose,” said Cousin Stickles shrewishly—Cousin Stickles did not
want Valancy back either—“I suppose you’ve found out he has another
wife—as we’ve been sure all along.”

“No. I only wish he had,” said Valancy. She was not suffering
particularly, but she was very tired. If only the explanations were all
over and she were upstairs in her old, ugly room—alone. Just alone! The
rattle of the beads on her mother’s sleeves, as they swung on the arms
of the reed chair, almost drove her crazy. Nothing else was worrying
her; but all at once it seemed that she simply could not endure that
thin, insistent rattle.

“My home, as I told you, is always open to you,” said Mrs. Frederick
stonily, “but I can never forgive you.”

Valancy gave a mirthless laugh.

“I’d care very little for that if I could only forgive myself,” she
said.

“Come, come,” said Uncle Benjamin testily. But rather enjoying himself.
He felt he had Valancy under his thumb again. “We’ve had enough of
mystery. What has happened? Why have you left that fellow? No doubt
there’s reason enough—but what particular reason is it?”

Valancy began to speak mechanically. She told her tale bluntly and
barely.

“A year ago Dr. Trent told me I had angina pectoris and could not live
long. I wanted to have some—life—before I died. That’s why I went away.
Why I married Barney. And now I’ve found it is all a mistake. There is
nothing wrong with my heart. I’ve got to live—and Barney only married
me out of pity. So I have to leave him—free.”

“God bless me!” said Uncle Benjamin. Cousin Stickles began to cry.

“Valancy, if you’d only had confidence in your own mother——”

“Yes, yes, I know,” said Valancy impatiently. “What’s the use of going
into that now? I can’t undo this year. God knows I wish I could. I’ve
tricked Barney into marrying me—and he’s really Bernard Redfern. Dr.
Redfern’s son, of Montreal. And his father wants him to go back to
him.”

Uncle Benjamin made a queer sound. Cousin Stickles took her
black-bordered handkerchief away from her eyes and stared at Valancy. A
queer gleam suddenly shot into Mrs. Frederick’s stone-grey orbs.

“Dr. Redfern—not the Purple Pill man?” she said.

Valancy nodded. “He’s John Foster, too—the writer of those nature
books.”

“But—but—” Mrs. Frederick was visibly agitated, though not over the
thought that she was the mother-in-law of John Foster—“_Dr. Redfern is
a millionaire_!”

Uncle Benjamin shut his mouth with a snap.

“Ten times over,” he said.

Valancy nodded.

“Yes. Barney left home years ago—because of—of some
trouble—some—disappointment. Now he will likely go back. So you see—I
had to come home. He doesn’t love me. I can’t hold him to a bond he was
tricked into.”

Uncle Benjamin looked incredibly sly.

“Did he say so? Does he want to get rid of you?”

“No. I haven’t seen him since I found out. But I tell you—he only
married me out of pity—because I asked him to—because he thought it
would only be for a little while.”

Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles both tried to speak, but Uncle
Benjamin waved a hand at them and frowned portentously.

“Let _me_ handle this,” wave and frown seemed to say. To Valancy:

“Well, well, dear, we’ll talk it all over later. You see, we don’t
quite understand everything yet. As Cousin Stickles says, you should
have confided in us before. Later on—I dare say we can find a way out
of this.”

“You think Barney can easily get a divorce, don’t you?” said Valancy
eagerly.

Uncle Benjamin silenced with another wave the exclamation of horror he
knew was trembling on Mrs. Frederick’s lips.

“Trust to me, Valancy. Everything will arrange itself. Tell me this,
Dossie. Have you been happy up back? Was Sr.—Mr. Redfern good to you?”

“I have been very happy and Barney was very good to me,” said Valancy,
as if reciting a lesson. She remembered when she studied grammar at
school she had disliked the past and perfect tenses. They had always
seemed so pathetic. “I have been”—it was all over and done with.

“Then don’t worry, little girl.” How amazingly paternal Uncle Benjamin
was! “Your family will stand behind you. We’ll see what can be done.”

“Thank you,” said Valancy dully. Really, it was quite decent of Uncle
Benjamin. “Can I go and lie down a little while? I’m—I’m—tired.”

“Of course you’re tired.” Uncle Benjamin patted her hand gently—very
gently. “All worn out and nervous. Go and lie down, by all means.
You’ll see things in quite a different light after you’ve had a good
sleep.”

He held the door open. As she went through he whispered, “What is the
best way to keep a man’s love?”

Valancy smiled wanly. But she had come back to the old life—the old
shackles. “What?” she asked as meekly as of yore.

“Not to return it,” said Uncle Benjamin with a chuckle. He shut the
door and rubbed his hands. Nodded and smiled mysteriously round the
room.

“Poor little Doss!” he said pathetically.

“Do you really suppose that—Snaith—can actually be Dr. Redfern’s son?”
gasped Mrs. Frederick.

“I see no reason for doubting it. She says Dr. Redfern has been there.
Why, the man is rich as wedding-cake. Amelia, I’ve always believed
there was more in Doss than most people thought. You kept her down too
much—repressed her. She never had a chance to show what was in her. And
now she’s landed a millionaire for a husband.”

“But—” hesitated Mrs. Frederick, “he—he—they told terrible tales about
him.”

“All gossip and invention—all gossip and invention. It’s always been a
mystery to me why people should be so ready to invent and circulate
slanders about other people they know absolutely nothing about. I can’t
understand why you paid so much attention to gossip and surmise. Just
because he didn’t choose to mix up with everybody, people resented it.
I was surprised to find what a decent fellow he seemed to be that time
he came into my store with Valancy. I discounted all the yarns then and
there.”

“But he was seen dead drunk in Port Lawrence once,” said Cousin
Stickles. Doubtfully, yet as one very willing to be convinced to the
contrary.

“Who saw him?” demanded Uncle Benjamin truculently. “Who saw him? Old
Jemmy Strang _said_ he saw him. I wouldn’t take old Jemmy Strang’s word
on oath. He’s too drunk himself half the time to see straight. He said
he saw him lying drunk on a bench in the Park. Pshaw! Redfern’s been
asleep there. Don’t worry over _that_.”

“But his clothes—and that awful old car—” said Mrs. Frederick
uncertainly.

“Eccentricities of genius,” declared Uncle Benjamin. “You heard Doss
say he was John Foster. I’m not up in literature myself, but I heard a
lecturer from Toronto say that John Foster’s books had put Canada on
the literary map of the world.”

“I—suppose—we must forgive her,” yielded Mrs. Frederick.

“Forgive her!” Uncle Benjamin snorted. Really, Amelia was an incredibly
stupid woman. No wonder poor Doss had gone sick and tired of living
with her. “Well, yes, I think you’d better forgive her! The question
is—will Snaith forgive _us_!”

“What if she persists in leaving him? You’ve no idea how stubborn she
can be,” said Mrs. Frederick.

“Leave it all to me, Amelia. Leave it all to me. You women have muddled
it enough. This whole affair has been bungled from start to finish. If
you had put yourself to a little trouble years ago, Amelia, she would
not have bolted over the traces as she did. Just let her alone—don’t
worry her with advice or questions till she’s ready to talk. She’s
evidently run away in a panic because she’s afraid he’d be angry with
her for fooling him. Most extraordinary thing of Trent to tell her such
a yarn! That’s what comes of going to strange doctors. Well, well, we
mustn’t blame her too harshly, poor child. Redfern will come after her.
If he doesn’t, I’ll hunt him up and talk to him as man to man. He may
be a millionaire, but Valancy is a Stirling. He can’t repudiate her
just because she was mistaken about her heart disease. Not likely he’ll
want to. Doss is a little overstrung. Bless me, I must get in the habit
of calling her Valancy. She isn’t a baby any longer. Now, remember,
Amelia. Be very kind and sympathetic.”

It was something of a large order to expect Mrs. Frederick to be kind
and sympathetic. But she did her best. When supper was ready she went
up and asked Valancy if she wouldn’t like a cup of tea. Valancy, lying
on her bed, declined. She just wanted to be left alone for a while.
Mrs. Frederick left her alone. She did not even remind Valancy that her
plight was the outcome of her own lack of daughterly respect and
obedience. One could not—exactly—say things like that to the
daughter-in-law of a millionaire.




CHAPTER XLI


Valancy looked dully about her old room. It, too, was so exactly the
same that it seemed almost impossible to believe in the changes that
had come to her since she had last slept in it. It
seemed—somehow—indecent that it should be so much the same. There was
Queen Louise everlastingly coming down the stairway, and nobody had let
the forlorn puppy in out of the rain. Here was the purple paper blind
and the greenish mirror. Outside, the old carriage-shop with its
blatant advertisements. Beyond it, the station with the same derelicts
and flirtatious flappers.

Here the old life waited for her, like some grim ogre that bided his
time and licked his chops. A monstrous horror of it suddenly possessed
her. When night fell and she had undressed and got into bed, the
merciful numbness passed away and she lay in anguish and thought of her
island under the stars. The camp-fires—all their little household jokes
and phrases and catch words—their furry beautiful cats—the lights
agleam on the fairy islands—canoes skimming over Mistawis in the magic
of morning—white birches shining among the dark spruces like beautiful
women’s bodies—winter snows and rose-red sunset fires—lakes drunken
with moonshine—all the delights of her lost paradise. She would not let
herself think of Barney. Only of these lesser things. She could not
endure to think of Barney.

Then she thought of him inescapably. She ached for him. She wanted his
arms around her—his face against hers—his whispers in her ear. She
recalled all his friendly looks and quips and jests—his little
compliments—his caresses. She counted them all over as a woman might
count her jewels—not one did she miss from the first day they had met.
These memories were all she could have now. She shut her eyes and
prayed.

“Let me remember every one, God! Let me never forget one of them!”

Yet it would be better to forget. This agony of longing and loneliness
would not be so terrible if one could forget. And Ethel Traverse. That
shimmering witch woman with her white skin and black eyes and shining
hair. The woman Barney had loved. The woman whom he still loved. Hadn’t
he told her he never changed his mind? Who was waiting for him in
Montreal. Who was the right wife for a rich and famous man. Barney
would marry her, of course, when he got his divorce. How Valancy hated
her! And envied her! Barney had said, “I love you,” to _her_. Valancy
had wondered what tone Barney would say “I love you” in—how his
dark-blue eyes would look when he said it. Ethel Traverse knew. Valancy
hated her for the knowledge—hated and envied her.

“She can never have those hours in the Blue Castle. They are _mine_,”
thought Valancy savagely. Ethel would never make strawberry jam or
dance to old Abel’s fiddle or fry bacon for Barney over a camp-fire.
She would never come to the little Mistawis shack at all.

What was Barney doing—thinking—feeling now? Had he come home and found
her letter? Was he still angry with her? Or a little pitiful. Was he
lying on their bed looking out on stormy Mistawis and listening to the
rain streaming down on the roof? Or was he still wandering in the
wilderness, raging at the predicament in which he found himself? Hating
her? Pain took her and wrung her like some great pitiless giant. She
got up and walked the floor. Would morning never come to end this
hideous night? And yet what could morning bring her? The old life
without the old stagnation that was at least bearable. The old life
with the new memories, the new longings, the new anguish.

“Oh, why can’t I die?” moaned Valancy.




CHAPTER XLII


It was not until early afternoon the next day that a dreadful old car
clanked up Elm Street and stopped in front of the brick house. A
hatless man sprang from it and rushed up the steps. The bell was rung
as it had never been rung before—vehemently, intensely. The ringer was
demanding entrance, not asking it. Uncle Benjamin chuckled as he
hurried to the door. Uncle Benjamin had “just dropped in” to enquire
how dear Doss—Valancy was. Dear Doss—Valancy, he had been informed, was
just the same. She had come down for breakfast—which she didn’t
eat—gone back to her room, come down for dinner—which she didn’t
eat—gone back to her room. That was all. She had not talked. And she
had been let, kindly, considerately, alone.

“Very good. Redfern will be here today,” said Uncle Benjamin. And now
Uncle Benjamin’s reputation as a prophet was made. Redfern was
here—unmistakably so.

“Is my wife here?” he demanded of Uncle Benjamin without preface.

Uncle Benjamin smiled expressively.

“Mr. Redfern, I believe? Very glad to meet you, sir. Yes, that naughty
little girl of yours is here. We have been——”

“I must see her,” Barney cut Uncle Benjamin ruthlessly short.

“Certainly, Mr. Redfern. Just step in here. Valancy will be down in a
minute.”

He ushered Barney into the parlour and betook himself to the
sitting-room and Mrs. Frederick.

“Go up and tell Valancy to come down. Her husband is here.”

But so dubious was Uncle Benjamin as to whether Valancy could really
come down in a minute—or at all—that he followed Mrs. Frederick on
tiptoe up the stairs and listened in the hall.

“Valancy dear,” said Mrs. Frederick tenderly, “your husband is in the
parlour, asking for you.”

“Oh, Mother.” Valancy got up from the window and wrung her hands. “I
cannot see him—I cannot! Tell him to go away—_ask_ him to go away. I
can’t see him!”

“Tell her,” hissed Uncle Benjamin through the keyhole, “that Redfern
says he won’t go away until he _has_ seen her.”

Redfern had not said anything of the kind, but Uncle Benjamin thought
he was that sort of a fellow. Valancy knew he was. She understood that
she might as well go down first as last.

She did not even look at Uncle Benjamin as she passed him on the
landing. Uncle Benjamin did not mind. Rubbing his hands and chuckling,
he retreated to the kitchen, where he genially demanded of Cousin
Stickles:

“Why are good husbands like bread?”

Cousin Stickles asked why.

“Because women need them,” beamed Uncle Benjamin.

Valancy was looking anything but beautiful when she entered the
parlour. Her white night had played fearful havoc with her face. She
wore an ugly old brown-and-blue gingham, having left all her pretty
dresses in the Blue Castle. But Barney dashed across the room and
caught her in his arms.

“Valancy, darling—oh, you darling little idiot! Whatever possessed you
to run away like that? When I came home last night and found your
letter I went quite mad. It was twelve o’clock—I knew it was too late
to come here then. I walked the floor all night. Then this morning Dad
came—I couldn’t get away till now. Valancy, whatever got into you?
Divorce, forsooth! Don’t you know——”

“I know you only married me out of pity,” said Valancy, brushing him
away feebly. “I know you don’t love me—I know——”

“You’ve been lying awake at three o’clock too long,” said Barney,
shaking her. “That’s all that’s the matter with you. Love you! Oh,
don’t I love you! My girl, when I saw that train coming down on you I
knew whether I loved you or not!”

“Oh, I was afraid you would try to make me think you cared,” cried
Valancy passionately. “Don’t—don’t! I _know_. I know all about Ethel
Traverse—your father told me everything. Oh, Barney, don’t torture me!
I can never go back to you!”

Barney released her and looked at her for a moment. Something in her
pallid, resolute face spoke more convincingly than words of her
determination.

“Valancy,” he said quietly, “Father couldn’t have told you everything
because he didn’t know it. Will you let _me_ tell you—everything?”

“Yes,” said Valancy wearily. Oh, how dear he was! How she longed to
throw herself into his arms! As he put her gently down in a chair, she
could have kissed the slender, brown hands that touched her arms. She
could not look up as he stood before her. She dared not meet his eyes.
For his sake, she must be brave. She knew him—kind, unselfish. Of
course he would pretend he did not want his freedom—she might have
known he would pretend that, once the first shock of realisation was
over. He was so sorry for her—he understood her terrible position. When
had he ever failed to understand? But she would never accept his
sacrifice. Never!

“You’ve seen Dad and you know I’m Bernard Redfern. And I suppose you’ve
guessed that I’m John Foster—since you went into Bluebeard’s Chamber.”

“Yes. But I didn’t go in out of curiosity. I forgot you had told me not
to go in—I forgot——”

“Never mind. I’m not going to kill you and hang you up on the wall, so
there’s no need to call for Sister Anne. I’m only going to tell you my
story from the beginning. I came back last night intending to do it.
Yes, I’m ‘old Doc. Redfern’s son’—of Purple Pills and Bitters fame. Oh,
don’t I know it? Wasn’t it rubbed into me for years?”

Barney laughed bitterly and strode up and down the room a few times.
Uncle Benjamin, tiptoeing through the hall, heard the laugh and
frowned. Surely Doss wasn’t going to be a stubborn little fool. Barney
threw himself into a chair before Valancy.

“Yes. As long as I can remember I’ve been a millionaire’s son. But when
I was born Dad wasn’t a millionaire. He wasn’t even a doctor—isn’t yet.
He was a veterinary and a failure at it. He and Mother lived in a
little village up in Quebec and were abominably poor. I don’t remember
Mother. Haven’t even a picture of her. She died when I was two years
old. She was fifteen years younger than Father—a little school teacher.
When she died Dad moved into Montreal and formed a company to sell his
hair tonic. He’d dreamed the prescription one night, it seems. Well, it
caught on. Money began to flow in. Dad invented—or dreamed—the other
things, too—Pills, Bitters, Liniment and so on. He was a millionaire by
the time I was ten, with a house so big a small chap like myself always
felt lost in it. I had every toy a boy could wish for—and I was the
loneliest little devil in the world. I remember only one happy day in
my childhood, Valancy. Only one. Even you were better off than that.
Dad had gone out to see an old friend in the country and took me along.
I was turned loose in the barnyard and I spent the whole day hammering
nails in a block of wood. I had a glorious day. When I had to go back
to my roomful of playthings in the big house in Montreal I cried. But I
didn’t tell Dad why. I never told him anything. It’s always been a hard
thing for me to tell things, Valancy—anything that went deep. And most
things went deep with me. I was a sensitive child and I was even more
sensitive as a boy. No one ever knew what I suffered. Dad never dreamed
of it.

“When he sent me to a private school—I was only eleven—the boys ducked
me in the swimming-tank until I stood on a table and read aloud all the
advertisements of Father’s patent abominations. I did it—then”—Barney
clinched his fists—“I was frightened and half drowned and all my world
was against me. But when I went to college and the sophs tried the same
stunt I didn’t do it.” Barney smiled grimly. “They couldn’t make me do
it. But they could—and did—make my life miserable. I never heard the
last of the Pills and the Bitters and the Hair Tonic. ‘After using’ was
my nickname—you see I’d always such a thick thatch. My four college
years were a nightmare. You know—or you don’t know—what merciless
beasts boys can be when they get a victim like me. I had few
friends—there was always some barrier between me and the kind of people
I cared for. And the other kind—who would have been very willing to be
intimate with rich old Doc. Redfern’s son—I didn’t care for. But I had
one friend—or thought I had. A clever, bookish chap—a bit of a writer.
That was a bond between us—I had some secret aspirations along that
line. He was older than I was—I looked up to him and worshipped him.
For a year I was happier than I’d ever been. Then—a burlesque sketch
came out in the college magazine—a mordant thing, ridiculing Dad’s
remedies. The names were changed, of course, but everybody knew what
and who was meant. Oh, it was clever—damnably so—and witty. McGill
rocked with laughter over it. I found out _he_ had written it.”

“Oh, were you sure?” Valancy’s dull eyes flamed with indignation.

“Yes. He admitted it when I asked him. Said a good idea was worth more
to him than a friend, any time. And he added a gratuitous thrust. ‘You
know, Redfern, there are some things money won’t buy. For instance—it
won’t buy you a grandfather.’ Well, it was a nasty slam. I was young
enough to feel cut up. And it destroyed a lot of my ideals and
illusions, which was the worst thing about it. I was a young
misanthrope after that. Didn’t want to be friends with any one. And
then—the year after I left college—I met Ethel Traverse.”

Valancy shivered. Barney, his hands stuck in his pockets, was regarding
the floor moodily and didn’t notice it.

“Dad told you about her, I suppose. She was very beautiful. And I loved
her. Oh, yes, I loved her. I won’t deny it or belittle it now. It was a
lonely, romantic boy’s first passionate love, and it was very real. And
I thought she loved me. I was fool enough to think that. I was wildly
happy when she promised to marry me. For a few months. Then—I found out
she didn’t. I was an involuntary eavesdropper on a certain occasion for
a moment. That moment was enough. The proverbial fate of the
eavesdropper overtook me. A girl friend of hers was asking her how she
could stomach Doc. Redfern’s son and the patent-medicine background.

“‘His money will gild the Pills and sweeten the Bitters,’ said Ethel,
with a laugh. ‘Mother told me to catch him if I could. We’re on the
rocks. But pah! I smell turpentine whenever he comes near me.’”

“Oh, Barney!” cried Valancy, wrung with pity for him. She had forgotten
all about herself and was filled with compassion for Barney and rage
against Ethel Traverse. How dared she?

“Well,”—Barney got up and began pacing round the room—“that finished
me. Completely. I left civilisation and those accursed dopes behind me
and went to the Yukon. For five years I knocked about the world—in all
sorts of outlandish places. I earned enough to live on—I wouldn’t touch
a cent of Dad’s money. Then one day I woke up to the fact that I no
longer cared a hang about Ethel, one way or another. She was somebody
I’d known in another world—that was all. But I had no hankering to go
back to the old life. None of that for me. I was free and I meant to
keep so. I came to Mistawis—saw Tom MacMurray’s island. My first book
had been published the year before, and made a hit—I had a bit of money
from my royalties. I bought my island. But I kept away from people. I
had no faith in anybody. I didn’t believe there was such a thing as
real friendship or true love in the world—not for me, anyhow—the son of
Purple Pills. I used to revel in all the wild yarns they told of me. In
fact, I’m afraid I suggested a few of them myself. By mysterious
remarks which people interpreted in the light of their own
prepossessions.

“Then—you came. I _had_ to believe you loved me—really loved _me_—not
my father’s millions. There was no other reason why you should want to
marry a penniless devil with my supposed record. And I was sorry for
you. Oh, yes, I don’t deny I married you because I was sorry for you.
And then—I found you the best and jolliest and dearest little pal and
chum a fellow ever had. Witty—loyal—sweet. You made me believe again in
the reality of friendship and love. The world seemed good again just
because you were in it, honey. I’d have been willing to go on forever
just as we were. I knew that, the night I came home and saw my
homelight shining out from the island for the first time. And knew you
were there waiting for me. After being homeless all my life it was
beautiful to have a home. To come home hungry at night and know there
was a good supper and a cheery fire—and _you_.

“But I didn’t realise what you actually meant to me till that moment at
the switch. Then it came like a lightning flash. I knew I couldn’t live
without you—that if I couldn’t pull you loose in time I’d have to die
with you. I admit it bowled me over—knocked me silly. I couldn’t get my
bearings for a while. That’s why I acted like a mule. But the thought
that drove me to the tall timber was the awful one that you were going
to die. I’d always hated the thought of it—but I supposed there wasn’t
any chance for you, so I put it out of my mind. Now I had to face
it—you were under sentence of death and I couldn’t live without you.
When I came home last night I had made up my mind that I’d take you to
all the specialists in the world—that something surely could be done
for you. I felt sure you couldn’t be as bad as Dr. Trent thought, when
those moments on the track hadn’t even hurt you. And I found your
note—and went mad with happiness—and a little terror for fear you
didn’t care much for me, after all, and had gone away to get rid of me.
But now, it’s all right, isn’t it, darling?”

Was she, Valancy being called “darling”?

“I _can’t_ believe you care for me,” she said helplessly. “I _know_ you
can’t. What’s the use, Barney? Of course, you’re sorry for me—of course
you want to do the best you can to straighten out the mess. But it
can’t be straightened out that way. You couldn’t love me—me.” She stood
up and pointed tragically to the mirror over the mantel. Certainly, not
even Allan Tierney could have seen beauty in the woeful, haggard little
face reflected there.

Barney didn’t look at the mirror. He looked at Valancy as if he would
like to snatch her—or beat her.

“Love you! Girl, you’re in the very core of my heart. I hold you there
like a jewel. Didn’t I promise you I’d never tell you a lie? Love you!
I love you with all there is of me to love. Heart, soul, brain. Every
fibre of body and spirit thrilling to the sweetness of you. There’s
nobody in the world for me but you, Valancy.”

“You’re—a good actor, Barney,” said Valancy, with a wan little smile.

Barney looked at her.

“So you don’t believe me—yet?”

“I—can t.”

“Oh—damn!” said Barney violently.

Valancy looked up startled. She had never seen _this_ Barney. Scowling!
Eyes black with anger. Sneering lips. Dead-white face.

“You don’t want to believe it,” said Barney in the silk-smooth voice of
ultimate rage. “You’re tired of me. You want to get out of it—free from
me. You’re ashamed of the Pills and the Liniment, just as she was. Your
Stirling pride can’t stomach them. It was all right as long as you
thought you hadn’t long to live. A good lark—you could put up with me.
But a lifetime with old Doc Redfern’s son is a different thing. Oh, I
understand—perfectly. I’ve been very dense—but I understand, at last.”

Valancy stood up. She stared into his furious face. Then—she suddenly
laughed.

“You darling!” she said. “You do mean it! You do really love me! You
wouldn’t be so enraged if you didn’t.”

Barney stared at her for a moment. Then he caught her in his arms with
the little low laugh of the triumphant lover.

Uncle Benjamin, who had been frozen with horror at the keyhole,
suddenly thawed out and tiptoed back to Mrs. Frederick and Cousin
Stickles.

“Everything is all right,” he announced jubilantly.

Dear little Doss! He would send for his lawyer right away and alter his
will again. Doss should be his sole heiress. To her that had should
certainly be given.

Mrs. Frederick, returning to her comfortable belief in an overruling
Providence, got out the family Bible and made an entry under
“Marriages.”




CHAPTER XLIII


“But, Barney,” protested Valancy after a few minutes, “your
father—somehow—gave me to understand that you _still_ loved _her_.”

“He would. Dad holds the championship for making blunders. If there’s a
thing that’s better left unsaid you can trust him to say it. But he
isn’t a bad old soul, Valancy. You’ll like him.”

“I do, now.”

“And his money isn’t tainted money. He made it honestly. His medicines
are quite harmless. Even his Purple Pills do people whole heaps of good
when they believe in them.”

“But—I’m not fit for your life,” sighed Valancy. “I’m not—clever—or
well-educated—or——”

“My life is in Mistawis—and all the wild places of the world. I’m not
going to ask you to live the life of a society woman. Of course, we
must spend a bit of the time with Dad—he’s lonely and old——”

“But not in that big house of his,” pleaded Valancy. “I can’t live in a
palace.”

“Can’t come down to that after your Blue Castle,” grinned Barney.
“Don’t worry, sweet. I couldn’t live in that house myself. It has a
white marble stairway with gilt bannisters and looks like a furniture
shop with the labels off. Likewise it’s the pride of Dad’s heart. We’ll
get a little house somewhere outside of Montreal—in the real
country—near enough to see Dad often. I think we’ll build one for
ourselves. A house you build for yourself is so much nicer than a
hand-me-down. But we’ll spend our summers in Mistawis. And our autumns
travelling. I want you to see the Alhambra—it’s the nearest thing to
the Blue Castle of your dreams I can think of. And there’s an old-world
garden in Italy where I want to show you the moon rising over Rome
through the dark cypress-trees.”

“Will that be any lovelier than the moon rising over Mistawis?”

“Not lovelier. But a different kind of loveliness. There are so many
kinds of loveliness. Valancy, before this year you’ve spent all your
life in ugliness. You know nothing of the beauty of the world. We’ll
climb mountains—hunt for treasures in the bazaars of Samarcand—search
out the magic of east and west—run hand in hand to the rim of the
world. I want to show you it all—see it again through your eyes. Girl,
there are a million things I want to show you—do with you—say to you.
It will take a lifetime. And we must see about that picture by Tierney,
after all.”

“Will you promise me one thing?” asked Valancy solemnly.

“Anything,” said Barney recklessly.

“Only one thing. You are never, under any circumstances or under any
provocation, to cast it up to me that I asked you to marry me.”




CHAPTER XLIV




E_xtract from letter written by Miss Olive Stirling to Mr. Cecil
Bruce:_

“It’s really disgusting that Doss’ crazy adventures should have turned
out like this. It makes one feel that there is no use in behaving
properly.

“I’m _sure_ her mind was unbalanced when she left home. What she said
about a dust-pile showed that. Of course I don’t think there was ever a
thing the matter with her heart. Or perhaps Snaith or Redfern or
whatever his name really is fed Purple Pills to her, back in that
Mistawis hut and cured her. It would make quite a testimonial for the
family ads, wouldn’t it?

“He’s such an insignificent-looking creature. I mentioned this to Doss
but all she said was, ‘I don’t like collar ad men.’

“Well, he’s certainly no collar ad man. Though I must say there is
something rather distinguished about him, now that he has cut his hair
and put on decent clothes. I really think, Cecil, you should exercise
more. It doesn’t do to get too fleshy.

“He also claims, I believe, to be John Foster. We can believe _that_ or
not, as we like, I suppose.

“Old Doc Redfern has given them two millions for a wedding-present.
Evidently the Purple Pills bring in the bacon. They’re going to spend
the fall in Italy and the winter in Egypt and motor through Normandy in
apple-blossom time. _Not_ in that dreadful old Lizzie, though. Redfern
has got a wonderful new car.

“Well, I think I’ll run away, too, and disgrace myself. It seems to
pay.

“Uncle Ben is a scream. Likewise Uncle James. The fuss they all make
over Doss now is absolutely sickening. To hear Aunt Amelia talking of
‘my son-in-law, Bernard Redfern’ and ‘my daughter, Mrs. Bernard
Redfern.’ Mother and Father are as bad as the rest. And they can’t see
that Valancy is just laughing at them all in her sleeve.”




CHAPTER XLV


Valancy and Barney turned under the mainland pines in the cool dusk of
the September night for a farewell look at the Blue Castle. Mistawis
was drowned in sunset lilac light, incredibly delicate and elusive. Nip
and Tuck were cawing lazily in the old pines. Good Luck and Banjo were
mewed and mewing in separate baskets in Barney’s new, dark-green car
_en route_ to Cousin Georgiana’s. Cousin Georgiana was going to take
care of them until Barney and Valancy came back. Aunt Wellington and
Cousin Sarah and Aunt Alberta had also entreated the privilege of
looking after them, but to Cousin Georgiana was it given. Valancy was
in tears.

“Don’t cry, Moonlight. We’ll be back next summer. And now we’re off for
a real honeymoon.”

Valancy smiled through her tears. She was so happy that her happiness
terrified her. But, despite the delights before her—‘the glory that was
Greece and the grandeur that was Rome’—lure of the ageless Nile—glamour
of the Riviera—mosque and palace and minaret—she knew perfectly well
that no spot or place or home in the world could ever possess the
sorcery of her Blue Castle.

THE END






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE CASTLE: A NOVEL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Meow Meow Meow
