The Project Gutenberg eBook of Metamorphosis
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Metamorphosis

Author: Franz Kafka

Translator: David Wyllie

Release date: August 17, 2005 [eBook #5200]
                Most recently updated: April 28, 2021

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK METAMORPHOSIS ***




Metamorphosis

by Franz Kafka

Translated by David Wyllie




I


One morning, when Gregor Samsa woke from troubled dreams, he found
himself transformed in his bed into a horrible vermin. He lay on his
armour-like back, and if he lifted his head a little he could see his
brown belly, slightly domed and divided by arches into stiff sections.
The bedding was hardly able to cover it and seemed ready to slide off
any moment. His many legs, pitifully thin compared with the size of the
rest of him, waved about helplessly as he looked.

“What’s happened to me?” he thought. It wasn’t a dream. His room, a
proper human room although a little too small, lay peacefully between
its four familiar walls. A collection of textile samples lay spread out
on the table—Samsa was a travelling salesman—and above it there hung a
picture that he had recently cut out of an illustrated magazine and
housed in a nice, gilded frame. It showed a lady fitted out with a fur
hat and fur boa who sat upright, raising a heavy fur muff that covered
the whole of her lower arm towards the viewer.

Gregor then turned to look out the window at the dull weather. Drops of
rain could be heard hitting the pane, which made him feel quite sad.
“How about if I sleep a little bit longer and forget all this
nonsense”, he thought, but that was something he was unable to do
because he was used to sleeping on his right, and in his present state
couldn’t get into that position. However hard he threw himself onto his
right, he always rolled back to where he was. He must have tried it a
hundred times, shut his eyes so that he wouldn’t have to look at the
floundering legs, and only stopped when he began to feel a mild, dull
pain there that he had never felt before.

“Oh, God”, he thought, “what a strenuous career it is that I’ve chosen!
Travelling day in and day out. Doing business like this takes much more
effort than doing your own business at home, and on top of that there’s
the curse of travelling, worries about making train connections, bad
and irregular food, contact with different people all the time so that
you can never get to know anyone or become friendly with them. It can
all go to Hell!” He felt a slight itch up on his belly; pushed himself
slowly up on his back towards the headboard so that he could lift his
head better; found where the itch was, and saw that it was covered with
lots of little white spots which he didn’t know what to make of; and
when he tried to feel the place with one of his legs he drew it quickly
back because as soon as he touched it he was overcome by a cold
shudder.

He slid back into his former position. “Getting up early all the time”,
he thought, “it makes you stupid. You’ve got to get enough sleep. Other
travelling salesmen live a life of luxury. For instance, whenever I go
back to the guest house during the morning to copy out the contract,
these gentlemen are always still sitting there eating their breakfasts.
I ought to just try that with my boss; I’d get kicked out on the spot.
But who knows, maybe that would be the best thing for me. If I didn’t
have my parents to think about I’d have given in my notice a long time
ago, I’d have gone up to the boss and told him just what I think, tell
him everything I would, let him know just what I feel. He’d fall right
off his desk! And it’s a funny sort of business to be sitting up there
at your desk, talking down at your subordinates from up there,
especially when you have to go right up close because the boss is hard
of hearing. Well, there’s still some hope; once I’ve got the money
together to pay off my parents’ debt to him—another five or six years I
suppose—that’s definitely what I’ll do. That’s when I’ll make the big
change. First of all though, I’ve got to get up, my train leaves at
five.”

And he looked over at the alarm clock, ticking on the chest of drawers.
“God in Heaven!” he thought. It was half past six and the hands were
quietly moving forwards, it was even later than half past, more like
quarter to seven. Had the alarm clock not rung? He could see from the
bed that it had been set for four o’clock as it should have been; it
certainly must have rung. Yes, but was it possible to quietly sleep
through that furniture-rattling noise? True, he had not slept
peacefully, but probably all the more deeply because of that. What
should he do now? The next train went at seven; if he were to catch
that he would have to rush like mad and the collection of samples was
still not packed, and he did not at all feel particularly fresh and
lively. And even if he did catch the train he would not avoid his
boss’s anger as the office assistant would have been there to see the
five o’clock train go, he would have put in his report about Gregor’s
not being there a long time ago. The office assistant was the boss’s
man, spineless, and with no understanding. What about if he reported
sick? But that would be extremely strained and suspicious as in five
years of service Gregor had never once yet been ill. His boss would
certainly come round with the doctor from the medical insurance
company, accuse his parents of having a lazy son, and accept the
doctor’s recommendation not to make any claim as the doctor believed
that no-one was ever ill but that many were workshy. And what’s more,
would he have been entirely wrong in this case? Gregor did in fact,
apart from excessive sleepiness after sleeping for so long, feel
completely well and even felt much hungrier than usual.

He was still hurriedly thinking all this through, unable to decide to
get out of the bed, when the clock struck quarter to seven. There was a
cautious knock at the door near his head. “Gregor”, somebody called—it
was his mother—“it’s quarter to seven. Didn’t you want to go
somewhere?” That gentle voice! Gregor was shocked when he heard his own
voice answering, it could hardly be recognised as the voice he had had
before. As if from deep inside him, there was a painful and
uncontrollable squeaking mixed in with it, the words could be made out
at first but then there was a sort of echo which made them unclear,
leaving the hearer unsure whether he had heard properly or not. Gregor
had wanted to give a full answer and explain everything, but in the
circumstances contented himself with saying: “Yes, mother, yes,
thank-you, I’m getting up now.” The change in Gregor’s voice probably
could not be noticed outside through the wooden door, as his mother was
satisfied with this explanation and shuffled away. But this short
conversation made the other members of the family aware that Gregor,
against their expectations was still at home, and soon his father came
knocking at one of the side doors, gently, but with his fist. “Gregor,
Gregor”, he called, “what’s wrong?” And after a short while he called
again with a warning deepness in his voice: “Gregor! Gregor!” At the
other side door his sister came plaintively: “Gregor? Aren’t you well?
Do you need anything?” Gregor answered to both sides: “I’m ready, now”,
making an effort to remove all the strangeness from his voice by
enunciating very carefully and putting long pauses between each,
individual word. His father went back to his breakfast, but his sister
whispered: “Gregor, open the door, I beg of you.” Gregor, however, had
no thought of opening the door, and instead congratulated himself for
his cautious habit, acquired from his travelling, of locking all doors
at night even when he was at home.

The first thing he wanted to do was to get up in peace without being
disturbed, to get dressed, and most of all to have his breakfast. Only
then would he consider what to do next, as he was well aware that he
would not bring his thoughts to any sensible conclusions by lying in
bed. He remembered that he had often felt a slight pain in bed, perhaps
caused by lying awkwardly, but that had always turned out to be pure
imagination and he wondered how his imaginings would slowly resolve
themselves today. He did not have the slightest doubt that the change
in his voice was nothing more than the first sign of a serious cold,
which was an occupational hazard for travelling salesmen.

It was a simple matter to throw off the covers; he only had to blow
himself up a little and they fell off by themselves. But it became
difficult after that, especially as he was so exceptionally broad. He
would have used his arms and his hands to push himself up; but instead
of them he only had all those little legs continuously moving in
different directions, and which he was moreover unable to control. If
he wanted to bend one of them, then that was the first one that would
stretch itself out; and if he finally managed to do what he wanted with
that leg, all the others seemed to be set free and would move about
painfully. “This is something that can’t be done in bed”, Gregor said
to himself, “so don’t keep trying to do it”.

The first thing he wanted to do was get the lower part of his body out
of the bed, but he had never seen this lower part, and could not
imagine what it looked like; it turned out to be too hard to move; it
went so slowly; and finally, almost in a frenzy, when he carelessly
shoved himself forwards with all the force he could gather, he chose
the wrong direction, hit hard against the lower bedpost, and learned
from the burning pain he felt that the lower part of his body might
well, at present, be the most sensitive.

So then he tried to get the top part of his body out of the bed first,
carefully turning his head to the side. This he managed quite easily,
and despite its breadth and its weight, the bulk of his body eventually
followed slowly in the direction of the head. But when he had at last
got his head out of the bed and into the fresh air it occurred to him
that if he let himself fall it would be a miracle if his head were not
injured, so he became afraid to carry on pushing himself forward the
same way. And he could not knock himself out now at any price; better
to stay in bed than lose consciousness.

It took just as much effort to get back to where he had been earlier,
but when he lay there sighing, and was once more watching his legs as
they struggled against each other even harder than before, if that was
possible, he could think of no way of bringing peace and order to this
chaos. He told himself once more that it was not possible for him to
stay in bed and that the most sensible thing to do would be to get free
of it in whatever way he could at whatever sacrifice. At the same time,
though, he did not forget to remind himself that calm consideration was
much better than rushing to desperate conclusions. At times like this
he would direct his eyes to the window and look out as clearly as he
could, but unfortunately, even the other side of the narrow street was
enveloped in morning fog and the view had little confidence or cheer to
offer him. “Seven o’clock, already”, he said to himself when the clock
struck again, “seven o’clock, and there’s still a fog like this.” And
he lay there quietly a while longer, breathing lightly as if he perhaps
expected the total stillness to bring things back to their real and
natural state.

But then he said to himself: “Before it strikes quarter past seven I’ll
definitely have to have got properly out of bed. And by then somebody
will have come round from work to ask what’s happened to me as well, as
they open up at work before seven o’clock.” And so he set himself to
the task of swinging the entire length of his body out of the bed all
at the same time. If he succeeded in falling out of bed in this way and
kept his head raised as he did so he could probably avoid injuring it.
His back seemed to be quite hard, and probably nothing would happen to
it falling onto the carpet. His main concern was for the loud noise he
was bound to make, and which even through all the doors would probably
raise concern if not alarm. But it was something that had to be risked.

When Gregor was already sticking half way out of the bed—the new method
was more of a game than an effort, all he had to do was rock back and
forth—it occurred to him how simple everything would be if somebody
came to help him. Two strong people—he had his father and the maid in
mind—would have been more than enough; they would only have to push
their arms under the dome of his back, peel him away from the bed, bend
down with the load and then be patient and careful as he swang over
onto the floor, where, hopefully, the little legs would find a use.
Should he really call for help though, even apart from the fact that
all the doors were locked? Despite all the difficulty he was in, he
could not suppress a smile at this thought.

After a while he had already moved so far across that it would have
been hard for him to keep his balance if he rocked too hard. The time
was now ten past seven and he would have to make a final decision very
soon. Then there was a ring at the door of the flat. “That’ll be
someone from work”, he said to himself, and froze very still, although
his little legs only became all the more lively as they danced around.
For a moment everything remained quiet. “They’re not opening the door”,
Gregor said to himself, caught in some nonsensical hope. But then of
course, the maid’s firm steps went to the door as ever and opened it.
Gregor only needed to hear the visitor’s first words of greeting and he
knew who it was—the chief clerk himself. Why did Gregor have to be the
only one condemned to work for a company where they immediately became
highly suspicious at the slightest shortcoming? Were all employees,
every one of them, louts, was there not one of them who was faithful
and devoted who would go so mad with pangs of conscience that he
couldn’t get out of bed if he didn’t spend at least a couple of hours
in the morning on company business? Was it really not enough to let one
of the trainees make enquiries—assuming enquiries were even
necessary—did the chief clerk have to come himself, and did they have
to show the whole, innocent family that this was so suspicious that
only the chief clerk could be trusted to have the wisdom to investigate
it? And more because these thoughts had made him upset than through any
proper decision, he swang himself with all his force out of the bed.
There was a loud thump, but it wasn’t really a loud noise. His fall was
softened a little by the carpet, and Gregor’s back was also more
elastic than he had thought, which made the sound muffled and not too
noticeable. He had not held his head carefully enough, though, and hit
it as he fell; annoyed and in pain, he turned it and rubbed it against
the carpet.

“Something’s fallen down in there”, said the chief clerk in the room on
the left. Gregor tried to imagine whether something of the sort that
had happened to him today could ever happen to the chief clerk too; you
had to concede that it was possible. But as if in gruff reply to this
question, the chief clerk’s firm footsteps in his highly polished boots
could now be heard in the adjoining room. From the room on his right,
Gregor’s sister whispered to him to let him know: “Gregor, the chief
clerk is here.” “Yes, I know”, said Gregor to himself; but without
daring to raise his voice loud enough for his sister to hear him.

“Gregor”, said his father now from the room to his left, “the chief
clerk has come round and wants to know why you didn’t leave on the
early train. We don’t know what to say to him. And anyway, he wants to
speak to you personally. So please open up this door. I’m sure he’ll be
good enough to forgive the untidiness of your room.” Then the chief
clerk called “Good morning, Mr. Samsa”. “He isn’t well”, said his
mother to the chief clerk, while his father continued to speak through
the door. “He isn’t well, please believe me. Why else would Gregor have
missed a train! The lad only ever thinks about the business. It nearly
makes me cross the way he never goes out in the evenings; he’s been in
town for a week now but stayed home every evening. He sits with us in
the kitchen and just reads the paper or studies train timetables. His
idea of relaxation is working with his fretsaw. He’s made a little
frame, for instance, it only took him two or three evenings, you’ll be
amazed how nice it is; it’s hanging up in his room; you’ll see it as
soon as Gregor opens the door. Anyway, I’m glad you’re here; we
wouldn’t have been able to get Gregor to open the door by ourselves;
he’s so stubborn; and I’m sure he isn’t well, he said this morning that
he is, but he isn’t.” “I’ll be there in a moment”, said Gregor slowly
and thoughtfully, but without moving so that he would not miss any word
of the conversation. “Well I can’t think of any other way of explaining
it, Mrs. Samsa”, said the chief clerk, “I hope it’s nothing serious.
But on the other hand, I must say that if we people in commerce ever
become slightly unwell then, fortunately or unfortunately as you like,
we simply have to overcome it because of business considerations.” “Can
the chief clerk come in to see you now then?”, asked his father
impatiently, knocking at the door again. “No”, said Gregor. In the room
on his right there followed a painful silence; in the room on his left
his sister began to cry.

So why did his sister not go and join the others? She had probably only
just got up and had not even begun to get dressed. And why was she
crying? Was it because he had not got up, and had not let the chief
clerk in, because he was in danger of losing his job and if that
happened his boss would once more pursue their parents with the same
demands as before? There was no need to worry about things like that
yet. Gregor was still there and had not the slightest intention of
abandoning his family. For the time being he just lay there on the
carpet, and no-one who knew the condition he was in would seriously
have expected him to let the chief clerk in. It was only a minor
discourtesy, and a suitable excuse could easily be found for it later
on, it was not something for which Gregor could be sacked on the spot.
And it seemed to Gregor much more sensible to leave him now in peace
instead of disturbing him with talking at him and crying. But the
others didn’t know what was happening, they were worried, that would
excuse their behaviour.

The chief clerk now raised his voice, “Mr. Samsa”, he called to him,
“what is wrong? You barricade yourself in your room, give us no more
than yes or no for an answer, you are causing serious and unnecessary
concern to your parents and you fail—and I mention this just by the
way—you fail to carry out your business duties in a way that is quite
unheard of. I’m speaking here on behalf of your parents and of your
employer, and really must request a clear and immediate explanation. I
am astonished, quite astonished. I thought I knew you as a calm and
sensible person, and now you suddenly seem to be showing off with
peculiar whims. This morning, your employer did suggest a possible
reason for your failure to appear, it’s true—it had to do with the
money that was recently entrusted to you—but I came near to giving him
my word of honour that that could not be the right explanation. But now
that I see your incomprehensible stubbornness I no longer feel any wish
whatsoever to intercede on your behalf. And nor is your position all
that secure. I had originally intended to say all this to you in
private, but since you cause me to waste my time here for no good
reason I don’t see why your parents should not also learn of it. Your
turnover has been very unsatisfactory of late; I grant you that it’s
not the time of year to do especially good business, we recognise that;
but there simply is no time of year to do no business at all, Mr.
Samsa, we cannot allow there to be.”

“But Sir”, called Gregor, beside himself and forgetting all else in the
excitement, “I’ll open up immediately, just a moment. I’m slightly
unwell, an attack of dizziness, I haven’t been able to get up. I’m
still in bed now. I’m quite fresh again now, though. I’m just getting
out of bed. Just a moment. Be patient! It’s not quite as easy as I’d
thought. I’m quite alright now, though. It’s shocking, what can
suddenly happen to a person! I was quite alright last night, my parents
know about it, perhaps better than me, I had a small symptom of it last
night already. They must have noticed it. I don’t know why I didn’t let
you know at work! But you always think you can get over an illness
without staying at home. Please, don’t make my parents suffer! There’s
no basis for any of the accusations you’re making; nobody’s ever said a
word to me about any of these things. Maybe you haven’t read the latest
contracts I sent in. I’ll set off with the eight o’clock train, as
well, these few hours of rest have given me strength. You don’t need to
wait, sir; I’ll be in the office soon after you, and please be so good
as to tell that to the boss and recommend me to him!”

And while Gregor gushed out these words, hardly knowing what he was
saying, he made his way over to the chest of drawers—this was easily
done, probably because of the practise he had already had in bed—where
he now tried to get himself upright. He really did want to open the
door, really did want to let them see him and to speak with the chief
clerk; the others were being so insistent, and he was curious to learn
what they would say when they caught sight of him. If they were shocked
then it would no longer be Gregor’s responsibility and he could rest.
If, however, they took everything calmly he would still have no reason
to be upset, and if he hurried he really could be at the station for
eight o’clock. The first few times he tried to climb up on the smooth
chest of drawers he just slid down again, but he finally gave himself
one last swing and stood there upright; the lower part of his body was
in serious pain but he no longer gave any attention to it. Now he let
himself fall against the back of a nearby chair and held tightly to the
edges of it with his little legs. By now he had also calmed down, and
kept quiet so that he could listen to what the chief clerk was saying.

“Did you understand a word of all that?” the chief clerk asked his
parents, “surely he’s not trying to make fools of us”. “Oh, God!”
called his mother, who was already in tears, “he could be seriously ill
and we’re making him suffer. Grete! Grete!” she then cried. “Mother?”
his sister called from the other side. They communicated across
Gregor’s room. “You’ll have to go for the doctor straight away. Gregor
is ill. Quick, get the doctor. Did you hear the way Gregor spoke just
now?” “That was the voice of an animal”, said the chief clerk, with a
calmness that was in contrast with his mother’s screams. “Anna! Anna!”
his father called into the kitchen through the entrance hall, clapping
his hands, “get a locksmith here, now!” And the two girls, their skirts
swishing, immediately ran out through the hall, wrenching open the
front door of the flat as they went. How had his sister managed to get
dressed so quickly? There was no sound of the door banging shut again;
they must have left it open; people often do in homes where something
awful has happened.

Gregor, in contrast, had become much calmer. So they couldn’t
understand his words any more, although they seemed clear enough to
him, clearer than before—perhaps his ears had become used to the sound.
They had realised, though, that there was something wrong with him, and
were ready to help. The first response to his situation had been
confident and wise, and that made him feel better. He felt that he had
been drawn back in among people, and from the doctor and the locksmith
he expected great and surprising achievements—although he did not
really distinguish one from the other. Whatever was said next would be
crucial, so, in order to make his voice as clear as possible, he
coughed a little, but taking care to do this not too loudly as even
this might well sound different from the way that a human coughs and he
was no longer sure he could judge this for himself. Meanwhile, it had
become very quiet in the next room. Perhaps his parents were sat at the
table whispering with the chief clerk, or perhaps they were all pressed
against the door and listening.

Gregor slowly pushed his way over to the door with the chair. Once
there he let go of it and threw himself onto the door, holding himself
upright against it using the adhesive on the tips of his legs. He
rested there a little while to recover from the effort involved and
then set himself to the task of turning the key in the lock with his
mouth. He seemed, unfortunately, to have no proper teeth—how was he,
then, to grasp the key?—but the lack of teeth was, of course, made up
for with a very strong jaw; using the jaw, he really was able to start
the key turning, ignoring the fact that he must have been causing some
kind of damage as a brown fluid came from his mouth, flowed over the
key and dripped onto the floor. “Listen”, said the chief clerk in the
next room, “he’s turning the key.” Gregor was greatly encouraged by
this; but they all should have been calling to him, his father and his
mother too: “Well done, Gregor”, they should have cried, “keep at it,
keep hold of the lock!” And with the idea that they were all excitedly
following his efforts, he bit on the key with all his strength, paying
no attention to the pain he was causing himself. As the key turned
round he turned around the lock with it, only holding himself upright
with his mouth, and hung onto the key or pushed it down again with the
whole weight of his body as needed. The clear sound of the lock as it
snapped back was Gregor’s sign that he could break his concentration,
and as he regained his breath he said to himself: “So, I didn’t need
the locksmith after all”. Then he lay his head on the handle of the
door to open it completely.

Because he had to open the door in this way, it was already wide open
before he could be seen. He had first to slowly turn himself around one
of the double doors, and he had to do it very carefully if he did not
want to fall flat on his back before entering the room. He was still
occupied with this difficult movement, unable to pay attention to
anything else, when he heard the chief clerk exclaim a loud “Oh!”,
which sounded like the soughing of the wind. Now he also saw him—he was
the nearest to the door—his hand pressed against his open mouth and
slowly retreating as if driven by a steady and invisible force.
Gregor’s mother, her hair still dishevelled from bed despite the chief
clerk’s being there, looked at his father. Then she unfolded her arms,
took two steps forward towards Gregor and sank down onto the floor into
her skirts that spread themselves out around her as her head
disappeared down onto her breast. His father looked hostile, and
clenched his fists as if wanting to knock Gregor back into his room.
Then he looked uncertainly round the living room, covered his eyes with
his hands and wept so that his powerful chest shook.

So Gregor did not go into the room, but leant against the inside of the
other door which was still held bolted in place. In this way only half
of his body could be seen, along with his head above it which he leant
over to one side as he peered out at the others. Meanwhile the day had
become much lighter; part of the endless, grey-black building on the
other side of the street—which was a hospital—could be seen quite
clearly with the austere and regular line of windows piercing its
façade; the rain was still falling, now throwing down large, individual
droplets which hit the ground one at a time. The washing up from
breakfast lay on the table; there was so much of it because, for
Gregor’s father, breakfast was the most important meal of the day and
he would stretch it out for several hours as he sat reading a number of
different newspapers. On the wall exactly opposite there was photograph
of Gregor when he was a lieutenant in the army, his sword in his hand
and a carefree smile on his face as he called forth respect for his
uniform and bearing. The door to the entrance hall was open and as the
front door of the flat was also open he could see onto the landing and
the stairs where they began their way down below.

“Now, then”, said Gregor, well aware that he was the only one to have
kept calm, “I’ll get dressed straight away now, pack up my samples and
set off. Will you please just let me leave? You can see”, he said to
the chief clerk, “that I’m not stubborn and I like to do my job; being
a commercial traveller is arduous but without travelling I couldn’t
earn my living. So where are you going, in to the office? Yes? Will you
report everything accurately, then? It’s quite possible for someone to
be temporarily unable to work, but that’s just the right time to
remember what’s been achieved in the past and consider that later on,
once the difficulty has been removed, he will certainly work with all
the more diligence and concentration. You’re well aware that I’m
seriously in debt to our employer as well as having to look after my
parents and my sister, so that I’m trapped in a difficult situation,
but I will work my way out of it again. Please don’t make things any
harder for me than they are already, and don’t take sides against me at
the office. I know that nobody likes the travellers. They think we earn
an enormous wage as well as having a soft time of it. That’s just
prejudice but they have no particular reason to think better of it. But
you, sir, you have a better overview than the rest of the staff, in
fact, if I can say this in confidence, a better overview than the boss
himself—it’s very easy for a businessman like him to make mistakes
about his employees and judge them more harshly than he should. And
you’re also well aware that we travellers spend almost the whole year
away from the office, so that we can very easily fall victim to gossip
and chance and groundless complaints, and it’s almost impossible to
defend yourself from that sort of thing, we don’t usually even hear
about them, or if at all it’s when we arrive back home exhausted from a
trip, and that’s when we feel the harmful effects of what’s been going
on without even knowing what caused them. Please, don’t go away, at
least first say something to show that you grant that I’m at least
partly right!”

But the chief clerk had turned away as soon as Gregor had started to
speak, and, with protruding lips, only stared back at him over his
trembling shoulders as he left. He did not keep still for a moment
while Gregor was speaking, but moved steadily towards the door without
taking his eyes off him. He moved very gradually, as if there had been
some secret prohibition on leaving the room. It was only when he had
reached the entrance hall that he made a sudden movement, drew his foot
from the living room, and rushed forward in a panic. In the hall, he
stretched his right hand far out towards the stairway as if out there,
there were some supernatural force waiting to save him.

Gregor realised that it was out of the question to let the chief clerk
go away in this mood if his position in the firm was not to be put into
extreme danger. That was something his parents did not understand very
well; over the years, they had become convinced that this job would
provide for Gregor for his entire life, and besides, they had so much
to worry about at present that they had lost sight of any thought for
the future. Gregor, though, did think about the future. The chief clerk
had to be held back, calmed down, convinced and finally won over; the
future of Gregor and his family depended on it! If only his sister were
here! She was clever; she was already in tears while Gregor was still
lying peacefully on his back. And the chief clerk was a lover of women,
surely she could persuade him; she would close the front door in the
entrance hall and talk him out of his shocked state. But his sister was
not there, Gregor would have to do the job himself. And without
considering that he still was not familiar with how well he could move
about in his present state, or that his speech still might not—or
probably would not—be understood, he let go of the door; pushed himself
through the opening; tried to reach the chief clerk on the landing who,
ridiculously, was holding on to the banister with both hands; but
Gregor fell immediately over and, with a little scream as he sought
something to hold onto, landed on his numerous little legs. Hardly had
that happened than, for the first time that day, he began to feel
alright with his body; the little legs had the solid ground under them;
to his pleasure, they did exactly as he told them; they were even
making the effort to carry him where he wanted to go; and he was soon
believing that all his sorrows would soon be finally at an end. He held
back the urge to move but swayed from side to side as he crouched there
on the floor. His mother was not far away in front of him and seemed,
at first, quite engrossed in herself, but then she suddenly jumped up
with her arms outstretched and her fingers spread shouting: “Help, for
pity’s sake, Help!” The way she held her head suggested she wanted to
see Gregor better, but the unthinking way she was hurrying backwards
showed that she did not; she had forgotten that the table was behind
her with all the breakfast things on it; when she reached the table she
sat quickly down on it without knowing what she was doing; without even
seeming to notice that the coffee pot had been knocked over and a gush
of coffee was pouring down onto the carpet.

“Mother, mother”, said Gregor gently, looking up at her. He had
completely forgotten the chief clerk for the moment, but could not help
himself snapping in the air with his jaws at the sight of the flow of
coffee. That set his mother screaming anew, she fled from the table and
into the arms of his father as he rushed towards her. Gregor, though,
had no time to spare for his parents now; the chief clerk had already
reached the stairs; with his chin on the banister, he looked back for
the last time. Gregor made a run for him; he wanted to be sure of
reaching him; the chief clerk must have expected something, as he leapt
down several steps at once and disappeared; his shouts resounding all
around the staircase. The flight of the chief clerk seemed,
unfortunately, to put Gregor’s father into a panic as well. Until then
he had been relatively self controlled, but now, instead of running
after the chief clerk himself, or at least not impeding Gregor as he
ran after him, Gregor’s father seized the chief clerk’s stick in his
right hand (the chief clerk had left it behind on a chair, along with
his hat and overcoat), picked up a large newspaper from the table with
his left, and used them to drive Gregor back into his room, stamping
his foot at him as he went. Gregor’s appeals to his father were of no
help, his appeals were simply not understood, however much he humbly
turned his head his father merely stamped his foot all the harder.
Across the room, despite the chilly weather, Gregor’s mother had pulled
open a window, leant far out of it and pressed her hands to her face. A
strong draught of air flew in from the street towards the stairway, the
curtains flew up, the newspapers on the table fluttered and some of
them were blown onto the floor. Nothing would stop Gregor’s father as
he drove him back, making hissing noises at him like a wild man. Gregor
had never had any practice in moving backwards and was only able to go
very slowly. If Gregor had only been allowed to turn round he would
have been back in his room straight away, but he was afraid that if he
took the time to do that his father would become impatient, and there
was the threat of a lethal blow to his back or head from the stick in
his father’s hand any moment. Eventually, though, Gregor realised that
he had no choice as he saw, to his disgust, that he was quite incapable
of going backwards in a straight line; so he began, as quickly as
possible and with frequent anxious glances at his father, to turn
himself round. It went very slowly, but perhaps his father was able to
see his good intentions as he did nothing to hinder him, in fact now
and then he used the tip of his stick to give directions from a
distance as to which way to turn. If only his father would stop that
unbearable hissing! It was making Gregor quite confused. When he had
nearly finished turning round, still listening to that hissing, he made
a mistake and turned himself back a little the way he had just come. He
was pleased when he finally had his head in front of the doorway, but
then saw that it was too narrow, and his body was too broad to get
through it without further difficulty. In his present mood, it
obviously did not occur to his father to open the other of the double
doors so that Gregor would have enough space to get through. He was
merely fixed on the idea that Gregor should be got back into his room
as quickly as possible. Nor would he ever have allowed Gregor the time
to get himself upright as preparation for getting through the doorway.
What he did, making more noise than ever, was to drive Gregor forwards
all the harder as if there had been nothing in the way; it sounded to
Gregor as if there was now more than one father behind him; it was not
a pleasant experience, and Gregor pushed himself into the doorway
without regard for what might happen. One side of his body lifted
itself, he lay at an angle in the doorway, one flank scraped on the
white door and was painfully injured, leaving vile brown flecks on it,
soon he was stuck fast and would not have been able to move at all by
himself, the little legs along one side hung quivering in the air while
those on the other side were pressed painfully against the ground. Then
his father gave him a hefty shove from behind which released him from
where he was held and sent him flying, and heavily bleeding, deep into
his room. The door was slammed shut with the stick, then, finally, all
was quiet.




II


It was not until it was getting dark that evening that Gregor awoke
from his deep and coma-like sleep. He would have woken soon afterwards
anyway even if he hadn’t been disturbed, as he had had enough sleep and
felt fully rested. But he had the impression that some hurried steps
and the sound of the door leading into the front room being carefully
shut had woken him. The light from the electric street lamps shone
palely here and there onto the ceiling and tops of the furniture, but
down below, where Gregor was, it was dark. He pushed himself over to
the door, feeling his way clumsily with his antennae—of which he was
now beginning to learn the value—in order to see what had been
happening there. The whole of his left side seemed like one, painfully
stretched scar, and he limped badly on his two rows of legs. One of the
legs had been badly injured in the events of that morning—it was nearly
a miracle that only one of them had been—and dragged along lifelessly.

It was only when he had reached the door that he realised what it
actually was that had drawn him over to it; it was the smell of
something to eat. By the door there was a dish filled with sweetened
milk with little pieces of white bread floating in it. He was so
pleased he almost laughed, as he was even hungrier than he had been
that morning, and immediately dipped his head into the milk, nearly
covering his eyes with it. But he soon drew his head back again in
disappointment; not only did the pain in his tender left side make it
difficult to eat the food—he was only able to eat if his whole body
worked together as a snuffling whole—but the milk did not taste at all
nice. Milk like this was normally his favourite drink, and his sister
had certainly left it there for him because of that, but he turned,
almost against his own will, away from the dish and crawled back into
the centre of the room.

Through the crack in the door, Gregor could see that the gas had been
lit in the living room. His father at this time would normally be sat
with his evening paper, reading it out in a loud voice to Gregor’s
mother, and sometimes to his sister, but there was now not a sound to
be heard. Gregor’s sister would often write and tell him about this
reading, but maybe his father had lost the habit in recent times. It
was so quiet all around too, even though there must have been somebody
in the flat. “What a quiet life it is the family lead”, said Gregor to
himself, and, gazing into the darkness, felt a great pride that he was
able to provide a life like that in such a nice home for his sister and
parents. But what now, if all this peace and wealth and comfort should
come to a horrible and frightening end? That was something that Gregor
did not want to think about too much, so he started to move about,
crawling up and down the room.

Once during that long evening, the door on one side of the room was
opened very slightly and hurriedly closed again; later on the door on
the other side did the same; it seemed that someone needed to enter the
room but thought better of it. Gregor went and waited immediately by
the door, resolved either to bring the timorous visitor into the room
in some way or at least to find out who it was; but the door was opened
no more that night and Gregor waited in vain. The previous morning
while the doors were locked everyone had wanted to get in there to him,
but now, now that he had opened up one of the doors and the other had
clearly been unlocked some time during the day, no-one came, and the
keys were in the other sides.

It was not until late at night that the gaslight in the living room was
put out, and now it was easy to see that his parents and sister had
stayed awake all that time, as they all could be distinctly heard as
they went away together on tip-toe. It was clear that no-one would come
into Gregor’s room any more until morning; that gave him plenty of time
to think undisturbed about how he would have to re-arrange his life.
For some reason, the tall, empty room where he was forced to remain
made him feel uneasy as he lay there flat on the floor, even though he
had been living in it for five years. Hardly aware of what he was doing
other than a slight feeling of shame, he hurried under the couch. It
pressed down on his back a little, and he was no longer able to lift
his head, but he nonetheless felt immediately at ease and his only
regret was that his body was too broad to get it all underneath.

He spent the whole night there. Some of the time he passed in a light
sleep, although he frequently woke from it in alarm because of his
hunger, and some of the time was spent in worries and vague hopes
which, however, always led to the same conclusion: for the time being
he must remain calm, he must show patience and the greatest
consideration so that his family could bear the unpleasantness that he,
in his present condition, was forced to impose on them.

Gregor soon had the opportunity to test the strength of his decisions,
as early the next morning, almost before the night had ended, his
sister, nearly fully dressed, opened the door from the front room and
looked anxiously in. She did not see him straight away, but when she
did notice him under the couch—he had to be somewhere, for God’s sake,
he couldn’t have flown away—she was so shocked that she lost control of
herself and slammed the door shut again from outside. But she seemed to
regret her behaviour, as she opened the door again straight away and
came in on tip-toe as if entering the room of someone seriously ill or
even of a stranger. Gregor had pushed his head forward, right to the
edge of the couch, and watched her. Would she notice that he had left
the milk as it was, realise that it was not from any lack of hunger and
bring him in some other food that was more suitable? If she didn’t do
it herself he would rather go hungry than draw her attention to it,
although he did feel a terrible urge to rush forward from under the
couch, throw himself at his sister’s feet and beg her for something
good to eat. However, his sister noticed the full dish immediately and
looked at it and the few drops of milk splashed around it with some
surprise. She immediately picked it up—using a rag, not her bare
hands—and carried it out. Gregor was extremely curious as to what she
would bring in its place, imagining the wildest possibilities, but he
never could have guessed what his sister, in her goodness, actually did
bring. In order to test his taste, she brought him a whole selection of
things, all spread out on an old newspaper. There were old, half-rotten
vegetables; bones from the evening meal, covered in white sauce that
had gone hard; a few raisins and almonds; some cheese that Gregor had
declared inedible two days before; a dry roll and some bread spread
with butter and salt. As well as all that she had poured some water
into the dish, which had probably been permanently set aside for
Gregor’s use, and placed it beside them. Then, out of consideration for
Gregor’s feelings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of her,
she hurried out again and even turned the key in the lock so that
Gregor would know he could make things as comfortable for himself as he
liked. Gregor’s little legs whirred, at last he could eat. What’s more,
his injuries must already have completely healed as he found no
difficulty in moving. This amazed him, as more than a month earlier he
had cut his finger slightly with a knife, he thought of how his finger
had still hurt the day before yesterday. “Am I less sensitive than I
used to be, then?”, he thought, and was already sucking greedily at the
cheese which had immediately, almost compellingly, attracted him much
more than the other foods on the newspaper. Quickly one after another,
his eyes watering with pleasure, he consumed the cheese, the vegetables
and the sauce; the fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn’t like at
all, and even dragged the things he did want to eat a little way away
from them because he couldn’t stand the smell. Long after he had
finished eating and lay lethargic in the same place, his sister slowly
turned the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should withdraw. He
was immediately startled, although he had been half asleep, and he
hurried back under the couch. But he needed great self-control to stay
there even for the short time that his sister was in the room, as
eating so much food had rounded out his body a little and he could
hardly breathe in that narrow space. Half suffocating, he watched with
bulging eyes as his sister unselfconsciously took a broom and swept up
the left-overs, mixing them in with the food he had not even touched at
all as if it could not be used any more. She quickly dropped it all
into a bin, closed it with its wooden lid, and carried everything out.
She had hardly turned her back before Gregor came out again from under
the couch and stretched himself.

This was how Gregor received his food each day now, once in the morning
while his parents and the maid were still asleep, and the second time
after everyone had eaten their meal at midday as his parents would
sleep for a little while then as well, and Gregor’s sister would send
the maid away on some errand. Gregor’s father and mother certainly did
not want him to starve either, but perhaps it would have been more than
they could stand to have any more experience of his feeding than being
told about it, and perhaps his sister wanted to spare them what
distress she could as they were indeed suffering enough.

It was impossible for Gregor to find out what they had told the doctor
and the locksmith that first morning to get them out of the flat. As
nobody could understand him, nobody, not even his sister, thought that
he could understand them, so he had to be content to hear his sister’s
sighs and appeals to the saints as she moved about his room. It was
only later, when she had become a little more used to everything—there
was, of course, no question of her ever becoming fully used to the
situation—that Gregor would sometimes catch a friendly comment, or at
least a comment that could be construed as friendly. “He’s enjoyed his
dinner today”, she might say when he had diligently cleared away all
the food left for him, or if he left most of it, which slowly became
more and more frequent, she would often say, sadly, “now everything’s
just been left there again”.

Although Gregor wasn’t able to hear any news directly he did listen to
much of what was said in the next rooms, and whenever he heard anyone
speaking he would scurry straight to the appropriate door and press his
whole body against it. There was seldom any conversation, especially at
first, that was not about him in some way, even if only in secret. For
two whole days, all the talk at every mealtime was about what they
should do now; but even between meals they spoke about the same subject
as there were always at least two members of the family at home—nobody
wanted to be at home by themselves and it was out of the question to
leave the flat entirely empty. And on the very first day the maid had
fallen to her knees and begged Gregor’s mother to let her go without
delay. It was not very clear how much she knew of what had happened but
she left within a quarter of an hour, tearfully thanking Gregor’s
mother for her dismissal as if she had done her an enormous service.
She even swore emphatically not to tell anyone the slightest about what
had happened, even though no-one had asked that of her.

Now Gregor’s sister also had to help his mother with the cooking;
although that was not so much bother as no-one ate very much. Gregor
often heard how one of them would unsuccessfully urge another to eat,
and receive no more answer than “no thanks, I’ve had enough” or
something similar. No-one drank very much either. His sister would
sometimes ask his father whether he would like a beer, hoping for the
chance to go and fetch it herself. When his father then said nothing
she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that she could send
the housekeeper for it, but then his father would close the matter with
a big, loud “No”, and no more would be said.

Even before the first day had come to an end, his father had explained
to Gregor’s mother and sister what their finances and prospects were.
Now and then he stood up from the table and took some receipt or
document from the little cash box he had saved from his business when
it had collapsed five years earlier. Gregor heard how he opened the
complicated lock and then closed it again after he had taken the item
he wanted. What he heard his father say was some of the first good news
that Gregor heard since he had first been incarcerated in his room. He
had thought that nothing at all remained from his father’s business, at
least he had never told him anything different, and Gregor had never
asked him about it anyway. Their business misfortune had reduced the
family to a state of total despair, and Gregor’s only concern at that
time had been to arrange things so that they could all forget about it
as quickly as possible. So then he started working especially hard,
with a fiery vigour that raised him from a junior salesman to a
travelling representative almost overnight, bringing with it the chance
to earn money in quite different ways. Gregor converted his success at
work straight into cash that he could lay on the table at home for the
benefit of his astonished and delighted family. They had been good
times and they had never come again, at least not with the same
splendour, even though Gregor had later earned so much that he was in a
position to bear the costs of the whole family, and did bear them. They
had even got used to it, both Gregor and the family, they took the
money with gratitude and he was glad to provide it, although there was
no longer much warm affection given in return. Gregor only remained
close to his sister now. Unlike him, she was very fond of music and a
gifted and expressive violinist, it was his secret plan to send her to
the conservatory next year even though it would cause great expense
that would have to be made up for in some other way. During Gregor’s
short periods in town, conversation with his sister would often turn to
the conservatory but it was only ever mentioned as a lovely dream that
could never be realised. Their parents did not like to hear this
innocent talk, but Gregor thought about it quite hard and decided he
would let them know what he planned with a grand announcement of it on
Christmas day.

That was the sort of totally pointless thing that went through his mind
in his present state, pressed upright against the door and listening.
There were times when he simply became too tired to continue listening,
when his head would fall wearily against the door and he would pull it
up again with a start, as even the slightest noise he caused would be
heard next door and they would all go silent. “What’s that he’s doing
now”, his father would say after a while, clearly having gone over to
the door, and only then would the interrupted conversation slowly be
taken up again.

When explaining things, his father repeated himself several times,
partly because it was a long time since he had been occupied with these
matters himself and partly because Gregor’s mother did not understand
everything the first time. From these repeated explanations Gregor
learned, to his pleasure, that despite all their misfortunes there was
still some money available from the old days. It was not a lot, but it
had not been touched in the meantime and some interest had accumulated.
Besides that, they had not been using up all the money that Gregor had
been bringing home every month, keeping only a little for himself, so
that that, too, had been accumulating. Behind the door, Gregor nodded
with enthusiasm in his pleasure at this unexpected thrift and caution.
He could actually have used this surplus money to reduce his father’s
debt to his boss, and the day when he could have freed himself from
that job would have come much closer, but now it was certainly better
the way his father had done things.

This money, however, was certainly not enough to enable the family to
live off the interest; it was enough to maintain them for, perhaps, one
or two years, no more. That’s to say, it was money that should not
really be touched but set aside for emergencies; money to live on had
to be earned. His father was healthy but old, and lacking in self
confidence. During the five years that he had not been working—the
first holiday in a life that had been full of strain and no success—he
had put on a lot of weight and become very slow and clumsy. Would
Gregor’s elderly mother now have to go and earn money? She suffered
from asthma and it was a strain for her just to move about the home,
every other day would be spent struggling for breath on the sofa by the
open window. Would his sister have to go and earn money? She was still
a child of seventeen, her life up till then had been very enviable,
consisting of wearing nice clothes, sleeping late, helping out in the
business, joining in with a few modest pleasures and most of all
playing the violin. Whenever they began to talk of the need to earn
money, Gregor would always first let go of the door and then throw
himself onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he became quite hot
with shame and regret.

He would often lie there the whole night through, not sleeping a wink
but scratching at the leather for hours on end. Or he might go to all
the effort of pushing a chair to the window, climbing up onto the sill
and, propped up in the chair, leaning on the window to stare out of it.
He had used to feel a great sense of freedom from doing this, but doing
it now was obviously something more remembered than experienced, as
what he actually saw in this way was becoming less distinct every day,
even things that were quite near; he had used to curse the ever-present
view of the hospital across the street, but now he could not see it at
all, and if he had not known that he lived in Charlottenstrasse, which
was a quiet street despite being in the middle of the city, he could
have thought that he was looking out the window at a barren waste where
the grey sky and the grey earth mingled inseparably. His observant
sister only needed to notice the chair twice before she would always
push it back to its exact position by the window after she had tidied
up the room, and even left the inner pane of the window open from then
on.

If Gregor had only been able to speak to his sister and thank her for
all that she had to do for him it would have been easier for him to
bear it; but as it was it caused him pain. His sister, naturally, tried
as far as possible to pretend there was nothing burdensome about it,
and the longer it went on, of course, the better she was able to do so,
but as time went by Gregor was also able to see through it all so much
better. It had even become very unpleasant for him, now, whenever she
entered the room. No sooner had she come in than she would quickly
close the door as a precaution so that no-one would have to suffer the
view into Gregor’s room, then she would go straight to the window and
pull it hurriedly open almost as if she were suffocating. Even if it
was cold, she would stay at the window breathing deeply for a little
while. She would alarm Gregor twice a day with this running about and
noise making; he would stay under the couch shivering the whole while,
knowing full well that she would certainly have liked to spare him this
ordeal, but it was impossible for her to be in the same room with him
with the windows closed.

One day, about a month after Gregor’s transformation when his sister no
longer had any particular reason to be shocked at his appearance, she
came into the room a little earlier than usual and found him still
staring out the window, motionless, and just where he would be most
horrible. In itself, his sister’s not coming into the room would have
been no surprise for Gregor as it would have been difficult for her to
immediately open the window while he was still there, but not only did
she not come in, she went straight back and closed the door behind her,
a stranger would have thought he had threatened her and tried to bite
her. Gregor went straight to hide himself under the couch, of course,
but he had to wait until midday before his sister came back and she
seemed much more uneasy than usual. It made him realise that she still
found his appearance unbearable and would continue to do so, she
probably even had to overcome the urge to flee when she saw the little
bit of him that protruded from under the couch. One day, in order to
spare her even this sight, he spent four hours carrying the bedsheet
over to the couch on his back and arranged it so that he was completely
covered and his sister would not be able to see him even if she bent
down. If she did not think this sheet was necessary then all she had to
do was take it off again, as it was clear enough that it was no
pleasure for Gregor to cut himself off so completely. She left the
sheet where it was. Gregor even thought he glimpsed a look of gratitude
one time when he carefully looked out from under the sheet to see how
his sister liked the new arrangement.

For the first fourteen days, Gregor’s parents could not bring
themselves to come into the room to see him. He would often hear them
say how they appreciated all the new work his sister was doing even
though, before, they had seen her as a girl who was somewhat useless
and frequently been annoyed with her. But now the two of them, father
and mother, would often both wait outside the door of Gregor’s room
while his sister tidied up in there, and as soon as she went out again
she would have to tell them exactly how everything looked, what Gregor
had eaten, how he had behaved this time and whether, perhaps, any
slight improvement could be seen. His mother also wanted to go in and
visit Gregor relatively soon but his father and sister at first
persuaded her against it. Gregor listened very closely to all this, and
approved fully. Later, though, she had to be held back by force, which
made her call out: “Let me go and see Gregor, he is my unfortunate son!
Can’t you understand I have to see him?”, and Gregor would think to
himself that maybe it would be better if his mother came in, not every
day of course, but one day a week, perhaps; she could understand
everything much better than his sister who, for all her courage, was
still just a child after all, and really might not have had an adult’s
appreciation of the burdensome job she had taken on.

Gregor’s wish to see his mother was soon realised. Out of consideration
for his parents, Gregor wanted to avoid being seen at the window during
the day, the few square meters of the floor did not give him much room
to crawl about, it was hard to just lie quietly through the night, his
food soon stopped giving him any pleasure at all, and so, to entertain
himself, he got into the habit of crawling up and down the walls and
ceiling. He was especially fond of hanging from the ceiling; it was
quite different from lying on the floor; he could breathe more freely;
his body had a light swing to it; and up there, relaxed and almost
happy, it might happen that he would surprise even himself by letting
go of the ceiling and landing on the floor with a crash. But now, of
course, he had far better control of his body than before and, even
with a fall as great as that, caused himself no damage. Very soon his
sister noticed Gregor’s new way of entertaining himself—he had, after
all, left traces of the adhesive from his feet as he crawled about—and
got it into her head to make it as easy as possible for him by removing
the furniture that got in his way, especially the chest of drawers and
the desk. Now, this was not something that she would be able to do by
herself; she did not dare to ask for help from her father; the sixteen
year old maid had carried on bravely since the cook had left but she
certainly would not have helped in this, she had even asked to be
allowed to keep the kitchen locked at all times and never to have to
open the door unless it was especially important; so his sister had no
choice but to choose some time when Gregor’s father was not there and
fetch his mother to help her. As she approached the room, Gregor could
hear his mother express her joy, but once at the door she went silent.
First, of course, his sister came in and looked round to see that
everything in the room was alright; and only then did she let her
mother enter. Gregor had hurriedly pulled the sheet down lower over the
couch and put more folds into it so that everything really looked as if
it had just been thrown down by chance. Gregor also refrained, this
time, from spying out from under the sheet; he gave up the chance to
see his mother until later and was simply glad that she had come. “You
can come in, he can’t be seen”, said his sister, obviously leading her
in by the hand. The old chest of drawers was too heavy for a pair of
feeble women to be heaving about, but Gregor listened as they pushed it
from its place, his sister always taking on the heaviest part of the
work for herself and ignoring her mother’s warnings that she would
strain herself. This lasted a very long time. After labouring at it for
fifteen minutes or more his mother said it would be better to leave the
chest where it was, for one thing it was too heavy for them to get the
job finished before Gregor’s father got home and leaving it in the
middle of the room it would be in his way even more, and for another
thing it wasn’t even sure that taking the furniture away would really
be any help to him. She thought just the opposite; the sight of the
bare walls saddened her right to her heart; and why wouldn’t Gregor
feel the same way about it, he’d been used to this furniture in his
room for a long time and it would make him feel abandoned to be in an
empty room like that. Then, quietly, almost whispering as if wanting
Gregor (whose whereabouts she did not know) to hear not even the tone
of her voice, as she was convinced that he did not understand her
words, she added “and by taking the furniture away, won’t it seem like
we’re showing that we’ve given up all hope of improvement and we’re
abandoning him to cope for himself? I think it’d be best to leave the
room exactly the way it was before so that when Gregor comes back to us
again he’ll find everything unchanged and he’ll be able to forget the
time in between all the easier”.

Hearing these words from his mother made Gregor realise that the lack
of any direct human communication, along with the monotonous life led
by the family during these two months, must have made him confused—he
could think of no other way of explaining to himself why he had
seriously wanted his room emptied out. Had he really wanted to
transform his room into a cave, a warm room fitted out with the nice
furniture he had inherited? That would have let him crawl around
unimpeded in any direction, but it would also have let him quickly
forget his past when he had still been human. He had come very close to
forgetting, and it had only been the voice of his mother, unheard for
so long, that had shaken him out of it. Nothing should be removed;
everything had to stay; he could not do without the good influence the
furniture had on his condition; and if the furniture made it difficult
for him to crawl about mindlessly that was not a loss but a great
advantage.

His sister, unfortunately, did not agree; she had become used to the
idea, not without reason, that she was Gregor’s spokesman to his
parents about the things that concerned him. This meant that his
mother’s advice now was sufficient reason for her to insist on removing
not only the chest of drawers and the desk, as she had thought at
first, but all the furniture apart from the all-important couch. It was
more than childish perversity, of course, or the unexpected confidence
she had recently acquired, that made her insist; she had indeed noticed
that Gregor needed a lot of room to crawl about in, whereas the
furniture, as far as anyone could see, was of no use to him at all.
Girls of that age, though, do become enthusiastic about things and feel
they must get their way whenever they can. Perhaps this was what
tempted Grete to make Gregor’s situation seem even more shocking than
it was so that she could do even more for him. Grete would probably be
the only one who would dare enter a room dominated by Gregor crawling
about the bare walls by himself.

So she refused to let her mother dissuade her. Gregor’s mother already
looked uneasy in his room, she soon stopped speaking and helped
Gregor’s sister to get the chest of drawers out with what strength she
had. The chest of drawers was something that Gregor could do without if
he had to, but the writing desk had to stay. Hardly had the two women
pushed the chest of drawers, groaning, out of the room than Gregor
poked his head out from under the couch to see what he could do about
it. He meant to be as careful and considerate as he could, but,
unfortunately, it was his mother who came back first while Grete in the
next room had her arms round the chest, pushing and pulling at it from
side to side by herself without, of course, moving it an inch. His
mother was not used to the sight of Gregor, he might have made her ill,
so Gregor hurried backwards to the far end of the couch. In his
startlement, though, he was not able to prevent the sheet at its front
from moving a little. It was enough to attract his mother’s attention.
She stood very still, remained there a moment, and then went back out
to Grete.

Gregor kept trying to assure himself that nothing unusual was
happening, it was just a few pieces of furniture being moved after all,
but he soon had to admit that the women going to and fro, their little
calls to each other, the scraping of the furniture on the floor, all
these things made him feel as if he were being assailed from all sides.
With his head and legs pulled in against him and his body pressed to
the floor, he was forced to admit to himself that he could not stand
all of this much longer. They were emptying his room out; taking away
everything that was dear to him; they had already taken out the chest
containing his fretsaw and other tools; now they threatened to remove
the writing desk with its place clearly worn into the floor, the desk
where he had done his homework as a business trainee, at high school,
even while he had been at infant school—he really could not wait any
longer to see whether the two women’s intentions were good. He had
nearly forgotten they were there anyway, as they were now too tired to
say anything while they worked and he could only hear their feet as
they stepped heavily on the floor.

So, while the women were leant against the desk in the other room
catching their breath, he sallied out, changed direction four times not
knowing what he should save first before his attention was suddenly
caught by the picture on the wall—which was already denuded of
everything else that had been on it—of the lady dressed in copious fur.
He hurried up onto the picture and pressed himself against its glass,
it held him firmly and felt good on his hot belly. This picture at
least, now totally covered by Gregor, would certainly be taken away by
no-one. He turned his head to face the door into the living room so
that he could watch the women when they came back.

They had not allowed themselves a long rest and came back quite soon;
Grete had put her arm around her mother and was nearly carrying her.
“What shall we take now, then?”, said Grete and looked around. Her eyes
met those of Gregor on the wall. Perhaps only because her mother was
there, she remained calm, bent her face to her so that she would not
look round and said, albeit hurriedly and with a tremor in her voice:
“Come on, let’s go back in the living room for a while?” Gregor could
see what Grete had in mind, she wanted to take her mother somewhere
safe and then chase him down from the wall. Well, she could certainly
try it! He sat unyielding on his picture. He would rather jump at
Grete’s face.

But Grete’s words had made her mother quite worried, she stepped to one
side, saw the enormous brown patch against the flowers of the
wallpaper, and before she even realised it was Gregor that she saw
screamed: “Oh God, oh God!” Arms outstretched, she fell onto the couch
as if she had given up everything and stayed there immobile. “Gregor!”
shouted his sister, glowering at him and shaking her fist. That was the
first word she had spoken to him directly since his transformation. She
ran into the other room to fetch some kind of smelling salts to bring
her mother out of her faint; Gregor wanted to help too—he could save
his picture later, although he stuck fast to the glass and had to pull
himself off by force; then he, too, ran into the next room as if he
could advise his sister like in the old days; but he had to just stand
behind her doing nothing; she was looking into various bottles, he
startled her when she turned round; a bottle fell to the ground and
broke; a splinter cut Gregor’s face, some kind of caustic medicine
splashed all over him; now, without delaying any longer, Grete took
hold of all the bottles she could and ran with them in to her mother;
she slammed the door shut with her foot. So now Gregor was shut out
from his mother, who, because of him, might be near to death; he could
not open the door if he did not want to chase his sister away, and she
had to stay with his mother; there was nothing for him to do but wait;
and, oppressed with anxiety and self-reproach, he began to crawl about,
he crawled over everything, walls, furniture, ceiling, and finally in
his confusion as the whole room began to spin around him he fell down
into the middle of the dinner table.

He lay there for a while, numb and immobile, all around him it was
quiet, maybe that was a good sign. Then there was someone at the door.
The maid, of course, had locked herself in her kitchen so that Grete
would have to go and answer it. His father had arrived home. “What’s
happened?” were his first words; Grete’s appearance must have made
everything clear to him. She answered him with subdued voice, and
openly pressed her face into his chest: “Mother’s fainted, but she’s
better now. Gregor got out.” “Just as I expected”, said his father,
“just as I always said, but you women wouldn’t listen, would you.” It
was clear to Gregor that Grete had not said enough and that his father
took it to mean that something bad had happened, that he was
responsible for some act of violence. That meant Gregor would now have
to try to calm his father, as he did not have the time to explain
things to him even if that had been possible. So he fled to the door of
his room and pressed himself against it so that his father, when he
came in from the hall, could see straight away that Gregor had the best
intentions and would go back into his room without delay, that it would
not be necessary to drive him back but that they had only to open the
door and he would disappear.

His father, though, was not in the mood to notice subtleties like that;
“Ah!”, he shouted as he came in, sounding as if he were both angry and
glad at the same time. Gregor drew his head back from the door and
lifted it towards his father. He really had not imagined his father the
way he stood there now; of late, with his new habit of crawling about,
he had neglected to pay attention to what was going on the rest of the
flat the way he had done before. He really ought to have expected
things to have changed, but still, still, was that really his father?
The same tired man as used to be laying there entombed in his bed when
Gregor came back from his business trips, who would receive him sitting
in the armchair in his nightgown when he came back in the evenings; who
was hardly even able to stand up but, as a sign of his pleasure, would
just raise his arms and who, on the couple of times a year when they
went for a walk together on a Sunday or public holiday wrapped up
tightly in his overcoat between Gregor and his mother, would always
labour his way forward a little more slowly than them, who were already
walking slowly for his sake; who would place his stick down carefully
and, if he wanted to say something would invariably stop and gather his
companions around him. He was standing up straight enough now; dressed
in a smart blue uniform with gold buttons, the sort worn by the
employees at the banking institute; above the high, stiff collar of the
coat his strong double-chin emerged; under the bushy eyebrows, his
piercing, dark eyes looked out fresh and alert; his normally unkempt
white hair was combed down painfully close to his scalp. He took his
cap, with its gold monogram from, probably, some bank, and threw it in
an arc right across the room onto the sofa, put his hands in his
trouser pockets, pushing back the bottom of his long uniform coat, and,
with look of determination, walked towards Gregor. He probably did not
even know himself what he had in mind, but nonetheless lifted his feet
unusually high. Gregor was amazed at the enormous size of the soles of
his boots, but wasted no time with that—he knew full well, right from
the first day of his new life, that his father thought it necessary to
always be extremely strict with him. And so he ran up to his father,
stopped when his father stopped, scurried forwards again when he moved,
even slightly. In this way they went round the room several times
without anything decisive happening, without even giving the impression
of a chase as everything went so slowly. Gregor remained all this time
on the floor, largely because he feared his father might see it as
especially provoking if he fled onto the wall or ceiling. Whatever he
did, Gregor had to admit that he certainly would not be able to keep up
this running about for long, as for each step his father took he had to
carry out countless movements. He became noticeably short of breath,
even in his earlier life his lungs had not been very reliable. Now, as
he lurched about in his efforts to muster all the strength he could for
running he could hardly keep his eyes open; his thoughts became too
slow for him to think of any other way of saving himself than running;
he almost forgot that the walls were there for him to use although,
here, they were concealed behind carefully carved furniture full of
notches and protrusions—then, right beside him, lightly tossed,
something flew down and rolled in front of him. It was an apple; then
another one immediately flew at him; Gregor froze in shock; there was
no longer any point in running as his father had decided to bombard
him. He had filled his pockets with fruit from the bowl on the
sideboard and now, without even taking the time for careful aim, threw
one apple after another. These little, red apples rolled about on the
floor, knocking into each other as if they had electric motors. An
apple thrown without much force glanced against Gregor’s back and slid
off without doing any harm. Another one however, immediately following
it, hit squarely and lodged in his back; Gregor wanted to drag himself
away, as if he could remove the surprising, the incredible pain by
changing his position; but he felt as if nailed to the spot and spread
himself out, all his senses in confusion. The last thing he saw was the
door of his room being pulled open, his sister was screaming, his
mother ran out in front of her in her blouse (as his sister had taken
off some of her clothes after she had fainted to make it easier for her
to breathe), she ran to his father, her skirts unfastened and sliding
one after another to the ground, stumbling over the skirts she pushed
herself to his father, her arms around him, uniting herself with him
totally—now Gregor lost his ability to see anything—her hands behind
his father’s head begging him to spare Gregor’s life.




III


No-one dared to remove the apple lodged in Gregor’s flesh, so it
remained there as a visible reminder of his injury. He had suffered it
there for more than a month, and his condition seemed serious enough to
remind even his father that Gregor, despite his current sad and
revolting form, was a family member who could not be treated as an
enemy. On the contrary, as a family there was a duty to swallow any
revulsion for him and to be patient, just to be patient.

Because of his injuries, Gregor had lost much of his mobility—probably
permanently. He had been reduced to the condition of an ancient invalid
and it took him long, long minutes to crawl across his room—crawling
over the ceiling was out of the question—but this deterioration in his
condition was fully (in his opinion) made up for by the door to the
living room being left open every evening. He got into the habit of
closely watching it for one or two hours before it was opened and then,
lying in the darkness of his room where he could not be seen from the
living room, he could watch the family in the light of the dinner table
and listen to their conversation—with everyone’s permission, in a way,
and thus quite differently from before.

They no longer held the lively conversations of earlier times, of
course, the ones that Gregor always thought about with longing when he
was tired and getting into the damp bed in some small hotel room. All
of them were usually very quiet nowadays. Soon after dinner, his father
would go to sleep in his chair; his mother and sister would urge each
other to be quiet; his mother, bent deeply under the lamp, would sew
fancy underwear for a fashion shop; his sister, who had taken a sales
job, learned shorthand and French in the evenings so that she might be
able to get a better position later on. Sometimes his father would wake
up and say to Gregor’s mother “you’re doing so much sewing again
today!”, as if he did not know that he had been dozing—and then he
would go back to sleep again while mother and sister would exchange a
tired grin.

With a kind of stubbornness, Gregor’s father refused to take his
uniform off even at home; while his nightgown hung unused on its peg
Gregor’s father would slumber where he was, fully dressed, as if always
ready to serve and expecting to hear the voice of his superior even
here. The uniform had not been new to start with, but as a result of
this it slowly became even shabbier despite the efforts of Gregor’s
mother and sister to look after it. Gregor would often spend the whole
evening looking at all the stains on this coat, with its gold buttons
always kept polished and shiny, while the old man in it would sleep,
highly uncomfortable but peaceful.

As soon as it struck ten, Gregor’s mother would speak gently to his
father to wake him and try to persuade him to go to bed, as he couldn’t
sleep properly where he was and he really had to get his sleep if he
was to be up at six to get to work. But since he had been in work he
had become more obstinate and would always insist on staying longer at
the table, even though he regularly fell asleep and it was then harder
than ever to persuade him to exchange the chair for his bed. Then,
however much mother and sister would importune him with little
reproaches and warnings he would keep slowly shaking his head for a
quarter of an hour with his eyes closed and refusing to get up.
Gregor’s mother would tug at his sleeve, whisper endearments into his
ear, Gregor’s sister would leave her work to help her mother, but
nothing would have any effect on him. He would just sink deeper into
his chair. Only when the two women took him under the arms he would
abruptly open his eyes, look at them one after the other and say: “What
a life! This is what peace I get in my old age!” And supported by the
two women he would lift himself up carefully as if he were carrying the
greatest load himself, let the women take him to the door, send them
off and carry on by himself while Gregor’s mother would throw down her
needle and his sister her pen so that they could run after his father
and continue being of help to him.

Who, in this tired and overworked family, would have had time to give
more attention to Gregor than was absolutely necessary? The household
budget became even smaller; so now the maid was dismissed; an enormous,
thick-boned charwoman with white hair that flapped around her head came
every morning and evening to do the heaviest work; everything else was
looked after by Gregor’s mother on top of the large amount of sewing
work she did. Gregor even learned, listening to the evening
conversation about what price they had hoped for, that several items of
jewellery belonging to the family had been sold, even though both
mother and sister had been very fond of wearing them at functions and
celebrations. But the loudest complaint was that although the flat was
much too big for their present circumstances, they could not move out
of it, there was no imaginable way of transferring Gregor to the new
address. He could see quite well, though, that there were more reasons
than consideration for him that made it difficult for them to move, it
would have been quite easy to transport him in any suitable crate with
a few air holes in it; the main thing holding the family back from
their decision to move was much more to do with their total despair,
and the thought that they had been struck with a misfortune unlike
anything experienced by anyone else they knew or were related to. They
carried out absolutely everything that the world expects from poor
people, Gregor’s father brought bank employees their breakfast, his
mother sacrificed herself by washing clothes for strangers, his sister
ran back and forth behind her desk at the behest of the customers, but
they just did not have the strength to do any more. And the injury in
Gregor’s back began to hurt as much as when it was new. After they had
come back from taking his father to bed Gregor’s mother and sister
would now leave their work where it was and sit close together, cheek
to cheek; his mother would point to Gregor’s room and say “Close that
door, Grete”, and then, when he was in the dark again, they would sit
in the next room and their tears would mingle, or they would simply sit
there staring dry-eyed at the table.

Gregor hardly slept at all, either night or day. Sometimes he would
think of taking over the family’s affairs, just like before, the next
time the door was opened; he had long forgotten about his boss and the
chief clerk, but they would appear again in his thoughts, the salesmen
and the apprentices, that stupid teaboy, two or three friends from
other businesses, one of the chambermaids from a provincial hotel, a
tender memory that appeared and disappeared again, a cashier from a hat
shop for whom his attention had been serious but too slow,—all of them
appeared to him, mixed together with strangers and others he had
forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family they were all of
them inaccessible, and he was glad when they disappeared. Other times
he was not at all in the mood to look after his family, he was filled
with simple rage about the lack of attention he was shown, and although
he could think of nothing he would have wanted, he made plans of how he
could get into the pantry where he could take all the things he was
entitled to, even if he was not hungry. Gregor’s sister no longer
thought about how she could please him but would hurriedly push some
food or other into his room with her foot before she rushed out to work
in the morning and at midday, and in the evening she would sweep it
away again with the broom, indifferent as to whether it had been eaten
or—more often than not—had been left totally untouched. She still
cleared up the room in the evening, but now she could not have been any
quicker about it. Smears of dirt were left on the walls, here and there
were little balls of dust and filth. At first, Gregor went into one of
the worst of these places when his sister arrived as a reproach to her,
but he could have stayed there for weeks without his sister doing
anything about it; she could see the dirt as well as he could but she
had simply decided to leave him to it. At the same time she became
touchy in a way that was quite new for her and which everyone in the
family understood—cleaning up Gregor’s room was for her and her alone.
Gregor’s mother did once thoroughly clean his room, and needed to use
several bucketfuls of water to do it—although that much dampness also
made Gregor ill and he lay flat on the couch, bitter and immobile. But
his mother was to be punished still more for what she had done, as
hardly had his sister arrived home in the evening than she noticed the
change in Gregor’s room and, highly aggrieved, ran back into the living
room where, despite her mothers raised and imploring hands, she broke
into convulsive tears. Her father, of course, was startled out of his
chair and the two parents looked on astonished and helpless; then they,
too, became agitated; Gregor’s father, standing to the right of his
mother, accused her of not leaving the cleaning of Gregor’s room to his
sister; from her left, Gregor’s sister screamed at her that she was
never to clean Gregor’s room again; while his mother tried to draw his
father, who was beside himself with anger, into the bedroom; his
sister, quaking with tears, thumped on the table with her small fists;
and Gregor hissed in anger that no-one had even thought of closing the
door to save him the sight of this and all its noise.

Gregor’s sister was exhausted from going out to work, and looking after
Gregor as she had done before was even more work for her, but even so
his mother ought certainly not to have taken her place. Gregor, on the
other hand, ought not to be neglected. Now, though, the charwoman was
here. This elderly widow, with a robust bone structure that made her
able to withstand the hardest of things in her long life, wasn’t really
repelled by Gregor. Just by chance one day, rather than any real
curiosity, she opened the door to Gregor’s room and found herself face
to face with him. He was taken totally by surprise, no-one was chasing
him but he began to rush to and fro while she just stood there in
amazement with her hands crossed in front of her. From then on she
never failed to open the door slightly every evening and morning and
look briefly in on him. At first she would call to him as she did so
with words that she probably considered friendly, such as “come on
then, you old dung-beetle!”, or “look at the old dung-beetle there!”
Gregor never responded to being spoken to in that way, but just
remained where he was without moving as if the door had never even been
opened. If only they had told this charwoman to clean up his room every
day instead of letting her disturb him for no reason whenever she felt
like it! One day, early in the morning while a heavy rain struck the
windowpanes, perhaps indicating that spring was coming, she began to
speak to him in that way once again. Gregor was so resentful of it that
he started to move toward her, he was slow and infirm, but it was like
a kind of attack. Instead of being afraid, the charwoman just lifted up
one of the chairs from near the door and stood there with her mouth
open, clearly intending not to close her mouth until the chair in her
hand had been slammed down into Gregor’s back. “Aren’t you coming any
closer, then?”, she asked when Gregor turned round again, and she
calmly put the chair back in the corner.

Gregor had almost entirely stopped eating. Only if he happened to find
himself next to the food that had been prepared for him he might take
some of it into his mouth to play with it, leave it there a few hours
and then, more often than not, spit it out again. At first he thought
it was distress at the state of his room that stopped him eating, but
he had soon got used to the changes made there. They had got into the
habit of putting things into this room that they had no room for
anywhere else, and there were now many such things as one of the rooms
in the flat had been rented out to three gentlemen. These earnest
gentlemen—all three of them had full beards, as Gregor learned peering
through the crack in the door one day—were painfully insistent on
things’ being tidy. This meant not only in their own room but, since
they had taken a room in this establishment, in the entire flat and
especially in the kitchen. Unnecessary clutter was something they could
not tolerate, especially if it was dirty. They had moreover brought
most of their own furnishings and equipment with them. For this reason,
many things had become superfluous which, although they could not be
sold, the family did not wish to discard. All these things found their
way into Gregor’s room. The dustbins from the kitchen found their way
in there too. The charwoman was always in a hurry, and anything she
couldn’t use for the time being she would just chuck in there. He,
fortunately, would usually see no more than the object and the hand
that held it. The woman most likely meant to fetch the things back out
again when she had time and the opportunity, or to throw everything out
in one go, but what actually happened was that they were left where
they landed when they had first been thrown unless Gregor made his way
through the junk and moved it somewhere else. At first he moved it
because, with no other room free where he could crawl about, he was
forced to, but later on he came to enjoy it although moving about in
that way left him sad and tired to death, and he would remain immobile
for hours afterwards.

The gentlemen who rented the room would sometimes take their evening
meal at home in the living room that was used by everyone, and so the
door to this room was often kept closed in the evening. But Gregor
found it easy to give up having the door open, he had, after all, often
failed to make use of it when it was open and, without the family
having noticed it, lain in his room in its darkest corner. One time,
though, the charwoman left the door to the living room slightly open,
and it remained open when the gentlemen who rented the room came in in
the evening and the light was put on. They sat up at the table where,
formerly, Gregor had taken his meals with his father and mother, they
unfolded the serviettes and picked up their knives and forks. Gregor’s
mother immediately appeared in the doorway with a dish of meat and soon
behind her came his sister with a dish piled high with potatoes. The
food was steaming, and filled the room with its smell. The gentlemen
bent over the dishes set in front of them as if they wanted to test the
food before eating it, and the gentleman in the middle, who seemed to
count as an authority for the other two, did indeed cut off a piece of
meat while it was still in its dish, clearly wishing to establish
whether it was sufficiently cooked or whether it should be sent back to
the kitchen. It was to his satisfaction, and Gregor’s mother and
sister, who had been looking on anxiously, began to breathe again and
smiled.

The family themselves ate in the kitchen. Nonetheless, Gregor’s father
came into the living room before he went into the kitchen, bowed once
with his cap in his hand and did his round of the table. The gentlemen
stood as one, and mumbled something into their beards. Then, once they
were alone, they ate in near perfect silence. It seemed remarkable to
Gregor that above all the various noises of eating their chewing teeth
could still be heard, as if they had wanted to show Gregor that you
need teeth in order to eat and it was not possible to perform anything
with jaws that are toothless however nice they might be. “I’d like to
eat something”, said Gregor anxiously, “but not anything like they’re
eating. They do feed themselves. And here I am, dying!”

Throughout all this time, Gregor could not remember having heard the
violin being played, but this evening it began to be heard from the
kitchen. The three gentlemen had already finished their meal, the one
in the middle had produced a newspaper, given a page to each of the
others, and now they leant back in their chairs reading them and
smoking. When the violin began playing they became attentive, stood up
and went on tip-toe over to the door of the hallway where they stood
pressed against each other. Someone must have heard them in the
kitchen, as Gregor’s father called out: “Is the playing perhaps
unpleasant for the gentlemen? We can stop it straight away.” “On the
contrary”, said the middle gentleman, “would the young lady not like to
come in and play for us here in the room, where it is, after all, much
more cosy and comfortable?” “Oh yes, we’d love to”, called back
Gregor’s father as if he had been the violin player himself. The
gentlemen stepped back into the room and waited. Gregor’s father soon
appeared with the music stand, his mother with the music and his sister
with the violin. She calmly prepared everything for her to begin
playing; his parents, who had never rented a room out before and
therefore showed an exaggerated courtesy towards the three gentlemen,
did not even dare to sit on their own chairs; his father leant against
the door with his right hand pushed in between two buttons on his
uniform coat; his mother, though, was offered a seat by one of the
gentlemen and sat—leaving the chair where the gentleman happened to
have placed it—out of the way in a corner.

His sister began to play; father and mother paid close attention, one
on each side, to the movements of her hands. Drawn in by the playing,
Gregor had dared to come forward a little and already had his head in
the living room. Before, he had taken great pride in how considerate he
was but now it hardly occurred to him that he had become so thoughtless
about the others. What’s more, there was now all the more reason to
keep himself hidden as he was covered in the dust that lay everywhere
in his room and flew up at the slightest movement; he carried threads,
hairs, and remains of food about on his back and sides; he was much too
indifferent to everything now to lay on his back and wipe himself on
the carpet like he had used to do several times a day. And despite this
condition, he was not too shy to move forward a little onto the
immaculate floor of the living room.

No-one noticed him, though. The family was totally preoccupied with the
violin playing; at first, the three gentlemen had put their hands in
their pockets and come up far too close behind the music stand to look
at all the notes being played, and they must have disturbed Gregor’s
sister, but soon, in contrast with the family, they withdrew back to
the window with their heads sunk and talking to each other at half
volume, and they stayed by the window while Gregor’s father observed
them anxiously. It really now seemed very obvious that they had
expected to hear some beautiful or entertaining violin playing but had
been disappointed, that they had had enough of the whole performance
and it was only now out of politeness that they allowed their peace to
be disturbed. It was especially unnerving, the way they all blew the
smoke from their cigarettes upwards from their mouth and noses. Yet
Gregor’s sister was playing so beautifully. Her face was leant to one
side, following the lines of music with a careful and melancholy
expression. Gregor crawled a little further forward, keeping his head
close to the ground so that he could meet her eyes if the chance came.
Was he an animal if music could captivate him so? It seemed to him that
he was being shown the way to the unknown nourishment he had been
yearning for. He was determined to make his way forward to his sister
and tug at her skirt to show her she might come into his room with her
violin, as no-one appreciated her playing here as much as he would. He
never wanted to let her out of his room, not while he lived, anyway;
his shocking appearance should, for once, be of some use to him; he
wanted to be at every door of his room at once to hiss and spit at the
attackers; his sister should not be forced to stay with him, though,
but stay of her own free will; she would sit beside him on the couch
with her ear bent down to him while he told her how he had always
intended to send her to the conservatory, how he would have told
everyone about it last Christmas—had Christmas really come and gone
already?—if this misfortune hadn’t got in the way, and refuse to let
anyone dissuade him from it. On hearing all this, his sister would
break out in tears of emotion, and Gregor would climb up to her
shoulder and kiss her neck, which, since she had been going out to
work, she had kept free without any necklace or collar.

“Mr. Samsa!”, shouted the middle gentleman to Gregor’s father,
pointing, without wasting any more words, with his forefinger at Gregor
as he slowly moved forward. The violin went silent, the middle of the
three gentlemen first smiled at his two friends, shaking his head, and
then looked back at Gregor. His father seemed to think it more
important to calm the three gentlemen before driving Gregor out, even
though they were not at all upset and seemed to think Gregor was more
entertaining than the violin playing had been. He rushed up to them
with his arms spread out and attempted to drive them back into their
room at the same time as trying to block their view of Gregor with his
body. Now they did become a little annoyed, and it was not clear
whether it was his father’s behaviour that annoyed them or the dawning
realisation that they had had a neighbour like Gregor in the next room
without knowing it. They asked Gregor’s father for explanations, raised
their arms like he had, tugged excitedly at their beards and moved back
towards their room only very slowly. Meanwhile Gregor’s sister had
overcome the despair she had fallen into when her playing was suddenly
interrupted. She had let her hands drop and let violin and bow hang
limply for a while but continued to look at the music as if still
playing, but then she suddenly pulled herself together, lay the
instrument on her mother’s lap who still sat laboriously struggling for
breath where she was, and ran into the next room which, under pressure
from her father, the three gentlemen were more quickly moving toward.
Under his sister’s experienced hand, the pillows and covers on the beds
flew up and were put into order and she had already finished making the
beds and slipped out again before the three gentlemen had reached the
room. Gregor’s father seemed so obsessed with what he was doing that he
forgot all the respect he owed to his tenants. He urged them and
pressed them until, when he was already at the door of the room, the
middle of the three gentlemen shouted like thunder and stamped his foot
and thereby brought Gregor’s father to a halt. “I declare here and
now”, he said, raising his hand and glancing at Gregor’s mother and
sister to gain their attention too, “that with regard to the repugnant
conditions that prevail in this flat and with this family”—here he
looked briefly but decisively at the floor—“I give immediate notice on
my room. For the days that I have been living here I will, of course,
pay nothing at all, on the contrary I will consider whether to proceed
with some kind of action for damages from you, and believe me it would
be very easy to set out the grounds for such an action.” He was silent
and looked straight ahead as if waiting for something. And indeed, his
two friends joined in with the words: “And we also give immediate
notice.” With that, he took hold of the door handle and slammed the
door.

Gregor’s father staggered back to his seat, feeling his way with his
hands, and fell into it; it looked as if he was stretching himself out
for his usual evening nap but from the uncontrolled way his head kept
nodding it could be seen that he was not sleeping at all. Throughout
all this, Gregor had lain still where the three gentlemen had first
seen him. His disappointment at the failure of his plan, and perhaps
also because he was weak from hunger, made it impossible for him to
move. He was sure that everyone would turn on him any moment, and he
waited. He was not even startled out of this state when the violin on
his mother’s lap fell from her trembling fingers and landed loudly on
the floor.

“Father, Mother”, said his sister, hitting the table with her hand as
introduction, “we can’t carry on like this. Maybe you can’t see it, but
I can. I don’t want to call this monster my brother, all I can say is:
we have to try and get rid of it. We’ve done all that’s humanly
possible to look after it and be patient, I don’t think anyone could
accuse us of doing anything wrong.”

“She’s absolutely right”, said Gregor’s father to himself. His mother,
who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to cough dully,
her hand held out in front of her and a deranged expression in her
eyes.

Gregor’s sister rushed to his mother and put her hand on her forehead.
Her words seemed to give Gregor’s father some more definite ideas. He
sat upright, played with his uniform cap between the plates left by the
three gentlemen after their meal, and occasionally looked down at
Gregor as he lay there immobile.

“We have to try and get rid of it”, said Gregor’s sister, now speaking
only to her father, as her mother was too occupied with coughing to
listen, “it’ll be the death of both of you, I can see it coming. We
can’t all work as hard as we have to and then come home to be tortured
like this, we can’t endure it. I can’t endure it any more.” And she
broke out so heavily in tears that they flowed down the face of her
mother, and she wiped them away with mechanical hand movements.

“My child”, said her father with sympathy and obvious understanding,
“what are we to do?”

His sister just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the helplessness
and tears that had taken hold of her, displacing her earlier certainty.

“If he could just understand us”, said his father almost as a question;
his sister shook her hand vigorously through her tears as a sign that
of that there was no question.

“If he could just understand us”, repeated Gregor’s father, closing his
eyes in acceptance of his sister’s certainty that that was quite
impossible, “then perhaps we could come to some kind of arrangement
with him. But as it is ...”

“It’s got to go”, shouted his sister, “that’s the only way, Father.
You’ve got to get rid of the idea that that’s Gregor. We’ve only harmed
ourselves by believing it for so long. How can that be Gregor? If it
were Gregor he would have seen long ago that it’s not possible for
human beings to live with an animal like that and he would have gone of
his own free will. We wouldn’t have a brother any more, then, but we
could carry on with our lives and remember him with respect. As it is
this animal is persecuting us, it’s driven out our tenants, it
obviously wants to take over the whole flat and force us to sleep on
the streets. Father, look, just look”, she suddenly screamed, “he’s
starting again!” In her alarm, which was totally beyond Gregor’s
comprehension, his sister even abandoned his mother as she pushed
herself vigorously out of her chair as if more willing to sacrifice her
own mother than stay anywhere near Gregor. She rushed over to behind
her father, who had become excited merely because she was and stood up
half raising his hands in front of Gregor’s sister as if to protect
her.

But Gregor had had no intention of frightening anyone, least of all his
sister. All he had done was begin to turn round so that he could go
back into his room, although that was in itself quite startling as his
pain-wracked condition meant that turning round required a great deal
of effort and he was using his head to help himself do it, repeatedly
raising it and striking it against the floor. He stopped and looked
round. They seemed to have realised his good intention and had only
been alarmed briefly. Now they all looked at him in unhappy silence.
His mother lay in her chair with her legs stretched out and pressed
against each other, her eyes nearly closed with exhaustion; his sister
sat next to his father with her arms around his neck.

“Maybe now they’ll let me turn round”, thought Gregor and went back to
work. He could not help panting loudly with the effort and had
sometimes to stop and take a rest. No-one was making him rush any more,
everything was left up to him. As soon as he had finally finished
turning round he began to move straight ahead. He was amazed at the
great distance that separated him from his room, and could not
understand how he had covered that distance in his weak state a little
while before and almost without noticing it. He concentrated on
crawling as fast as he could and hardly noticed that there was not a
word, not any cry, from his family to distract him. He did not turn his
head until he had reached the doorway. He did not turn it all the way
round as he felt his neck becoming stiff, but it was nonetheless enough
to see that nothing behind him had changed, only his sister had stood
up. With his last glance he saw that his mother had now fallen
completely asleep.

He was hardly inside his room before the door was hurriedly shut,
bolted and locked. The sudden noise behind Gregor so startled him that
his little legs collapsed under him. It was his sister who had been in
so much of a rush. She had been standing there waiting and sprung
forward lightly, Gregor had not heard her coming at all, and as she
turned the key in the lock she said loudly to her parents “At last!”.

“What now, then?”, Gregor asked himself as he looked round in the
darkness. He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move at
all. This was no surprise to him, it seemed rather that being able to
actually move around on those spindly little legs until then was
unnatural. He also felt relatively comfortable. It is true that his
entire body was aching, but the pain seemed to be slowly getting weaker
and weaker and would finally disappear altogether. He could already
hardly feel the decayed apple in his back or the inflamed area around
it, which was entirely covered in white dust. He thought back of his
family with emotion and love. If it was possible, he felt that he must
go away even more strongly than his sister. He remained in this state
of empty and peaceful rumination until he heard the clock tower strike
three in the morning. He watched as it slowly began to get light
everywhere outside the window too. Then, without his willing it, his
head sank down completely, and his last breath flowed weakly from his
nostrils.

When the cleaner came in early in the morning—they’d often asked her
not to keep slamming the doors but with her strength and in her hurry
she still did, so that everyone in the flat knew when she’d arrived and
from then on it was impossible to sleep in peace—she made her usual
brief look in on Gregor and at first found nothing special. She thought
he was laying there so still on purpose, playing the martyr; she
attributed all possible understanding to him. She happened to be
holding the long broom in her hand, so she tried to tickle Gregor with
it from the doorway. When she had no success with that she tried to
make a nuisance of herself and poked at him a little, and only when she
found she could shove him across the floor with no resistance at all
did she start to pay attention. She soon realised what had really
happened, opened her eyes wide, whistled to herself, but did not waste
time to yank open the bedroom doors and shout loudly into the darkness
of the bedrooms: “Come and ’ave a look at this, it’s dead, just lying
there, stone dead!”

Mr. and Mrs. Samsa sat upright there in their marriage bed and had to
make an effort to get over the shock caused by the cleaner before they
could grasp what she was saying. But then, each from his own side, they
hurried out of bed. Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his shoulders,
Mrs. Samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is how they went
into Gregor’s room. On the way they opened the door to the living room
where Grete had been sleeping since the three gentlemen had moved in;
she was fully dressed as if she had never been asleep, and the paleness
of her face seemed to confirm this. “Dead?”, asked Mrs. Samsa, looking
at the charwoman enquiringly, even though she could have checked for
herself and could have known it even without checking. “That’s what I
said”, replied the cleaner, and to prove it she gave Gregor’s body
another shove with the broom, sending it sideways across the floor.
Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if she wanted to hold back the broom, but
did not complete it. “Now then”, said Mr. Samsa, “let’s give thanks to
God for that”. He crossed himself, and the three women followed his
example. Grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said: “Just
look how thin he was. He didn’t eat anything for so long. The food came
out again just the same as when it went in”. Gregor’s body was indeed
completely dried up and flat, they had not seen it until then, but now
he was not lifted up on his little legs, nor did he do anything to make
them look away.

“Grete, come with us in here for a little while”, said Mrs. Samsa with
a pained smile, and Grete followed her parents into the bedroom but not
without looking back at the body. The cleaner shut the door and opened
the window wide. Although it was still early in the morning the fresh
air had something of warmth mixed in with it. It was already the end of
March, after all.

The three gentlemen stepped out of their room and looked round in
amazement for their breakfasts; they had been forgotten about. “Where
is our breakfast?”, the middle gentleman asked the cleaner irritably.
She just put her finger on her lips and made a quick and silent sign to
the men that they might like to come into Gregor’s room. They did so,
and stood around Gregor’s corpse with their hands in the pockets of
their well-worn coats. It was now quite light in the room.

Then the door of the bedroom opened and Mr. Samsa appeared in his
uniform with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other. All of
them had been crying a little; Grete now and then pressed her face
against her father’s arm.

“Leave my home. Now!”, said Mr. Samsa, indicating the door and without
letting the women from him. “What do you mean?”, asked the middle of
the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smiled sweetly. The
other two held their hands behind their backs and continually rubbed
them together in gleeful anticipation of a loud quarrel which could
only end in their favour. “I mean just what I said”, answered Mr.
Samsa, and, with his two companions, went in a straight line towards
the man. At first, he stood there still, looking at the ground as if
the contents of his head were rearranging themselves into new
positions. “Alright, we’ll go then”, he said, and looked up at Mr.
Samsa as if he had been suddenly overcome with humility and wanted
permission again from Mr. Samsa for his decision. Mr. Samsa merely
opened his eyes wide and briefly nodded to him several times. At that,
and without delay, the man actually did take long strides into the
front hallway; his two friends had stopped rubbing their hands some
time before and had been listening to what was being said. Now they
jumped off after their friend as if taken with a sudden fear that Mr.
Samsa might go into the hallway in front of them and break the
connection with their leader. Once there, all three took their hats
from the stand, took their sticks from the holder, bowed without a word
and left the premises. Mr. Samsa and the two women followed them out
onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust the men’s
intentions and as they leaned over the landing they saw how the three
gentlemen made slow but steady progress down the many steps. As they
turned the corner on each floor they disappeared and would reappear a
few moments later; the further down they went, the more that the Samsa
family lost interest in them; when a butcher’s boy, proud of posture
with his tray on his head, passed them on his way up and came nearer
than they were, Mr. Samsa and the women came away from the landing and
went, as if relieved, back into the flat.

They decided the best way to make use of that day was for relaxation
and to go for a walk; not only had they earned a break from work but
they were in serious need of it. So they sat at the table and wrote
three letters of excusal, Mr. Samsa to his employers, Mrs. Samsa to her
contractor and Grete to her principal. The cleaner came in while they
were writing to tell them she was going, she’d finished her work for
that morning. The three of them at first just nodded without looking up
from what they were writing, and it was only when the cleaner still did
not seem to want to leave that they looked up in irritation. “Well?”,
asked Mr. Samsa. The charwoman stood in the doorway with a smile on her
face as if she had some tremendous good news to report, but would only
do it if she was clearly asked to. The almost vertical little ostrich
feather on her hat, which had been a source of irritation to Mr. Samsa
all the time she had been working for them, swayed gently in all
directions. “What is it you want then?”, asked Mrs. Samsa, whom the
cleaner had the most respect for. “Yes”, she answered, and broke into a
friendly laugh that made her unable to speak straight away, “well then,
that thing in there, you needn’t worry about how you’re going to get
rid of it. That’s all been sorted out.” Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down
over their letters as if intent on continuing with what they were
writing; Mr. Samsa saw that the cleaner wanted to start describing
everything in detail but, with outstretched hand, he made it quite
clear that she was not to. So, as she was prevented from telling them
all about it, she suddenly remembered what a hurry she was in and,
clearly peeved, called out “Cheerio then, everyone”, turned round
sharply and left, slamming the door terribly as she went.

“Tonight she gets sacked”, said Mr. Samsa, but he received no reply
from either his wife or his daughter as the charwoman seemed to have
destroyed the peace they had only just gained. They got up and went
over to the window where they remained with their arms around each
other. Mr. Samsa twisted round in his chair to look at them and sat
there watching for a while. Then he called out: “Come here, then. Let’s
forget about all that old stuff, shall we. Come and give me a bit of
attention”. The two women immediately did as he said, hurrying over to
him where they kissed him and hugged him and then they quickly finished
their letters.

After that, the three of them left the flat together, which was
something they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the
open country outside the town. They had the tram, filled with warm
sunshine, all to themselves. Leant back comfortably on their seats,
they discussed their prospects and found that on closer examination
they were not at all bad—until then they had never asked each other
about their work but all three had jobs which were very good and held
particularly good promise for the future. The greatest improvement for
the time being, of course, would be achieved quite easily by moving
house; what they needed now was a flat that was smaller and cheaper
than the current one which had been chosen by Gregor, one that was in a
better location and, most of all, more practical. All the time, Grete
was becoming livelier. With all the worry they had been having of late
her cheeks had become pale, but, while they were talking, Mr. and Mrs.
Samsa were struck, almost simultaneously, with the thought of how their
daughter was blossoming into a well built and beautiful young lady.
They became quieter. Just from each other’s glance and almost without
knowing it they agreed that it would soon be time to find a good man
for her. And, as if in confirmation of their new dreams and good
intentions, as soon as they reached their destination Grete was the
first to get up and stretch out her young body.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK METAMORPHOSIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few individual works protected
by copyright law in the United States and most of the remainder of the
world, included in the Project Gutenberg collection with the
permission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright owner
for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyright
holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Twenty years after
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Twenty years after

Author: Alexandre Dumas
        Auguste Maquet

Release date: March 1, 1998 [eBook #1259]
                Most recently updated: April 9, 2022

Language: English

Credits: An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY YEARS AFTER ***




Twenty Years After

By Alexandre Dumas, Père

Second Volume of the D’Artagnan Series




LINKED INDEX OF PROJECT GUTENBERG VOLUMES:

ORDER   TITLE                       PG EBOOK#    DATES       VOLUME    CHAPTERS
1       The Three Musketeers        1257         1625–1628    1
2       Twenty Years After          1259         1648–1649    2
3       The Vicomte de Bragelonne   2609         1660         3         1–75
4       Ten Years Later             2681         1660–1661    3         76–140
5       Louise de la Valliere       2710         1661         3         141–208
6       The Man in the Iron Mask    2759         1661–1673    3         209–269

[Project Gutenberg eBook 1258 listed below, is of the same title as
eBook 2681 and its contents overlap those of two other volumes: it
includes all the chapters of eBook 2609 and the first 28 chapters of
2681]

        TITLE                       PG EBOOK#    DATES       VOLUME    CHAPTERS
        Ten Years Later             1258         1660–1661   3         1–104




CONTENTS

 Chapter I. The Shade of Cardinal Richelieu.
 Chapter II. A Nightly Patrol.
 Chapter III. Dead Animosities.
 Chapter IV. Anne of Austria at the Age of Forty-six.
 Chapter V. The Gascon and the Italian.
 Chapter VI. D’Artagnan in his Fortieth Year.
 Chapter VII. Touches upon the Strange Effects a Half-pistole may have.
 Chapter VIII. D’Artagnan, Going to a Distance to discover Aramis.
 Chapter IX. The Abbé D’Herblay.
 Chapter X. Monsieur Porthos du Vallon de Bracieux de Pierrefonds.
 Chapter XI. Wealth does not necessarily produce Happiness.
 Chapter XII. Porthos was Discontented with his Condition.
 Chapter XIII. Two Angelic Faces.
 Chapter XIV. The Castle of Bragelonne.
 Chapter XV. Athos as a Diplomatist.
 Chapter XVI. The Duc de Beaufort.
 Chapter XVII. Duc de Beaufort amused his Leisure Hours in the Donjon of Vincennes.
 Chapter XVIII. Grimaud begins his Functions.
 Chapter XIX. Pâtés made by the Successor of Father Marteau are described.
 Chapter XX. One of Marie Michon’s Adventures.
 Chapter XXI. The Abbé Scarron.
 Chapter XXII. Saint Denis.
 Chapter XXIII. One of the Forty Methods of Escape of the Duc de Beaufort.
 Chapter XXIV. The timely Arrival of D’Artagnan in Paris.
 Chapter XXV. An Adventure on the High Road.
 Chapter XXVI. The Rencontre.
 Chapter XXVII. The four old Friends prepare to meet again.
 Chapter XXVIII. The Place Royale.
 Chapter XXIX. The Ferry across the Oise.
 Chapter XXX. Skirmishing.
 Chapter XXXI. The Monk.
 Chapter XXXII. The Absolution.
 Chapter XXXIII. Grimaud Speaks.
 Chapter XXXIV. On the Eve of Battle.
 Chapter XXXV. A Dinner in the Old Style.
 Chapter XXXVI. A Letter from Charles the First.
 Chapter XXXVII. Cromwell’s Letter.
 Chapter XXXVIII. Henrietta Maria and Mazarin.
 Chapter XXXIX. How, sometimes, the Unhappy mistake Chance for Providence.
 Chapter XL. Uncle and Nephew.
 Chapter XLI. Paternal Affection.
 Chapter XLII. Another Queen in Want of Help.
 Chapter XLIII. In which it is proved that first Impulses are oftentimes the best.
 Chapter XLIV. Te Deum for the Victory of Lens.
 Chapter XLV. The Beggar of St. Eustache.
 Chapter XLVI. The Tower of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.
 Chapter XLVII. The Riot.
 Chapter XLVIII. The Riot becomes a Revolution.
 Chapter XLIX. Misfortune refreshes the Memory.
 Chapter L. The Interview.
 Chapter LI. The Flight.
 Chapter LII. The Carriage of Monsieur le Coadjuteur.
 Chapter LIII. How D’Artagnan and Porthos earned by selling Straw.
 Chapter LIV. In which we hear Tidings of Aramis.
 Chapter LV. The Scotchman.
 Chapter LVI. The Avenger.
 Chapter LVII. Oliver Cromwell.
 Chapter LVIII. Jesus Seigneur.
 Chapter LIX. Noble Natures never lose Courage, nor good Stomachs their Appetites.
 Chapter LX. Respect to Fallen Majesty.
 Chapter LXI. D’Artagnan hits on a Plan.
 Chapter LXII. London.
 Chapter LXIII. The Trial.
 Chapter LXIV. Whitehall.
 Chapter LXV. The Workmen.
 Chapter LXVI. Remember!
 Chapter LXVII. The Man in the Mask.
 Chapter LXVIII. Cromwell’s House.
 Chapter LXIX. Conversational.
 Chapter LXX. The Skiff “Lightning.”
 Chapter LXXI. Port Wine.
 Chapter LXXII. End of the Port Wine Mystery.
 Chapter LXXIII. Fatality.
 Chapter LXXIV. How Mousqueton had a Narrow Escape of being eaten.
 Chapter LXXV. The Return.
 Chapter LXXVI. The Ambassadors.
 Chapter LXXVII. The three Lieutenants of the Generalissimo.
 Chapter LXXVIII. The Battle of Charenton.
 Chapter LXXIX. The Road to Picardy.
 Chapter LXXX. The Gratitude of Anne of Austria.
 Chapter LXXXI. Cardinal Mazarin as King.
 Chapter LXXXII. Precautions.
 Chapter LXXXIII. Strength and Sagacity.
 Chapter LXXXIV. Strength and Sagacity—Continued.
 Chapter LXXXV. The Oubliettes of Cardinal Mazarin.
 Chapter LXXXVI. Conferences.
 Chapter LXXXVII. Thinking that Porthos will be at last a Baron, and D’Artagnan a Captain.
 Chapter LXXXVIII. Shows how with Threat and Pen more is effected than by the Sword.
 Chapter LXXXIX. Difficult for Kings to return to the Capitals of their Kingdoms.
 Chapter XC. Conclusion.




Chapter I.
The Shade of Cardinal Richelieu.


In a splendid chamber of the Palais Royal, formerly styled the Palais
Cardinal, a man was sitting in deep reverie, his head supported on his
hands, leaning over a gilt and inlaid table which was covered with
letters and papers. Behind this figure glowed a vast fireplace alive
with leaping flames; great logs of oak blazed and crackled on the
polished brass andirons whose flicker shone upon the superb habiliments
of the lonely tenant of the room, which was illumined grandly by twin
candelabra rich with wax-lights.

Any one who happened at that moment to contemplate that red simar—the
gorgeous robe of office—and the rich lace, or who gazed on that pale
brow, bent in anxious meditation, might, in the solitude of that
apartment, combined with the silence of the ante-chambers and the
measured paces of the guards upon the landing-place, have fancied that
the shade of Cardinal Richelieu lingered still in his accustomed haunt.

It was, alas! the ghost of former greatness. France enfeebled, the
authority of her sovereign contemned, her nobles returning to their
former turbulence and insolence, her enemies within her frontiers—all
proved the great Richelieu no longer in existence.

In truth, that the red simar which occupied the wonted place was his no
longer, was still more strikingly obvious from the isolation which
seemed, as we have observed, more appropriate to a phantom than a
living creature—from the corridors deserted by courtiers, and courts
crowded with guards—from that spirit of bitter ridicule, which, arising
from the streets below, penetrated through the very casements of the
room, which resounded with the murmurs of a whole city leagued against
the minister; as well as from the distant and incessant sounds of guns
firing—let off, happily, without other end or aim, except to show to
the guards, the Swiss troops and the military who surrounded the Palais
Royal, that the people were possessed of arms.

The shade of Richelieu was Mazarin. Now Mazarin was alone and
defenceless, as he well knew.

“Foreigner!” he ejaculated, “Italian! that is their mean yet mighty
byword of reproach—the watchword with which they assassinated, hanged,
and made away with Concini; and if I gave them their way they would
assassinate, hang, and make away with me in the same manner, although
they have nothing to complain of except a tax or two now and then.
Idiots! ignorant of their real enemies, they do not perceive that it is
not the Italian who speaks French badly, but those who can say fine
things to them in the purest Parisian accent, who are their real foes.

“Yes, yes,” Mazarin continued, whilst his wonted smile, full of
subtlety, lent a strange expression to his pale lips; “yes, these
noises prove to me, indeed, that the destiny of favorites is
precarious; but ye shall know I am no ordinary favorite. No! The Earl
of Essex, ’tis true, wore a splendid ring, set with diamonds, given him
by his royal mistress, whilst I—I have nothing but a simple circlet of
gold, with a cipher on it and a date; but that ring has been blessed in
the chapel of the Palais Royal,* so they will never ruin me, as they
long to do, and whilst they shout, ‘Down with Mazarin!’ I, unknown, and
unperceived by them, incite them to cry out, ‘Long live the Duke de
Beaufort’ one day; another, ‘Long live the Prince de Conde;’ and again,
‘Long live the parliament!’” And at this word the smile on the
cardinal’s lips assumed an expression of hatred, of which his mild
countenance seemed incapable. “The parliament! We shall soon see how to
dispose,” he continued, “of the parliament! Both Orleans and Montargis
are ours. It will be a work of time, but those who have begun by crying
out: Down with Mazarin! will finish by shouting out, Down with all the
people I have mentioned, each in his turn.

* It is said that Mazarin, who, though a cardinal, had not taken such
vows as to prevent it, was secretly married to Anne of Austria.—La
Porte’s Memoirs.


“Richelieu, whom they hated during his lifetime and whom they now
praise after his death, was even less popular than I am. Often he was
driven away, oftener still had he a dread of being sent away. The queen
will never banish me, and even were I obliged to yield to the populace
she would yield with me; if I fly, she will fly; and then we shall see
how the rebels will get on without either king or queen.

“Oh, were I not a foreigner! were I but a Frenchman! were I but of
gentle birth!”

The position of the cardinal was indeed critical, and recent events had
added to his difficulties. Discontent had long pervaded the lower ranks
of society in France. Crushed and impoverished by taxation—imposed by
Mazarin, whose avarice impelled him to grind them down to the very
dust—the people, as the Advocate-General Talon described it, had
nothing left to them except their souls; and as those could not be sold
by auction, they began to murmur. Patience had in vain been recommended
to them by reports of brilliant victories gained by France; laurels,
however, were not meat and drink, and the people had for some time been
in a state of discontent.

Had this been all, it might not, perhaps, have greatly signified; for
when the lower classes alone complained, the court of France, separated
as it was from the poor by the intervening classes of the gentry and
the _bourgeoisie_, seldom listened to their voice; but unluckily,
Mazarin had had the imprudence to attack the magistrates and had sold
no less than twelve appointments in the Court of Requests, at a high
price; and as the officers of that court paid very dearly for their
places, and as the addition of twelve new colleagues would necessarily
lower the value of each place, the old functionaries formed a union
amongst themselves, and, enraged, swore on the Bible not to allow of
this addition to their number, but to resist all the persecutions which
might ensue; and should any one of them chance to forfeit his post by
this resistance, to combine to indemnify him for his loss.

Now the following occurrences had taken place between the two
contending parties.

On the seventh of January between seven and eight hundred tradesmen had
assembled in Paris to discuss a new tax which was to be levied on house
property. They deputed ten of their number to wait upon the Duke of
Orleans, who, according to his custom, affected popularity. The duke
received them and they informed him that they were resolved not to pay
this tax, even if they were obliged to defend themselves against its
collectors by force of arms. They were listened to with great
politeness by the duke, who held out hopes of easier measures, promised
to speak in their behalf to the queen, and dismissed them with the
ordinary expression of royalty, “We will see what we can do.”

Two days afterward these same magistrates appeared before the cardinal
and their spokesman addressed Mazarin with so much fearlessness and
determination that the minister was astounded and sent the deputation
away with the same answer as it had received from the Duke of
Orleans—that he would see what could be done; and in accordance with
that intention a council of state was assembled and the superintendent
of finance was summoned.

This man, named Emery, was the object of popular detestation, in the
first place because he _was_ superintendent of finance, and every
superintendent of finance deserved to be hated; in the second place,
because he rather deserved the odium which he had incurred.

He was the son of a banker at Lyons named Particelli, who, after
becoming a bankrupt, chose to change his name to Emery; and Cardinal
Richelieu having discovered in him great financial aptitude, had
introduced him with a strong recommendation to Louis XIII. under his
assumed name, in order that he might be appointed to the post he
subsequently held.

“You surprise me!” exclaimed the monarch. “I am rejoiced to hear you
speak of Monsieur d’Emery as calculated for a post which requires a man
of probity. I was really afraid that you were going to force that
villain Particelli upon me.”

“Sire,” replied Richelieu, “rest assured that Particelli, the man to
whom your majesty refers, has been hanged.”

“Ah; so much the better!” exclaimed the king. “It is not for nothing
that I am styled Louis the Just,” and he signed Emery’s appointment.

This was the same Emery who became eventually superintendent of
finance.

He was sent for by the ministers and he came before them pale and
trembling, declaring that his son had very nearly been assassinated the
day before, near the palace. The mob had insulted him on account of the
ostentatious luxury of his wife, whose house was hung with red velvet
edged with gold fringe. This lady was the daughter of Nicholas de
Camus, who arrived in Paris with twenty francs in his pocket, became
secretary of state, and accumulated wealth enough to divide nine
millions of francs among his children and to keep an income of forty
thousand for himself.

The fact was that Emery’s son had run a great chance of being
suffocated, one of the rioters having proposed to squeeze him until he
gave up all the gold he had swallowed. Nothing, therefore, was settled
that day, as Emery’s head was not steady enough for business after such
an occurrence.

On the next day Mathieu Molé, the chief president, whose courage at
this crisis, says the Cardinal de Retz, was equal to that of the Duc de
Beaufort and the Prince de Condé—in other words, of the two men who
were considered the bravest in France—had been attacked in his turn.
The people threatened to hold him responsible for the evils that hung
over them. But the chief president had replied with his habitual
coolness, without betraying either disturbance or surprise, that should
the agitators refuse obedience to the king’s wishes he would have
gallows erected in the public squares and proceed at once to hang the
most active among them. To which the others had responded that they
would be glad to see the gallows erected; they would serve for the
hanging of those detestable judges who purchased favor at court at the
price of the people’s misery.

Nor was this all. On the eleventh the queen in going to mass at Notre
Dame, as she always did on Saturdays, was followed by more than two
hundred women demanding justice. These poor creatures had no bad
intentions. They wished only to be allowed to fall on their knees
before their sovereign, and that they might move her to compassion; but
they were prevented by the royal guard and the queen proceeded on her
way, haughtily disdainful of their entreaties.

At length parliament was convoked; the authority of the king was to be
maintained.

One day—it was the morning of the day my story begins—the king, Louis
XIV., then ten years of age, went in state, under pretext of returning
thanks for his recovery from the small-pox, to Notre Dame. He took the
opportunity of calling out his guard, the Swiss troops and the
musketeers, and he had planted them round the Palais Royal, on the
quays, and on the Pont Neuf. After mass the young monarch drove to the
Parliament House, where, upon the throne, he hastily confirmed not only
such edicts as he had already passed, but issued new ones, each one,
according to Cardinal de Retz, more ruinous than the others—a
proceeding which drew forth a strong remonstrance from the chief
president, Molé—whilst President Blancmesnil and Councillor Broussel
raised their voices in indignation against fresh taxes.

The king returned amidst the silence of a vast multitude to the Palais
Royal. All minds were uneasy, most were foreboding, many of the people
used threatening language.

At first, indeed, they were doubtful whether the king’s visit to the
parliament had been in order to lighten or increase their burdens; but
scarcely was it known that the taxes were to be still further
increased, when cries of “Down with Mazarin!” “Long live Broussel!”
“Long live Blancmesnil!” resounded through the city. For the people had
learned that Broussel and Blancmesnil had made speeches in their
behalf, and, although the eloquence of these deputies had been without
avail, it had none the less won for them the people’s good-will. All
attempts to disperse the groups collected in the streets, or silence
their exclamations, were in vain. Orders had just been given to the
royal guards and the Swiss guards, not only to stand firm, but to send
out patrols to the streets of Saint Denis and Saint Martin, where the
people thronged and where they were the most vociferous, when the mayor
of Paris was announced at the Palais Royal.

He was shown in directly; he came to say that if these offensive
precautions were not discontinued, in two hours Paris would be under
arms.

Deliberations were being held when a lieutenant in the guards, named
Comminges, made his appearance, with his clothes all torn, his face
streaming with blood. The queen on seeing him uttered a cry of surprise
and asked him what was going on.

As the mayor had foreseen, the sight of the guards had exasperated the
mob. The tocsin was sounded. Comminges had arrested one of the
ringleaders and had ordered him to be hanged near the cross of Du
Trahoir; but in attempting to execute this command the soldiery were
attacked in the market-place with stones and halberds; the delinquent
had escaped to the Rue des Lombards and rushed into a house. They broke
open the doors and searched the dwelling, but in vain. Comminges,
wounded by a stone which had struck him on the forehead, had left a
picket in the street and returned to the Palais Royal, followed by a
menacing crowd, to tell his story.

This account confirmed that of the mayor. The authorities were not in a
condition to cope with serious revolt. Mazarin endeavored to circulate
among the people a report that troops had only been stationed on the
quays and on the Pont Neuf, on account of the ceremonial of the day,
and that they would soon withdraw. In fact, about four o’clock they
were all concentrated about the Palais Royal, the courts and ground
floors of which were filled with musketeers and Swiss guards, and there
awaited the outcome of all this disturbance.

Such was the state of affairs at the very moment we introduced our
readers to the study of Cardinal Mazarin—once that of Cardinal
Richelieu. We have seen in what state of mind he listened to the
murmurs from below, which even reached him in his seclusion, and to the
guns, the firing of which resounded through that room. All at once he
raised his head; his brow slightly contracted like that of a man who
has formed a resolution; he fixed his eyes upon an enormous clock that
was about to strike ten, and taking up a whistle of silver gilt that
stood upon the table near him, he shrilled it twice.

A door hidden in the tapestry opened noiselessly and a man in black
silently advanced and stood behind the chair on which Mazarin sat.

“Bernouin,” said the cardinal, not turning round, for having whistled,
he knew that it was his _valet-de-chambre_ who was behind him; “what
musketeers are now within the palace?”

“The Black Musketeers, my lord.”

“What company?”

“Tréville’s company.”

“Is there any officer belonging to this company in the ante-chamber?”

“Lieutenant d’Artagnan.”

“A man on whom we can depend, I hope.”

“Yes, my lord.”

“Give me a uniform of one of these musketeers and help me to put it
on.”

The valet went out as silently as he had entered and appeared in a few
minutes bringing the dress demanded.

The cardinal, in deep thought and in silence, began to take off the
robes of state he had assumed in order to be present at the sitting of
parliament, and to attire himself in the military coat, which he wore
with a certain degree of easy grace, owing to his former campaigns in
Italy. When he was completely dressed he said:

“Send hither Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

The valet went out of the room, this time by the centre door, but still
as silently as before; one might have fancied him an apparition.

When he was left alone the cardinal looked at himself in the glass with
a feeling of self-satisfaction. Still young—for he was scarcely
forty-six years of age—he possessed great elegance of form and was
above the middle height; his complexion was brilliant and beautiful;
his glance full of expression; his nose, though large, was well
proportioned; his forehead broad and majestic; his hair, of a chestnut
color, was curled slightly; his beard, which was darker than his hair,
was turned carefully with a curling iron, a practice that greatly
improved it. After a short time the cardinal arranged his shoulder
belt, then looked with great complacency at his hands, which were most
elegant and of which he took the greatest care; and throwing on one
side the large kid gloves tried on at first, as belonging to the
uniform, he put on others of silk only. At this instant the door
opened.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the _valet-de-chambre_.

An officer, as he spoke, entered the apartment. He was a man between
thirty-nine and forty years of age, of medium height but a very well
proportioned figure; with an intellectual and animated physiognomy; his
beard black, and his hair turning gray, as often happens when people
have found life either too gay or too sad, more especially when they
happen to be of swart complexion.

D’Artagnan advanced a few steps into the apartment.

How perfectly he remembered his former entrance into that very room!
Seeing, however, no one there except a musketeer of his own troop, he
fixed his eyes upon the supposed soldier, in whose dress, nevertheless,
he recognized at the first glance the cardinal.

The lieutenant remained standing in a dignified but respectful posture,
such as became a man of good birth, who had in the course of his life
been frequently in the society of the highest nobles.

The cardinal looked at him with a cunning rather than serious glance,
yet he examined his countenance with attention and after a momentary
silence said:

“You are Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“I am that individual,” replied the officer.

Mazarin gazed once more at a countenance full of intelligence, the play
of which had been, nevertheless, subdued by age and experience; and
D’Artagnan received the penetrating glance like one who had formerly
sustained many a searching look, very different, indeed, from those
which were inquiringly directed on him at that instant.

“Sir,” resumed the cardinal, “you are to come with me, or rather, I am
to go with you.”

“I am at your command, my lord,” returned D’Artagnan.

“I wish to visit in person the outposts which surround the Palais
Royal; do you suppose that there is any danger in so doing?”

“Danger, my lord!” exclaimed D’Artagnan with a look of astonishment,
“what danger?”

“I am told that there is a general insurrection.”

“The uniform of the king’s musketeers carries a certain respect with
it, and even if that were not the case I would engage with four of my
men to put to flight a hundred of these clowns.”

“Did you witness the injury sustained by Comminges?”

“Monsieur de Comminges is in the guards and not in the musketeers——”

“Which means, I suppose, that the musketeers are better soldiers than
the guards.” The cardinal smiled as he spoke.

“Every one likes his own uniform best, my lord.”

“Myself excepted,” and again Mazarin smiled; “for you perceive that I
have left off mine and put on yours.”

“Lord bless us! this is modesty indeed!” cried D’Artagnan. “Had I such
a uniform as your eminence possesses, I protest I should be mightily
content, and I would take an oath never to wear any other costume——”

“Yes, but for to-night’s adventure I don’t suppose my dress would have
been a very safe one. Give me my felt hat, Bernouin.”

The valet instantly brought to his master a regimental hat with a wide
brim. The cardinal put it on in military style.

“Your horses are ready saddled in their stables, are they not?” he
said, turning to D’Artagnan.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Well, let us set out.”

“How many men does your eminence wish to escort you?”

“You say that with four men you will undertake to disperse a hundred
low fellows; as it may happen that we shall have to encounter two
hundred, take eight——”

“As many as my lord wishes.”

“I will follow you. This way—light us downstairs Bernouin.”

The valet held a wax-light; the cardinal took a key from his bureau and
opening the door of a secret stair descended into the court of the
Palais Royal.




Chapter II.
A Nightly Patrol.


In ten minutes Mazarin and his party were traversing the street “Les
Bons Enfants” behind the theatre built by Richelieu expressly for the
play of “Mirame,” and in which Mazarin, who was an amateur of music,
but not of literature, had introduced into France the first opera that
was ever acted in that country.

The appearance of the town denoted the greatest agitation. Numberless
groups paraded the streets and, whatever D’Artagnan might think of it,
it was obvious that the citizens had for the night laid aside their
usual forbearance, in order to assume a warlike aspect. From time to
time noises came in the direction of the public markets. The report of
firearms was heard near the Rue Saint Denis and occasionally church
bells began to ring indiscriminately and at the caprice of the
populace. D’Artagnan, meantime, pursued his way with the indifference
of a man upon whom such acts of folly made no impression. When he
approached a group in the middle of the street he urged his horse upon
it without a word of warning; and the members of the group, whether
rebels or not, as if they knew with what sort of a man they had to
deal, at once gave place to the patrol. The cardinal envied that
composure, which he attributed to the habit of meeting danger; but none
the less he conceived for the officer under whose orders he had for the
moment placed himself, that consideration which even prudence pays to
careless courage. On approaching an outpost near the Barriere des
Sergens, the sentinel cried out, “Who’s there?” and D’Artagnan
answered—having first asked the word of the cardinal—“Louis and
Rocroy.” After which he inquired if Lieutenant Comminges were not the
commanding officer at the outpost. The soldier replied by pointing out
to him an officer who was conversing, on foot, his hand upon the neck
of a horse on which the individual to whom he was talking sat. Here was
the officer D’Artagnan was seeking.

“Here is Monsieur Comminges,” said D’Artagnan, returning to the
cardinal. He instantly retired, from a feeling of respectful delicacy;
it was, however, evident that the cardinal was recognized by both
Comminges and the other officers on horseback.

“Well done, Guitant,” cried the cardinal to the equestrian; “I see
plainly that, notwithstanding the sixty-four years that have passed
over your head, you are still the same man, active and zealous. What
were you saying to this youngster?”

“My lord,” replied Guitant, “I was observing that we live in troublous
times and that to-day’s events are very like those in the days of the
Ligue, of which I heard so much in my youth. Are you aware that the mob
have even suggested throwing up barricades in the Rue Saint Denis and
the Rue Saint Antoine?”

“And what was Comminges saying to you in reply, my good Guitant?”

“My lord,” said Comminges, “I answered that to compose a Ligue only one
ingredient was wanting—in my opinion an essential one—a Duc de Guise;
moreover, no generation ever does the same thing twice.”

“No, but they mean to make a Fronde, as they call it,” said Guitant.

“And what is a Fronde?” inquired Mazarin.

“My lord, Fronde is the name the discontented give to their party.”

“And what is the origin of this name?”

“It seems that some days since Councillor Bachaumont remarked at the
palace that rebels and agitators reminded him of schoolboys
slinging—qui frondent—stones from the moats round Paris, young urchins
who run off the moment the constable appears, only to return to their
diversion the instant his back is turned. So they have picked up the
word and the insurrectionists are called ‘Frondeurs,’ and yesterday
every article sold was ‘a la Fronde;’ bread ‘a la Fronde,’ hats ‘a la
Fronde,’ to say nothing of gloves, pocket-handkerchiefs, and fans; but
listen——”

At that moment a window opened and a man began to sing:

 “A tempest from the Fronde Did blow to-day: I think ’twill blow Sieur
 Mazarin away.”


“Insolent wretch!” cried Guitant.

“My lord,” said Comminges, who, irritated by his wounds, wished for
revenge and longed to give back blow for blow, “shall I fire off a ball
to punish that jester, and to warn him not to sing so much out of tune
in the future?”

And as he spoke he put his hand on the holster of his uncle’s
saddle-bow.

“Certainly not! certainly not,” exclaimed Mazarin. “Diavolo! my dear
friend, you are going to spoil everything—everything is going on
famously. I know the French as well as if I had made them myself. They
sing—let them pay the piper. During the Ligue, about which Guitant was
speaking just now, the people chanted nothing except the mass, so
everything went to destruction. Come, Guitant, come along, and let’s
see if they keep watch at the Quinze-Vingts as at the Barriere des
Sergens.”

And waving his hand to Comminges he rejoined D’Artagnan, who instantly
put himself at the head of his troop, followed by the cardinal, Guitant
and the rest of the escort.

“Just so,” muttered Comminges, looking after Mazarin. “True, I forgot;
provided he can get money out of the people, that is all he wants.”

The street of Saint Honore, when the cardinal and his party passed
through it, was crowded by an assemblage who, standing in groups,
discussed the edicts of that memorable day. They pitied the young king,
who was unconsciously ruining his country, and threw all the odium of
his proceedings on Mazarin. Addresses to the Duke of Orleans and to
Condé were suggested. Blancmesnil and Broussel seemed in the highest
favor.

D’Artagnan passed through the very midst of this discontented mob just
as if his horse and he had been made of iron. Mazarin and Guitant
conversed together in whispers. The musketeers, who had already
discovered who Mazarin was, followed in profound silence. In the street
of Saint Thomas-du-Louvre they stopped at the barrier distinguished by
the name of Quinze-Vingts. Here Guitant spoke to one of the subalterns,
asking how matters were progressing.

“Ah, captain!” said the officer, “everything is quiet hereabout—if I
did not know that something is going on in yonder house!”

And he pointed to a magnificent hotel situated on the very spot whereon
the Vaudeville now stands.

“In that hotel? it is the Hotel Rambouillet,” cried Guitant.

“I really don’t know what hotel it is; all I do know is that I observed
some suspicious looking people go in there——”

“Nonsense!” exclaimed Guitant, with a burst of laughter; “those men
must be poets.”

“Come, Guitant, speak, if you please, respectfully of these gentlemen,”
said Mazarin; “don’t you know that I was in my youth a poet? I wrote
verses in the style of Benserade——”

“You, my lord?”

“Yes, I; shall I repeat to you some of my verses?”

“Just as you please, my lord. I do not understand Italian.”

“Yes, but you understand French,” and Mazarin laid his hand upon
Guitant’s shoulder. “My good, my brave Guitant, whatsoever command I
may give you in that language—in French—whatever I may order you to do,
will you not perform it?”

“Certainly. I have already answered that question in the affirmative;
but that command must come from the queen herself.”

“Yes! ah yes!” Mazarin bit his lips as he spoke; “I know your devotion
to her majesty.”

“I have been a captain in the queen’s guards for twenty years,” was the
reply.

“En route, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal; “all goes well in
this direction.”

D’Artagnan, in the meantime, had taken the head of his detachment
without a word and with that ready and profound obedience which marks
the character of an old soldier.

He led the way toward the hill of Saint Roche. The Rue Richelieu and
the Rue Villedot were then, owing to their vicinity to the ramparts,
less frequented than any others in that direction, for the town was
thinly inhabited thereabout.

“Who is in command here?” asked the cardinal.

“Villequier,” said Guitant.

“Diavolo! Speak to him yourself, for ever since you were deputed by me
to arrest the Duc de Beaufort, this officer and I have been on bad
terms. He laid claim to that honor as captain of the royal guards.”

“I am aware of that, and I have told him a hundred times that he was
wrong. The king could not give that order, since at that time he was
hardly four years old.”

“Yes, but I could give him the order—I, Guitant—and I preferred to give
it to you.”

Guitant, without reply, rode forward and desired the sentinel to call
Monsieur de Villequier.

“Ah! so you are here!” cried the officer, in the tone of ill-humor
habitual to him; “what the devil are you doing here?”

“I wish to know—can you tell me, pray—is anything fresh occurring in
this part of the town?”

“What do you mean? People cry out, ‘Long live the king! down with
Mazarin!’ That’s nothing new; no, we’ve been used to those acclamations
for some time.”

“And you sing chorus,” replied Guitant, laughing.

“Faith, I’ve half a mind to do it. In my opinion the people are right;
and cheerfully would I give up five years of my pay—which I am never
paid, by the way—to make the king five years older.”

“Really! And pray what would come to pass, supposing the king were five
years older than he is?”

“As soon as ever the king comes of age he will issue his commands
himself, and ’tis far pleasanter to obey the grandson of Henry IV. than
the son of Peter Mazarin. ‘Sdeath! I would die willingly for the king,
but supposing I happened to be killed on account of Mazarin, as your
nephew came near being to-day, there could be nothing in Paradise,
however well placed I might be there, that could console me for it.”

“Well, well, Monsieur de Villequier,” Mazarin interposed, “I shall make
it my care the king hears of your loyalty. Come, gentlemen,” addressing
the troop, “let us return.”

“Stop,” exclaimed Villequier, “so Mazarin was here! so much the better.
I have been waiting for a long time to tell him what I think of him. I
am obliged to you Guitant, although your intention was perhaps not very
favorable to me, for such an opportunity.”

He turned away and went off to his post, whistling a tune then popular
among the party called the “Fronde,” whilst Mazarin returned, in a
pensive mood, toward the Palais Royal. All that he had heard from these
three different men, Comminges, Guitant and Villequier, confirmed him
in his conviction that in case of serious tumults there would be no one
on his side except the queen; and then Anne of Austria had so often
deserted her friends that her support seemed most precarious. During
the whole of this nocturnal ride, during the whole time that he was
endeavoring to understand the various characters of Comminges, Guitant
and Villequier, Mazarin was, in truth, studying more especially one
man. This man, who had remained immovable as bronze when menaced by the
mob—not a muscle of whose face was stirred, either at Mazarin’s
witticisms or by the jests of the multitude—seemed to the cardinal a
peculiar being, who, having participated in past events similar to
those now occurring, was calculated to cope with those now on the eve
of taking place.

The name of D’Artagnan was not altogether new to Mazarin, who, although
he did not arrive in France before the year 1634 or 1635, that is to
say, about eight or nine years after the events which we have related
in a preceding narrative, * fancied he had heard it pronounced as that
of one who was said to be a model of courage, address and loyalty.

* “The Three Musketeers.”


Possessed by this idea, the cardinal resolved to know all about
D’Artagnan immediately; of course he could not inquire from D’Artagnan
himself who he was and what had been his career; he remarked, however,
in the course of conversation that the lieutenant of musketeers spoke
with a Gascon accent. Now the Italians and the Gascons are too much
alike and know each other too well ever to trust what any one of them
may say of himself; so in reaching the walls which surrounded the
Palais Royal, the cardinal knocked at a little door, and after thanking
D’Artagnan and requesting him to wait in the court of the Palais Royal,
he made a sign to Guitant to follow him.

They both dismounted, consigned their horses to the lackey who had
opened the door, and disappeared in the garden.

“My dear friend,” said the cardinal, leaning, as they walked through
the garden, on his friend’s arm, “you told me just now that you had
been twenty years in the queen’s service.”

“Yes, it’s true. I have,” returned Guitant.

“Now, my dear Guitant, I have often remarked that in addition to your
courage, which is indisputable, and your fidelity, which is invincible,
you possess an admirable memory.”

“You have found that out, have you, my lord? Deuce take it—all the
worse for me!”

“How?”

“There is no doubt but that one of the chief accomplishments of a
courtier is to know when to forget.”

“But you, Guitant, are not a courtier. You are a brave soldier, one of
the few remaining veterans of the days of Henry IV. Alas! how few
to-day exist!”

“Plague on’t, my lord, have you brought me here to get my horoscope out
of me?”

“No; I only brought you here to ask you,” returned Mazarin, smiling,
“if you have taken any particular notice of our lieutenant of
musketeers?”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan? I have had no occasion to notice him
particularly; he’s an old acquaintance. He’s a Gascon. De Tréville
knows him and esteems him very highly, and De Tréville, as you know, is
one of the queen’s greatest friends. As a soldier the man ranks well;
he did his whole duty and even more, at the siege of Rochelle—as at
Suze and Perpignan.”

“But you know, Guitant, we poor ministers often want men with other
qualities besides courage; we want men of talent. Pray, was not
Monsieur d’Artagnan, in the time of the cardinal, mixed up in some
intrigue from which he came out, according to report, quite cleverly?”

“My lord, as to the report you allude to”—Guitant perceived that the
cardinal wished to make him speak out—“I know nothing but what the
public knows. I never meddle in intrigues, and if I occasionally become
a confidant of the intrigues of others I am sure your eminence will
approve of my keeping them secret.”

Mazarin shook his head.

“Ah!” he said; “some ministers are fortunate and find out all that they
wish to know.”

“My lord,” replied Guitant, “such ministers do not weigh men in the
same balance; they get their information on war from warriors; on
intrigues, from intriguers. Consult some politician of the period of
which you speak, and if you pay well for it you will certainly get to
know all you want.”

“Eh, pardieu!” said Mazarin, with a grimace which he always made when
spoken to about money. “They will be paid, if there is no way of
getting out of it.”

“Does my lord seriously wish me to name any one who was mixed up in the
cabals of that day?”

“By Bacchus!” rejoined Mazarin, impatiently, “it’s about an hour since
I asked you for that very thing, wooden-head that you are.”

“There is one man for whom I can answer, if he will speak out.”

“That’s my concern; I will make him speak.”

“Ah, my lord, ’tis not easy to make people say what they don’t wish to
let out.”

“Pooh! with patience one must succeed. Well, this man. Who is he?”

“The Comte de Rochefort.”

“The Comte de Rochefort!”

“Unfortunately he has disappeared these four or five years and I don’t
know where he is.”

“I know, Guitant,” said Mazarin.

“Well, then, how is it that your eminence complained just now of want
of information?”

“You think,” resumed Mazarin, “that Rochefort——”

“He was Cardinal Richelieu’s creature, my lord. I warn you, however,
his services will cost you something. The cardinal was lavish to his
underlings.”

“Yes, yes, Guitant,” said Mazarin; “Richelieu was a great man, a very
great man, but he had that defect. Thanks, Guitant; I shall benefit by
your advice this very evening.”

Here they separated and bidding adieu to Guitant in the court of the
Palais Royal, Mazarin approached an officer who was walking up and down
within that inclosure.

It was D’Artagnan, who was waiting for him.

“Come hither,” said Mazarin in his softest voice; “I have an order to
give you.”

D’Artagnan bent low and following the cardinal up the secret staircase,
soon found himself in the study whence they had first set out.

The cardinal seated himself before his bureau and taking a sheet of
paper wrote some lines upon it, whilst D’Artagnan stood imperturbable,
without showing either impatience or curiosity. He was like a soldierly
automaton, or rather, like a magnificent marionette.

The cardinal folded and sealed his letter.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” he said, “you are to take this dispatch to the
Bastile and bring back here the person it concerns. You must take a
carriage and an escort, and guard the prisoner with the greatest care.”

D’Artagnan took the letter, touched his hat with his hand, turned round
upon his heel like a drill-sergeant, and a moment afterward was heard,
in his dry and monotonous tone, commanding “Four men and an escort, a
carriage and a horse.” Five minutes afterward the wheels of the
carriage and the horses’ shoes were heard resounding on the pavement of
the courtyard.




Chapter III.
Dead Animosities.


D’Artagnan arrived at the Bastile just as it was striking half-past
eight. His visit was announced to the governor, who, on hearing that he
came from the cardinal, went to meet him and received him at the top of
the great flight of steps outside the door. The governor of the Bastile
was Monsieur du Tremblay, the brother of the famous Capuchin, Joseph,
that fearful favorite of Richelieu’s, who went by the name of the Gray
Cardinal.

During the period that the Duc de Bassompierre passed in the
Bastile—where he remained for twelve long years—when his companions, in
their dreams of liberty, said to each other: “As for me, I shall go out
of the prison at such a time,” and another, at such and such a time,
the duke used to answer, “As for me, gentlemen, I shall leave only when
Monsieur du Tremblay leaves;” meaning that at the death of the cardinal
Du Tremblay would certainly lose his place at the Bastile and De
Bassompierre regain his at court.

His prediction was nearly fulfilled, but in a very different way from
that which De Bassompierre supposed; for after the death of Richelieu
everything went on, contrary to expectation, in the same way as before;
and Bassompierre had little chance of leaving his prison.

Monsieur du Tremblay received D’Artagnan with extreme politeness and
invited him to sit down with him to supper, of which he was himself
about to partake.

“I should be delighted to do so,” was the reply; “but if I am not
mistaken, the words ‘In haste,’ are written on the envelope of the
letter which I brought.”

“You are right,” said Du Tremblay. “Halloo, major! tell them to order
Number 25 to come downstairs.”

The unhappy wretch who entered the Bastile ceased, as he crossed the
threshold, to be a man—he became a number.

D’Artagnan shuddered at the noise of the keys; he remained on
horseback, feeling no inclination to dismount, and sat looking at the
bars, at the buttressed windows and the immense walls he had hitherto
only seen from the other side of the moat, but by which he had for
twenty years been awe-struck.

A bell resounded.

“I must leave you,” said Du Tremblay; “I am sent for to sign the
release of a prisoner. I shall be happy to meet you again, sir.”

“May the devil annihilate me if I return thy wish!” murmured
D’Artagnan, smiling as he pronounced the imprecation; “I declare I feel
quite ill after only being five minutes in the courtyard. Go to! go to!
I would rather die on straw than hoard up a thousand a year by being
governor of the Bastile.”

He had scarcely finished this soliloquy before the prisoner arrived. On
seeing him D’Artagnan could hardly suppress an exclamation of surprise.
The prisoner got into the carriage without seeming to recognize the
musketeer.

“Gentlemen,” thus D’Artagnan addressed the four musketeers, “I am
ordered to exercise the greatest possible care in guarding the
prisoner, and since there are no locks to the carriage, I shall sit
beside him. Monsieur de Lillebonne, lead my horse by the bridle, if you
please.” As he spoke he dismounted, gave the bridle of his horse to the
musketeer and placing himself by the side of the prisoner said, in a
voice perfectly composed, “To the Palais Royal, at full trot.”

The carriage drove on and D’Artagnan, availing himself of the darkness
in the archway under which they were passing, threw himself into the
arms of the prisoner.

“Rochefort!” he exclaimed; “you! is it you, indeed? I am not mistaken?”

“D’Artagnan!” cried Rochefort.

“Ah! my poor friend!” resumed D’Artagnan, “not having seen you for four
or five years I concluded you were dead.”

“I’faith,” said Rochefort, “there’s no great difference, I think,
between a dead man and one who has been buried alive; now I have been
buried alive, or very nearly so.”

“And for what crime are you imprisoned in the Bastile.”

“Do you wish me to speak the truth?”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, I don’t know.”

“Have you any suspicion of me, Rochefort?”

“No! on the honor of a gentleman; but I cannot be imprisoned for the
reason alleged; it is impossible.”

“What reason?” asked D’Artagnan.

“For stealing.”

“For stealing! you, Rochefort! you are laughing at me.”

“I understand. You mean that this demands explanation, do you not?”

“I admit it.”

“Well, this is what actually took place: One evening after an orgy in
Reinard’s apartment at the Tuileries with the Duc d’Harcourt,
Fontrailles, De Rieux and others, the Duc d’Harcourt proposed that we
should go and pull cloaks on the Pont Neuf; that is, you know, a
diversion which the Duc d’Orleans made quite the fashion.”

“Were you crazy, Rochefort? at your age!”

“No, I was drunk. And yet, since the amusement seemed to me rather
tame, I proposed to Chevalier de Rieux that we should be spectators
instead of actors, and, in order to see to advantage, that we should
mount the bronze horse. No sooner said than done. Thanks to the spurs,
which served as stirrups, in a moment we were perched upon the croupe;
we were well placed and saw everything. Four or five cloaks had already
been lifted, with a dexterity without parallel, and not one of the
victims had dared to say a word, when some fool of a fellow, less
patient than the others, took it into his head to cry out, ‘Guard!’ and
drew upon us a patrol of archers. Duc d’Harcourt, Fontrailles, and the
others escaped; De Rieux was inclined to do likewise, but I told him
they wouldn’t look for us where we were. He wouldn’t listen, put his
foot on the spur to get down, the spur broke, he fell with a broken
leg, and, instead of keeping quiet, took to crying out like a
gallows-bird. I then was ready to dismount, but it was too late; I
descended into the arms of the archers. They conducted me to the
Chatelet, where I slept soundly, being very sure that on the next day I
should go forth free. The next day came and passed, the day after, a
week; I then wrote to the cardinal. The same day they came for me and
took me to the Bastile. That was five years ago. Do you believe it was
because I committed the sacrilege of mounting en croupe behind Henry
IV.?”

“No; you are right, my dear Rochefort, it couldn’t be for that; but you
will probably learn the reason soon.”

“Ah, indeed! I forgot to ask you—where are you taking me?”

“To the cardinal.”

“What does he want with me?”

“I do not know. I did not even know that you were the person I was sent
to fetch.”

“Impossible—you—a favorite of the minister!”

“A favorite! no, indeed!” cried D’Artagnan. “Ah, my poor friend! I am
just as poor a Gascon as when I saw you at Meung, twenty-two years ago,
you know; alas!” and he concluded his speech with a deep sigh.

“Nevertheless, you come as one in authority.”

“Because I happened to be in the ante-chamber when the cardinal called
me, by the merest chance. I am still a lieutenant in the musketeers and
have been so these twenty years.”

“Then no misfortune has happened to you?”

“And what misfortune could happen to me? To quote some Latin verses I
have forgotten, or rather, never knew well, ‘the thunderbolt never
falls on the valleys,’ and I am a valley, dear Rochefort,—one of the
lowliest of the low.”

“Then Mazarin is still Mazarin?”

“The same as ever, my friend; it is said that he is married to the
queen.”

“Married?”

“If not her husband, he is unquestionably her lover.”

“You surprise me. Rebuff Buckingham and consent to Mazarin!”

“Just like the women,” replied D’Artagnan, coolly.

“Like women, not like queens.”

“Egad! queens are the weakest of their sex, when it comes to such
things as these.”

“And M. de Beaufort—is he still in prison?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Oh, nothing, but that he might get me out of this, if he were
favorably inclined to me.”

“You are probably nearer freedom than he is, so it will be your
business to get him out.”

“And,” said the prisoner, “what talk is there of war with Spain?”

“With Spain, no,” answered D’Artagnan; “but Paris.”

“What do you mean?” cried Rochefort.

“Do you hear the guns, pray? The citizens are amusing themselves in the
meantime.”

“And you—do you really think that anything could be done with these
bourgeois?”

“Yes, they might do well if they had any leader to unite them in one
body.”

“How miserable not to be free!”

“Don’t be downcast. Since Mazarin has sent for you, it is because he
wants you. I congratulate you! Many a long year has passed since any
one has wanted to employ me; so you see in what a situation I am.”

“Make your complaints known; that’s my advice.”

“Listen, Rochefort; let us make a compact. We are friends, are we not?”

“Egad! I bear the traces of our friendship—three slits or slashes from
your sword.”

“Well, if you should be restored to favor, don’t forget me.”

“On the honor of a Rochefort; but you must do the like for me.”

“There’s my hand,—I promise.”

“Therefore, whenever you find any opportunity of saying something in my
behalf——”

“I shall say it, and you?”

“I shall do the same.”

“Apropos, are we to speak of your friends also, Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis? or have you forgotten them?”

“Almost.”

“What has become of them?”

“I don’t know; we separated, as you know. They are alive, that’s all
that I can say about them; from time to time I hear of them indirectly,
but in what part of the world they are, devil take me if I know, No, on
my honor, I have not a friend in the world but you, Rochefort.”

“And the illustrious—what’s the name of the lad whom I made a sergeant
in Piedmont’s regiment?”

“Planchet!”

“The illustrious Planchet. What has become of him?”

“I shouldn’t wonder if he were at the head of the mob at this very
moment. He married a woman who keeps a confectioner’s shop in the Rue
des Lombards, for he’s a lad who was always fond of sweetmeats; he’s
now a citizen of Paris. You’ll see that that queer fellow will be a
sheriff before I shall be a captain.”

“Come, dear D’Artagnan, look up a little! Courage! It is when one is
lowest on the wheel of fortune that the merry-go-round wheels and
rewards us. This evening your destiny begins to change.”

“Amen!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, stopping the carriage.

“What are you doing?” asked Rochefort.

“We are almost there and I want no one to see me getting out of your
carriage; we are supposed not to know each other.”

“You are right. Adieu.”

“Au revoir. Remember your promise.”

In five minutes the party entered the courtyard and D’Artagnan led the
prisoner up the great staircase and across the corridor and
ante-chamber.

As they stopped at the door of the cardinal’s study, D’Artagnan was
about to be announced when Rochefort slapped him on his shoulder.

“D’Artagnan, let me confess to you what I’ve been thinking about during
the whole of my drive, as I looked out upon the parties of citizens who
perpetually crossed our path and looked at you and your four men with
fiery eyes.”

“Speak out,” answered D’Artagnan.

“I had only to cry out ‘Help!’ for you and for your companions to be
cut to pieces, and then I should have been free.”

“Why didn’t you do it?” asked the lieutenant.

“Come, come!” cried Rochefort. “Did we not swear friendship? Ah! had
any one but you been there, I don’t say——”

D’Artagnan bowed. “Is it possible that Rochefort has become a better
man than I am?” he said to himself. And he caused himself to be
announced to the minister.

“Let M. de Rochefort enter,” said Mazarin, eagerly, on hearing their
names pronounced; “and beg M. d’Artagnan to wait; I shall have further
need of him.”

These words gave great joy to D’Artagnan. As he had said, it had been a
long time since any one had needed him; and that demand for his
services on the part of Mazarin seemed to him an auspicious sign.

Rochefort, rendered suspicious and cautious by these words, entered the
apartment, where he found Mazarin sitting at the table, dressed in his
ordinary garb and as one of the prelates of the Church, his costume
being similar to that of the abbés in that day, excepting that his
scarf and stockings were violet.

As the door was closed Rochefort cast a glance toward Mazarin, which
was answered by one, equally furtive, from the minister.

There was little change in the cardinal; still dressed with sedulous
care, his hair well arranged and curled, his person perfumed, he
looked, owing to his extreme taste in dress, only half his age. But
Rochefort, who had passed five years in prison, had become old in the
lapse of a few years; the dark locks of this estimable friend of the
defunct Cardinal Richelieu were now white; the deep bronze of his
complexion had been succeeded by a mortal pallor which betokened
debility. As he gazed at him Mazarin shook his head slightly, as much
as to say, “This is a man who does not appear to me fit for much.”

After a pause, which appeared an age to Rochefort, Mazarin took from a
bundle of papers a letter, and showing it to the count, he said:

“I find here a letter in which you sue for liberty, Monsieur de
Rochefort. You are in prison, then?”

Rochefort trembled in every limb at this question. “But I thought,” he
said, “that your eminence knew that circumstance better than any one——”

“I? Oh no! There is a congestion of prisoners in the Bastile, who were
cooped up in the time of Monsieur de Richelieu; I don’t even know their
names.”

“Yes, but in regard to myself, my lord, it cannot be so, for I was
removed from the Chatelet to the Bastile owing to an order from your
eminence.”

“You think you were.”

“I am certain of it.”

“Ah, stay! I fancy I remember it. Did you not once refuse to undertake
a journey to Brussels for the queen?”

“Ah! ah!” exclaimed Rochefort. “There is the true reason! Idiot that I
am, though I have been trying to find it out for five years, I never
found it out.”

“But I do not say it was the cause of your imprisonment. I merely ask
you, did you not refuse to go to Brussels for the queen, whilst you had
consented to go there to do some service for the late cardinal?”

“That is the very reason I refused to go back to Brussels. I was there
at a fearful moment. I was sent there to intercept a correspondence
between Chalais and the archduke, and even then, when I was discovered
I was nearly torn to pieces. How could I, then, return to Brussels? I
should injure the queen instead of serving her.”

“Well, since the best motives are liable to misconstruction, the queen
saw in your refusal nothing but a refusal—a distinct refusal she had
also much to complain of you during the lifetime of the late cardinal;
yes, her majesty the queen——”

Rochefort smiled contemptuously.

“Since I was a faithful servant, my lord, to Cardinal Richelieu during
his life, it stands to reason that now, after his death, I should serve
you well, in defiance of the whole world.”

“With regard to myself, Monsieur de Rochefort,” replied Mazarin, “I am
not, like Monsieur de Richelieu, all-powerful. I am but a minister, who
wants no servants, being myself nothing but a servant of the queen’s.
Now, the queen is of a sensitive nature. Hearing of your refusal to
obey her she looked upon it as a declaration of war, and as she
considers you a man of superior talent, and consequently dangerous, she
desired me to make sure of you; that is the reason of your being shut
up in the Bastile. But your release can be managed. You are one of
those men who can comprehend certain matters and having understood
them, can act with energy——”

“Such was Cardinal Richelieu’s opinion, my lord.”

“The cardinal,” interrupted Mazarin, “was a great politician and
therein shone his vast superiority over me. I am a straightforward,
simple man; that’s my great disadvantage. I am of a frankness of
character quite French.”

Rochefort bit his lips in order to prevent a smile.

“Now to the point. I want friends; I want faithful servants. When I say
I want, I mean the queen wants them. I do nothing without her
commands—pray understand that; not like Monsieur de Richelieu, who went
on just as he pleased. So I shall never be a great man, as he was, but
to compensate for that, I shall be a good man, Monsieur de Rochefort,
and I hope to prove it to you.”

Rochefort knew well the tones of that soft voice, in which sounded
sometimes a sort of gentle lisp, like the hissing of young vipers.

“I am disposed to believe your eminence,” he replied; “though I have
had but little evidence of that good-nature of which your eminence
speaks. Do not forget that I have been five years in the Bastile and
that no medium of viewing things is so deceptive as the grating of a
prison.”

“Ah, Monsieur de Rochefort! have I not told you already that I had
nothing to do with that? The queen—cannot you make allowances for the
pettishness of a queen and a princess? But that has passed away as
suddenly as it came, and is forgotten.”

“I can easily suppose, sir, that her majesty has forgotten it amid the
fetes and the courtiers of the Palais Royal, but I who have passed
those years in the Bastile——”

“Ah! mon Dieu! my dear Monsieur de Rochefort! do you absolutely think
that the Palais Royal is the abode of gayety? No. We have had great
annoyances there. As for me, I play my game squarely, fairly, and above
board, as I always do. Let us come to some conclusion. Are you one of
us, Monsieur de Rochefort?”

“I am very desirous of being so, my lord, but I am totally in the dark
about everything. In the Bastile one talks politics only with soldiers
and jailers, and you have not an idea, my lord, how little is known of
what is going on by people of that sort; I am of Monsieur de
Bassompierre’s party. Is he still one of the seventeen peers of
France?”

“He is dead, sir; a great loss. His devotion to the queen was
boundless; men of loyalty are scarce.”

“I think so, forsooth,” said Rochefort, “and when you find any of them,
you march them off to the Bastile. However, there are plenty in the
world, but you don’t look in the right direction for them, my lord.”

“Indeed! explain to me. Ah! my dear Monsieur de Rochefort, how much you
must have learned during your intimacy with the late cardinal! Ah! he
was a great man.”

“Will your eminence be angry if I read you a lesson?”

“I! never! you know you may say anything to me. I try to be beloved,
not feared.”

“Well, there is on the wall of my cell, scratched with a nail, a
proverb, which says, ‘Like master, like servant.’”

“Pray, what does that mean?”

“It means that Monsieur de Richelieu was able to find trusty servants,
dozens and dozens of them.”

“He! the point aimed at by every poniard! Richelieu, who passed his
life in warding off blows which were forever aimed at him!”

“But he did ward them off,” said De Rochefort, “and the reason was,
that though he had bitter enemies he possessed also true friends. I
have known persons,” he continued—for he thought he might avail himself
of the opportunity of speaking of D’Artagnan—“who by their sagacity and
address have deceived the penetration of Cardinal Richelieu; who by
their valor have got the better of his guards and spies; persons
without money, without support, without credit, yet who have preserved
to the crowned head its crown and made the cardinal crave pardon.”

“But those men you speak of,” said Mazarin, smiling inwardly on seeing
Rochefort approach the point to which he was leading him, “those men
were not devoted to the cardinal, for they contended against him.”

“No; in that case they would have met with more fitting reward. They
had the misfortune to be devoted to that very queen for whom just now
you were seeking servants.”

“But how is it that you know so much of these matters?”

“I know them because the men of whom I speak were at that time my
enemies; because they fought against me; because I did them all the
harm I could and they returned it to the best of their ability; because
one of them, with whom I had most to do, gave me a pretty sword-thrust,
now about seven years ago, the third that I received from the same
hand; it closed an old account.”

“Ah!” said Mazarin, with admirable suavity, “could I but find such
men!”

“My lord, there has stood for six years at your very door a man such as
I describe, and during those six years he has been unappreciated and
unemployed by you.”

“Who is it?”

“It is Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“That Gascon!” cried Mazarin, with well acted surprise.

“‘That Gascon’ has saved a queen and made Monsieur de Richelieu confess
that in point of talent, address and political skill, to him he was
only a tyro.”

“Really?”

“It is as I have the honor of telling it to your excellency.”

“Tell me a little about it, my dear Monsieur de Rochefort.”

“That is somewhat difficult, my lord,” said Rochefort, with a smile.

“Then he will tell it me himself.”

“I doubt it, my lord.”

“Why do you doubt it?”

“Because the secret does not belong to him; because, as I have told
you, it has to do with a great queen.”

“And he was alone in achieving an enterprise like that?”

“No, my lord, he had three colleagues, three brave men, men such as you
were wishing for just now.”

“And were these four men attached to each other, true in heart, really
united?”

“As if they had been one man—as if their four hearts had pulsated in
one breast.”

“You pique my curiosity, dear Rochefort; pray tell me the whole story.”

“That is impossible; but I will tell you a true story, my lord.”

“Pray do so, I delight in stories,” cried the cardinal.

“Listen, then,” returned Rochefort, as he spoke endeavoring to read in
that subtle countenance the cardinal’s motive. “Once upon a time there
lived a queen—a powerful monarch—who reigned over one of the greatest
kingdoms of the universe; and a minister; and this minister wished much
to injure the queen, whom once he had loved too well. (Do not try, my
lord, you cannot guess who it is; all this happened long before you
came into the country where this queen reigned.) There came to the
court an ambassador so brave, so magnificent, so elegant, that every
woman lost her heart to him; and the queen had even the indiscretion to
give him certain ornaments so rare that they could never be replaced by
any like them.

“As these ornaments were given by the king the minister persuaded his
majesty to insist upon the queen’s appearing in them as part of her
jewels at a ball which was soon to take place. There is no occasion to
tell you, my lord, that the minister knew for a fact that these
ornaments had sailed away with the ambassador, who was far away, beyond
seas. This illustrious queen had fallen low as the least of her
subjects—fallen from her high estate.”

“Indeed!”

“Well, my lord, four men resolved to save her. These four men were not
princes, neither were they dukes, neither were they men in power; they
were not even rich. They were four honest soldiers, each with a good
heart, a good arm and a sword at the service of those who wanted it.
They set out. The minister knew of their departure and had planted
people on the road to prevent them ever reaching their destination.
Three of them were overwhelmed and disabled by numerous assailants; one
of them alone arrived at the port, having either killed or wounded
those who wished to stop him. He crossed the sea and brought back the
set of ornaments to the great queen, who was able to wear them on her
shoulder on the appointed day; and this very nearly ruined the
minister. What do you think of that exploit, my lord?”

“It is magnificent!” said Mazarin, thoughtfully.

“Well, I know of ten such men.”

Mazarin made no reply; he reflected.

Five or six minutes elapsed.

“You have nothing more to ask of me, my lord?” said Rochefort.

“Yes. And you say that Monsieur d’Artagnan was one of those four men?”

“He led the enterprise.”

“And who were the others?”

“I leave it to Monsieur d’Artagnan to name them, my lord. They were his
friends and not mine. He alone would have any influence with them; I do
not even know them under their true names.”

“You suspect me, Monsieur de Rochefort; I want him and you and all to
aid me.”

“Begin with me, my lord; for after five or six years of imprisonment it
is natural to feel some curiosity as to one’s destination.”

“You, my dear Monsieur de Rochefort, shall have the post of confidence;
you shall go to Vincennes, where Monsieur de Beaufort is confined; you
will guard him well for me. Well, what is the matter?”

“The matter is that you have proposed to me what is impossible,” said
Rochefort, shaking his head with an air of disappointment.

“What! impossible? And why is it impossible?”

“Because Monsieur de Beaufort is one of my friends, or rather, I am one
of his. Have you forgotten, my lord, that it is he who answered for me
to the queen?”

“Since then Monsieur de Beaufort has become an enemy of the State.”

“That may be, my lord; but since I am neither king nor queen nor
minister, he is not my enemy and I cannot accept your offer.”

“This, then, is what you call devotion! I congratulate you. Your
devotion does not commit you too far, Monsieur de Rochefort.”

“And then, my lord,” continued Rochefort, “you understand that to
emerge from the Bastile in order to enter Vincennes is only to change
one’s prison.”

“Say at once that you are on the side of Monsieur de Beaufort; that
will be the most sincere line of conduct,” said Mazarin.

“My lord, I have been so long shut up, that I am only of one party—I am
for fresh air. Employ me in any other way; employ me even actively, but
let it be on the high roads.”

“My dear Monsieur de Rochefort,” Mazarin replied in a tone of raillery,
“you think yourself still a young man; your spirit is that of the
phoenix, but your strength fails you. Believe me, you ought now to take
a rest. Here!”

“You decide, then, nothing about me, my lord?”

“On the contrary, I have come to a decision.”

Bernouin came into the room.

“Call an officer of justice,” he said; “and stay close to me,” he
added, in a low tone.

The officer entered. Mazarin wrote a few words, which he gave to this
man; then he bowed.

“Adieu, Monsieur de Rochefort,” he said.

Rochefort bent low.

“I see, my lord, I am to be taken back to the Bastile.”

“You are sagacious.”

“I shall return thither, my lord, but it is a mistake on your part not
to employ me.”

“You? the friend of my greatest foes? Don’t suppose that you are the
only person who can serve me, Monsieur de Rochefort. I shall find many
men as able as you are.”

“I wish you may, my lord,” replied De Rochefort.

He was then reconducted by the little staircase, instead of passing
through the ante-chamber where D’Artagnan was waiting. In the courtyard
the carriage and the four musketeers were ready, but he looked around
in vain for his friend.

“Ah!” he muttered to himself, “this changes the situation, and if there
is still a crowd of people in the streets we will try to show Mazarin
that we are still, thank God, good for something else than keeping
guard over a prisoner;” and he jumped into the carriage with the
alacrity of a man of five-and-twenty.




Chapter IV.
Anne of Austria at the Age of Forty-six.


When left alone with Bernouin, Mazarin was for some minutes lost in
thought. He had gained much information, but not enough. Mazarin was a
cheat at the card-table. This is a detail preserved to us by Brienne.
He called it using his advantages. He now determined not to begin the
game with D’Artagnan till he knew completely all his adversary’s cards.

“My lord, have you any commands?” asked Bernouin.

“Yes, yes,” replied Mazarin. “Light me; I am going to the queen.”

Bernouin took up a candlestick and led the way.

There was a secret communication between the cardinal’s apartments and
those of the queen; and through this corridor* Mazarin passed whenever
he wished to visit Anne of Austria.

*This secret passage is still to be seen in the Palais Royal.


In the bedroom in which this passage ended, Bernouin encountered Madame
de Beauvais, like himself intrusted with the secret of these
subterranean love affairs; and Madame de Beauvais undertook to prepare
Anne of Austria, who was in her oratory with the young king, Louis
XIV., to receive the cardinal.

Anne, reclining in a large easy-chair, her head supported by her hand,
her elbow resting on a table, was looking at her son, who was turning
over the leaves of a large book filled with pictures. This celebrated
woman fully understood the art of being dull with dignity. It was her
practice to pass hours either in her oratory or in her room, without
either reading or praying.

When Madame de Beauvais appeared at the door and announced the
cardinal, the child, who had been absorbed in the pages of Quintus
Curtius, enlivened as they were by engravings of Alexander’s feats of
arms, frowned and looked at his mother.

“Why,” he said, “does he enter without first asking for an audience?”

Anne colored slightly.

“The prime minister,” she said, “is obliged in these unsettled days to
inform the queen of all that is happening from time to time, without
exciting the curiosity or remarks of the court.”

“But Richelieu never came in this manner,” said the pertinacious boy.

“How can you remember what Monsieur de Richelieu did? You were too
young to know about such things.”

“I do not remember what he did, but I have inquired and I have been
told all about it.”

“And who told you about it?” asked Anne of Austria, with a movement of
impatience.

“I know that I ought never to name the persons who answer my
questions,” answered the child, “for if I do I shall learn nothing
further.”

At this very moment Mazarin entered. The king rose immediately, took
his book, closed it and went to lay it down on the table, near which he
continued standing, in order that Mazarin might be obliged to stand
also.

Mazarin contemplated these proceedings with a thoughtful glance. They
explained what had occurred that evening.

He bowed respectfully to the king, who gave him a somewhat cavalier
reception, but a look from his mother reproved him for the hatred
which, from his infancy, Louis XIV. had entertained toward Mazarin, and
he endeavored to receive the minister’s homage with civility.

Anne of Austria sought to read in Mazarin’s face the occasion of this
unexpected visit, since the cardinal usually came to her apartment only
after every one had retired.

The minister made a slight sign with his head, whereupon the queen said
to Madame Beauvais:

“It is time for the king to go to bed; call Laporte.”

The queen had several times already told her son that he ought to go to
bed, and several times Louis had coaxingly insisted on staying where he
was; but now he made no reply, but turned pale and bit his lips with
anger.

In a few minutes Laporte came into the room. The child went directly to
him without kissing his mother.

“Well, Louis,” said Anne, “why do you not kiss me?”

“I thought you were angry with me, madame; you sent me away.”

“I do not send you away, but you have had the small-pox and I am afraid
that sitting up late may tire you.”

“You had no fears of my being tired when you ordered me to go to the
palace to-day to pass the odious decrees which have raised the people
to rebellion.”

“Sire!” interposed Laporte, in order to turn the subject, “to whom does
your majesty wish me to give the candle?”

“To any one, Laporte,” the child said; and then added in a loud voice,
“to any one except Mancini.”

Now Mancini was a nephew of Mazarin’s and was as much hated by Louis as
the cardinal himself, although placed near his person by the minister.

And the king went out of the room without either embracing his mother
or even bowing to the cardinal.

“Good,” said Mazarin, “I am glad to see that his majesty has been
brought up with a hatred of dissimulation.”

“Why do you say that?” asked the queen, almost timidly.

“Why, it seems to me that the way in which he left us needs no
explanation. Besides, his majesty takes no pains to conceal how little
affection he has for me. That, however, does not hinder me from being
entirely devoted to his service, as I am to that of your majesty.”

“I ask your pardon for him, cardinal,” said the queen; “he is a child,
not yet able to understand his obligations to you.”

The cardinal smiled.

“But,” continued the queen, “you have doubtless come for some important
purpose. What is it, then?”

Mazarin sank into a chair with the deepest melancholy painted on his
countenance.

“It is likely,” he replied, “that we shall soon be obliged to separate,
unless you love me well enough to follow me to Italy.”

“Why,” cried the queen; “how is that?”

“Because, as they say in the opera of ‘Thisbe,’ ‘The whole world
conspires to break our bonds.’”

“You jest, sir!” answered the queen, endeavoring to assume something of
her former dignity.

“Alas! I do not, madame,” rejoined Mazarin. “Mark well what I say. The
whole world conspires to break our bonds. Now as you are one of the
whole world, I mean to say that you also are deserting me.”

“Cardinal!”

“Heavens! did I not see you the other day smile on the Duke of Orleans?
or rather at what he said?”

“And what was he saying?”

“He said this, madame: ‘Mazarin is a stumbling-block. Send him away and
all will then be well.’”

“What do you wish me to do?”

“Oh, madame! you are the queen!”

“Queen, forsooth! when I am at the mercy of every scribbler in the
Palais Royal who covers waste paper with nonsense, or of every country
squire in the kingdom.”

“Nevertheless, you have still the power of banishing from your presence
those whom you do not like!”

“That is to say, whom you do not like,” returned the queen.

“I! persons whom I do not like!”

“Yes, indeed. Who sent away Madame de Chevreuse after she had been
persecuted twelve years under the last reign?”

“A woman of intrigue, who wanted to keep up against me the spirit of
cabal she had raised against M. de Richelieu.”

“Who dismissed Madame de Hautefort, that friend so loyal that she
refused the favor of the king that she might remain in mine?”

“A prude, who told you every night, as she undressed you, that it was a
sin to love a priest, just as if one were a priest because one happens
to be a cardinal.”

“Who ordered Monsieur de Beaufort to be arrested?”

“An incendiary the burden of whose song was his intention to
assassinate me.”

“You see, cardinal,” replied the queen, “that your enemies are mine.”

“That is not enough madame, it is necessary that your friends should be
also mine.”

“My friends, monsieur?” The queen shook her head. “Alas, I have them no
longer!”

“How is it that you have no friends in your prosperity when you had
many in adversity?”

“It is because in my prosperity I forgot those old friends, monsieur;
because I have acted like Queen Marie de Medicis, who, returning from
her first exile, treated with contempt all those who had suffered for
her and, being proscribed a second time, died at Cologne abandoned by
every one, even by her own son.”

“Well, let us see,” said Mazarin; “isn’t there still time to repair the
evil? Search among your friends, your oldest friends.”

“What do you mean, monsieur?”

“Nothing else than I say—search.”

“Alas, I look around me in vain! I have no influence with any one.
Monsieur is, as usual, led by his favorite; yesterday it was Choisy,
to-day it is La Riviere, to-morrow it will be some one else. Monsieur
le Prince is led by the coadjutor, who is led by Madame de Guemenee.”

“Therefore, madame, I ask you to look, not among your friends of
to-day, but among those of other times.”

“Among my friends of other times?” said the queen.

“Yes, among your friends of other times; among those who aided you to
contend against the Duc de Richelieu and even to conquer him.”

“What is he aiming at?” murmured the queen, looking uneasily at the
cardinal.

“Yes,” continued his eminence; “under certain circumstances, with that
strong and shrewd mind your majesty possesses, aided by your friends,
you were able to repel the attacks of that adversary.”

“I!” said the queen. “I suffered, that is all.”

“Yes,” said Mazarin, “as women suffer in avenging themselves. Come, let
us come to the point. Do you know Monsieur de Rochefort?”

“One of my bitterest enemies—the faithful friend of Cardinal
Richelieu.”

“I know that, and we sent him to the Bastile,” said Mazarin.

“Is he at liberty?” asked the queen.

“No; still there, but I only speak of him in order that I may introduce
the name of another man. Do you know Monsieur d’Artagnan?” he added,
looking steadfastly at the queen.

Anne of Austria received the blow with a beating heart.

“Has the Gascon been indiscreet?” she murmured to herself, then said
aloud:

“D’Artagnan! stop an instant, the name seems certainly familiar.
D’Artagnan! there was a musketeer who was in love with one of my women.
Poor young creature! she was poisoned on my account.”

“That’s all you know of him?” asked Mazarin.

The queen looked at him, surprised.

“You seem, sir,” she remarked, “to be making me undergo a course of
cross-examination.”

“Which you answer according to your fancy,” replied Mazarin.

“Tell me your wishes and I will comply with them.”

The queen spoke with some impatience.

“Well, madame,” said Mazarin, bowing, “I desire that you give me a
share in your friends, as I have shared with you the little industry
and talent that Heaven has given me. The circumstances are grave and it
will be necessary to act promptly.”

“Still!” said the queen. “I thought that we were finally quit of
Monsieur de Beaufort.”

“Yes, you saw only the torrent that threatened to overturn everything
and you gave no attention to the still water. There is, however, a
proverb current in France relating to water which is quiet.”

“Continue,” said the queen.

“Well, then, madame, not a day passes in which I do not suffer affronts
from your princes and your lordly servants, all of them automata who do
not perceive that I wind up the spring that makes them move, nor do
they see that beneath my quiet demeanor lies the still scorn of an
injured, irritated man, who has sworn to himself to master them one of
these days. We have arrested Monsieur de Beaufort, but he is the least
dangerous among them. There is the Prince de Condé——”

“The hero of Rocroy. Do you think of him?”

“Yes, madame, often and often, but pazienza, as we say in Italy; next,
after Monsieur de Condé, comes the Duke of Orleans.”

“What are you saying? The first prince of the blood, the king’s uncle!”

“No! not the first prince of the blood, not the king’s uncle, but the
base conspirator, the soul of every cabal, who pretends to lead the
brave people who are weak enough to believe in the honor of a prince of
the blood—not the prince nearest to the throne, not the king’s uncle, I
repeat, but the murderer of Chalais, of Montmorency and of Cinq-Mars,
who is playing now the same game he played long ago and who thinks that
he will win the game because he has a new adversary—instead of a man
who threatened, a man who smiles. But he is mistaken; I shall not leave
so near the queen that source of discord with which the deceased
cardinal so often caused the anger of the king to rage above the
boiling point.”

Anne blushed and buried her face in her hands.

“What am I to do?” she said, bowed down beneath the voice of her
tyrant.

“Endeavor to remember the names of those faithful servants who crossed
the Channel, in spite of Monsieur de Richelieu, tracking the roads
along which they passed by their blood, to bring back to your majesty
certain jewels given by you to Buckingham.”

Anne arose, full of majesty, and as if touched by a spring, and looking
at the cardinal with the haughty dignity which in the days of her youth
had made her so powerful: “You are insulting me!” she said.

“I wish,” continued Mazarin, finishing, as it were, the speech this
sudden movement of the queen had cut; “I wish, in fact, that you should
now do for your husband what you formerly did for your lover.”

“Again that accusation!” cried the queen. “I thought that calumny was
stifled or extinct; you have spared me till now, but since you speak of
it, once for all, I tell you——”

“Madame, I do not ask you to tell me,” said Mazarin, astounded by this
returning courage.

“I will tell you all,” replied Anne. “Listen: there were in truth, at
that epoch, four devoted hearts, four loyal spirits, four faithful
swords, who saved more than my life—my honor——”

“Ah! you confess it!” exclaimed Mazarin.

“Is it only the guilty whose honor is at the sport of others, sir? and
cannot women be dishonored by appearances? Yes, appearances were
against me and I was about to suffer dishonor. However, I swear I was
not guilty, I swear it by——”

The queen looked around her for some sacred object by which she could
swear, and taking out of a cupboard hidden in the tapestry, a small
coffer of rosewood set in silver, and laying it on the altar:

“I swear,” she said, “by these sacred relics that Buckingham was not my
lover.”

“What relics are those by which you swear?” asked Mazarin, smiling. “I
am incredulous.”

The queen untied from around her throat a small golden key which hung
there, and presented it to the cardinal.

“Open, sir,” she said, “and look for yourself.”

Mazarin opened the coffer; a knife, covered with rust, and two letters,
one of which was stained with blood, alone met his gaze.

“What are these things?” he asked.

“What are these things?” replied Anne, with queen-like dignity,
extending toward the open coffer an arm, despite the lapse of years,
still beautiful. “These two letters are the only ones I ever wrote to
him. This knife is the knife with which Felton stabbed him. Read the
letters and see if I have lied or spoken the truth.”

But Mazarin, notwithstanding this permission, instead of reading the
letters, took the knife which the dying Buckingham had snatched out of
the wound and sent by Laporte to the queen. The blade was red, for the
blood had become rust; after a momentary examination during which the
queen became as white as the cloth which covered the altar on which she
was leaning, he put it back into the coffer with an involuntary
shudder.

“It is well, madame, I believe your oath.”

“No, no, read,” exclaimed the queen, indignantly; “read, I command you,
for I am resolved that everything shall be finished to-night and never
will I recur to this subject again. Do you think,” she said, with a
ghastly smile, “that I shall be inclined to reopen this coffer to
answer any future accusations?”

Mazarin, overcome by this determination, read the two letters. In one
the queen asked for the ornaments back again. This letter had been
conveyed by D’Artagnan and had arrived in time. The other was that
which Laporte had placed in the hands of the Duke of Buckingham,
warning him that he was about to be assassinated; that communication
had arrived too late.

“It is well, madame,” said Mazarin; “nothing can gainsay such
testimony.”

“Sir,” replied the queen, closing the coffer and leaning her hand upon
it, “if there is anything to be said, it is that I have always been
ungrateful to the brave men who saved me—that I have given nothing to
that gallant officer, D’Artagnan, you were speaking of just now, but my
hand to kiss and this diamond.”

As she spoke she extended her beautiful hand to the cardinal and showed
him a superb diamond which sparkled on her finger.

“It appears,” she resumed, “that he sold it—-he sold it in order to
save me another time—to be able to send a messenger to the duke to warn
him of his danger—he sold it to Monsieur des Essarts, on whose finger I
remarked it. I bought it from him, but it belongs to D’Artagnan. Give
it back to him, sir, and since you have such a man in your service,
make him useful.”

“Thank you, madame,” said Mazarin. “I will profit by the advice.”

“And now,” added the queen, her voice broken by her emotion, “have you
any other question to ask me?”

“Nothing,”—the cardinal spoke in his most conciliatory manner—“except
to beg of you to forgive my unworthy suspicions. I love you so tenderly
that I cannot help being jealous, even of the past.”

A smile, which was indefinable, passed over the lips of the queen.

“Since you have no further interrogations to make, leave me, I beseech
you,” she said. “I wish, after such a scene, to be alone.”

Mazarin bent low before her.

“I will retire, madame. Do you permit me to return?”

“Yes, to-morrow.”

The cardinal took the queen’s hand and pressed it with an air of
gallantry to his lips.

Scarcely had he left her when the queen went into her son’s room, and
inquired from Laporte if the king was in bed. Laporte pointed to the
child, who was asleep.

Anne ascended the steps side of the bed and softly kissed the placid
forehead of her son; then she retired as silently as she had come,
merely saying to Laporte:

“Try, my dear Laporte, to make the king more courteous to Monsieur le
Cardinal, to whom both he and I are under such important obligations.”




Chapter V.
The Gascon and the Italian.


Meanwhile the cardinal returned to his own room; and after asking
Bernouin, who stood at the door, whether anything had occurred during
his absence, and being answered in the negative, he desired that he
might be left alone.

When he was alone he opened the door of the corridor and then that of
the ante-chamber. There D’Artagnan was asleep upon a bench.

The cardinal went up to him and touched his shoulder. D’Artagnan
started, awakened himself, and as he awoke, stood up exactly like a
soldier under arms.

“Here I am,” said he. “Who calls me?”

“I,” said Mazarin, with his most smiling expression.

“I ask pardon of your eminence,” said D’Artagnan, “but I was so
fatigued——”

“Don’t ask my pardon, monsieur,” said Mazarin, “for you fatigued
yourself in my service.”

D’Artagnan admired Mazarin’s gracious manner. “Ah,” said he, between
his teeth, “is there truth in the proverb that fortune comes while one
sleeps?”

“Follow me, monsieur,” said Mazarin.

“Come, come,” murmured D’Artagnan, “Rochefort has kept his promise, but
where in the devil is he?” And he searched the cabinet even to the
smallest recesses, but there was no sign of Rochefort.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal, sitting down on a fauteuil,
“you have always seemed to me to be a brave and honorable man.”

“Possibly,” thought D’Artagnan, “but he has taken a long time to let me
know his thoughts;” nevertheless, he bowed to the very ground in
gratitude for Mazarin’s compliment.

“Well,” continued Mazarin, “the time has come to put to use your
talents and your valor.”

There was a sudden gleam of joy in the officer’s eyes, which vanished
immediately, for he knew nothing of Mazarin’s purpose.

“Order, my lord,” he said; “I am ready to obey your eminence.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued the cardinal, “you performed sundry
superb exploits in the last reign.”

“Your eminence is too good to remember such trifles in my favor. It is
true I fought with tolerable success.”

“I don’t speak of your warlike exploits, monsieur,” said Mazarin;
“although they gained you much reputation, they were surpassed by
others.”

D’Artagnan pretended astonishment.

“Well, you do not reply?” resumed Mazarin.

“I am waiting, my lord, till you tell me of what exploits you speak.”

“I speak of the adventure—Eh, you know well what I mean.”

“Alas, no, my lord!” replied D’Artagnan, surprised.

“You are discreet—so much the better. I speak of that adventure in
behalf of the queen, of the ornaments, of the journey you made with
three of your friends.”

“Aha!” thought the Gascon; “is this a snare or not? Let me be on my
guard.”

And he assumed a look of stupidity which Mendori or Bellerose, two of
the first actors of the day, might have envied.

“Bravo!” cried Mazarin; “they told me that you were the man I wanted.
Come, let us see what you will do for me.”

“Everything that your eminence may please to command me,” was the
reply.

“You will do for me what you have done for the queen?”

“Certainly,” D’Artagnan said to himself, “he wishes to make me speak
out. He’s not more cunning than De Richelieu was! Devil take him!” Then
he said aloud:

“The queen, my lord? I don’t comprehend.”

“You don’t comprehend that I want you and your three friends to be of
use to me?”

“Which of my friends, my lord?”

“Your three friends—the friends of former days.”

“Of former days, my lord! In former days I had not only three friends,
I had thirty; at two-and-twenty one calls every man one’s friend.”

“Well, sir,” returned Mazarin, “prudence is a fine thing, but to-day
you might regret having been too prudent.”

“My lord, Pythagoras made his disciples keep silence for five years
that they might learn to hold their tongues.”

“But you have been silent for twenty years, sir. Speak, now the queen
herself releases you from your promise.”

“The queen!” said D’Artagnan, with an astonishment which this time was
not pretended.

“Yes, the queen! And as a proof of what I say she commanded me to show
you this diamond, which she thinks you know.”

And so saying, Mazarin extended his hand to the officer, who sighed as
he recognized the ring so gracefully given to him by the queen on the
night of the ball at the Hotel de Ville and which she had repurchased
from Monsieur des Essarts.

“’Tis true. I remember well that diamond, which belonged to the queen.”

“You see, then, that I speak to you in the queen’s name. Answer me
without acting as if you were on the stage; your interests are
concerned in your so doing.”

“Faith, my lord, it is very necessary for me to make my fortune, your
eminence has so long forgotten me.”

“We need only a week to amend all that. Come, you are accounted for,
you are here, but where are your friends?”

“I do not know, my lord. We have parted company this long time; all
three have left the service.”

“Where can you find them, then?”

“Wherever they are, that’s my business.”

“Well, now, what are your conditions, if I employ you?”

“Money, my lord, as much money as what you wish me to undertake will
require. I remember too well how sometimes we were stopped for want of
money, and but for that diamond, which I was obliged to sell, we should
have remained on the road.”

“The devil he does! Money! and a large sum!” said Mazarin. “Pray, are
you aware that the king has no money in his treasury?”

“Do then as I did, my lord. Sell the crown diamonds. Trust me, don’t
let us try to do things cheaply. Great undertakings come poorly off
with paltry means.”

“Well,” returned Mazarin, “we will satisfy you.”

“Richelieu,” thought D’Artagnan, “would have given me five hundred
pistoles in advance.”

“You will then be at my service?” asked Mazarin.

“Yes, if my friends agree.”

“But if they refuse can I count on you?”

“I have never accomplished anything alone,” said D’Artagnan, shaking
his head.

“Go, then, and find them.”

“What shall I say to them by way of inducement to serve your eminence?”

“You know them better than I. Adapt your promises to their respective
characters.”

“What shall I promise?”

“That if they serve me as well as they served the queen my gratitude
shall be magnificent.”

“But what are we to do?”

“Make your mind easy; when the time for action comes you shall be put
in full possession of what I require from you; wait till that time
arrives and find out your friends.”

“My lord, perhaps they are not in Paris. It is even probable that I
shall have to make a journey. I am only a lieutenant of musketeers,
very poor, and journeys cost money.

“My intention,” said Mazarin, “is not that you go with a great
following; my plans require secrecy, and would be jeopardized by a too
extravagant equipment.”

“Still, my lord, I can’t travel on my pay, for it is now three months
behind; and I can’t travel on my savings, for in my twenty-two years of
service I have accumulated nothing but debts.”

Mazarin remained some moments in deep thought, as if he were fighting
with himself; then, going to a large cupboard closed with a triple
lock, he took from it a bag of silver, and weighing it twice in his
hands before he gave it to D’Artagnan:

“Take this,” he said with a sigh, “’tis merely for your journey.”

“If these are Spanish doubloons, or even gold crowns,” thought
D’Artagnan, “we shall yet be able to do business together.” He saluted
the cardinal and plunged the bag into the depths of an immense pocket.

“Well, then, all is settled; you are to set off,” said the cardinal.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Apropos, what are the names of your friends?”

“The Count de la Fere, formerly styled Athos; Monsieur du Vallon, whom
we used to call Porthos; the Chevalier d’Herblay, now the Abbé
d’Herblay, whom we styled Aramis——”

The cardinal smiled.

“Younger sons,” he said, “who enlisted in the musketeers under feigned
names in order not to lower their family names. Long swords but light
purses. Was that it?”

“If, God willing, these swords should be devoted to the service of your
eminence,” said D’Artagnan, “I shall venture to express a wish, which
is, that in its turn the purse of your eminence may become light and
theirs heavy—for with these three men your eminence may rouse all
Europe if you like.”

“These Gascons,” said the cardinal, laughing, “almost beat the Italians
in effrontery.”

“At all events,” answered D’Artagnan, with a smile almost as crafty as
the cardinal’s, “they beat them when they draw their swords.”

He then withdrew, and as he passed into the courtyard he stopped near a
lamp and dived eagerly into the bag of money.

“Crown pieces only—silver pieces! I suspected it. Ah! Mazarin! Mazarin!
thou hast no confidence in me! so much the worse for thee, for harm may
come of it!”

Meanwhile the cardinal was rubbing his hands in great satisfaction.

“A hundred pistoles! a hundred pistoles! for a hundred pistoles I have
discovered a secret for which Richelieu would have paid twenty thousand
crowns; without reckoning the value of that diamond”—he cast a
complacent look at the ring, which he had kept, instead of restoring to
D’Artagnan—“which is worth, at least, ten thousand francs.”

He returned to his room, and after depositing the ring in a casket
filled with brilliants of every sort, for the cardinal was a
connoisseur in precious stones, he called to Bernouin to undress him,
regardless of the noises of gun-fire that, though it was now near
midnight, continued to resound through Paris.

In the meantime D’Artagnan took his way toward the Rue Tiquetonne,
where he lived at the Hotel de la Chevrette.

We will explain in a few words how D’Artagnan had been led to choose
that place of residence.




Chapter VI.
D’Artagnan in his Fortieth Year.


Years have elapsed, many events have happened, alas! since, in our
romance of “The Three Musketeers,” we took leave of D’Artagnan at No.
12 Rue des Fossoyeurs. D’Artagnan had not failed in his career, but
circumstances had been adverse to him. So long as he was surrounded by
his friends he retained his youth and the poetry of his character. He
was one of those fine, ingenuous natures which assimilate themselves
easily to the dispositions of others. Athos imparted to him his
greatness of soul, Porthos his enthusiasm, Aramis his elegance. Had
D’Artagnan continued his intimacy with these three men he would have
become a superior character. Athos was the first to leave him, in order
that he might retire to a little property he had inherited near Blois;
Porthos, the second, to marry an attorney’s wife; and lastly, Aramis,
the third, to take orders and become an abbé. From that day D’Artagnan
felt lonely and powerless, without courage to pursue a career in which
he could only distinguish himself on condition that each of his three
companions should endow him with one of the gifts each had received
from Heaven.

Notwithstanding his commission in the musketeers, D’Artagnan felt
completely solitary. For a time the delightful remembrance of Madame
Bonancieux left on his character a certain poetic tinge, perishable
indeed; for like all other recollections in this world, these
impressions were, by degrees, effaced. A garrison life is fatal even to
the most aristocratic organization; and imperceptibly, D’Artagnan,
always in the camp, always on horseback, always in garrison, became (I
know not how in the present age one would express it) a typical
trooper. His early refinement of character was not only not lost, it
grew even greater than ever; but it was now applied to the little,
instead of to the great things of life—to the martial condition of the
soldier—comprised under the head of a good lodging, a rich table, a
congenial hostess. These important advantages D’Artagnan found to his
own taste in the Rue Tiquetonne at the sign of the Roe.

From the time D’Artagnan took quarters in that hotel, the mistress of
the house, a pretty and fresh looking Flemish woman, twenty-five or
twenty-six years old, had been singularly interested in him; and after
certain love passages, much obstructed by an inconvenient husband to
whom a dozen times D’Artagnan had made a pretence of passing a sword
through his body, that husband had disappeared one fine morning, after
furtively selling certain choice lots of wine, carrying away with him
money and jewels. He was thought to be dead; his wife, especially, who
cherished the pleasing idea that she was a widow, stoutly maintained
that death had taken him. Therefore, after the connection had continued
three years, carefully fostered by D’Artagnan, who found his bed and
his mistress more agreeable every year, each doing credit to the other,
the mistress conceived the extraordinary desire of becoming a wife and
proposed to D’Artagnan that he should marry her.

“Ah, fie!” D’Artagnan replied. “Bigamy, my dear! Come now, you don’t
really wish it?”

“But he is dead; I am sure of it.”

“He was a very contrary fellow and might come back on purpose to have
us hanged.”

“All right; if he comes back you will kill him, you are so skillful and
so brave.”

“Peste! my darling! another way of getting hanged.”

“So you refuse my request?”

“To be sure I do—furiously!”

The pretty landlady was desolate. She would have taken D’Artagnan not
only as her husband, but as her God, he was so handsome and had so
fierce a mustache.

Then along toward the fourth year came the expedition of Franche-Comte.
D’Artagnan was assigned to it and made his preparations to depart.
There were then great griefs, tears without end and solemn promises to
remain faithful—all of course on the part of the hostess. D’Artagnan
was too grand to promise anything; he purposed only to do all that he
could to increase the glory of his name.

As to that, we know D’Artagnan’s courage; he exposed himself freely to
danger and while charging at the head of his company he received a ball
through the chest which laid him prostrate on the field of battle. He
had been seen falling from his horse and had not been seen to rise;
every one, therefore, believed him to be dead, especially those to whom
his death would give promotion. One believes readily what he wishes to
believe. Now in the army, from the division-generals who desire the
death of the general-in-chief, to the soldiers who desire the death of
the corporals, all desire some one’s death.

But D’Artagnan was not a man to let himself be killed like that. After
he had remained through the heat of the day unconscious on the
battle-field, the cool freshness of the night brought him to himself.
He gained a village, knocked at the door of the finest house and was
received as the wounded are always and everywhere received in France.
He was petted, tended, cured; and one fine morning, in better health
than ever before, he set out for France. Once in France he turned his
course toward Paris, and reaching Paris went straight to Rue
Tiquetonne.

But D’Artagnan found in his chamber the personal equipment of a man,
complete, except for the sword, arranged along the wall.

“He has returned,” said he. “So much the worse, and so much the
better!”

It need not be said that D’Artagnan was still thinking of the husband.
He made inquiries and discovered that the servants were new and that
the mistress had gone for a walk.

“Alone?” asked D’Artagnan.

“With monsieur.”

“Monsieur has returned, then?”

“Of course,” naively replied the servant.

“If I had any money,” said D’Artagnan to himself, “I would go away; but
I have none. I must stay and follow the advice of my hostess, while
thwarting the conjugal designs of this inopportune apparition.”

He had just completed this monologue—which proves that in momentous
circumstances nothing is more natural than the monologue—when the
servant-maid, watching at the door, suddenly cried out:

“Ah! see! here is madame returning with monsieur.”

D’Artagnan looked out and at the corner of Rue Montmartre saw the
hostess coming along hanging to the arm of an enormous Swiss, who
tiptoed in his walk with a magnificent air which pleasantly reminded
him of his old friend Porthos.

“Is that monsieur?” said D’Artagnan to himself. “Oh! oh! he has grown a
good deal, it seems to me.” And he sat down in the hall, choosing a
conspicuous place.

The hostess, as she entered, saw D’Artagnan and uttered a little cry,
whereupon D’Artagnan, judging that he had been recognized, rose, ran to
her and embraced her tenderly. The Swiss, with an air of stupefaction,
looked at the hostess, who turned pale.

“Ah, it is you, monsieur! What do you want of me?” she asked, in great
distress.

“Is monsieur your cousin? Is monsieur your brother?” said D’Artagnan,
not in the slightest degree embarrassed in the role he was playing. And
without waiting for her reply he threw himself into the arms of the
Helvetian, who received him with great coldness.

“Who is that man?” he asked.

The hostess replied only by gasps.

“Who is that Swiss?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Monsieur is going to marry me,” replied the hostess, between two
gasps.

“Your husband, then, is at last dead?”

“How does that concern you?” replied the Swiss.

“It concerns me much,” said D’Artagnan, “since you cannot marry madame
without my consent and since——”

“And since?” asked the Swiss.

“And since—I do not give it,” said the musketeer.

The Swiss became as purple as a peony. He wore his elegant uniform,
D’Artagnan was wrapped in a sort of gray cloak; the Swiss was six feet
high, D’Artagnan was hardly more than five; the Swiss considered
himself on his own ground and regarded D’Artagnan as an intruder.

“Will you go away from here?” demanded the Swiss, stamping violently,
like a man who begins to be seriously angry.

“I? By no means!” said D’Artagnan.

“Some one must go for help,” said a lad, who could not comprehend that
this little man should make a stand against that other man, who was so
large.

D’Artagnan, with a sudden accession of wrath, seized the lad by the ear
and led him apart, with the injunction:

“Stay you where you are and don’t you stir, or I will pull this ear
off. As for you, illustrious descendant of William Tell, you will
straightway get together your clothes which are in my room and which
annoy me, and go out quickly to another lodging.”

The Swiss began to laugh boisterously. “I go out?” he said. “And why?”

“Ah, very well!” said D’Artagnan; “I see that you understand French.
Come then, and take a turn with me and I will explain.”

The hostess, who knew D’Artagnan’s skill with the sword, began to weep
and tear her hair. D’Artagnan turned toward her, saying, “Then send him
away, madame.”

“Pooh!” said the Swiss, who had needed a little time to take in
D’Artagnan’s proposal, “pooh! who are you, in the first place, to ask
me to take a turn with you?”

“I am lieutenant in his majesty’s musketeers,” said D’Artagnan, “and
consequently your superior in everything; only, as the question now is
not of rank, but of quarters—you know the custom—come and seek for
yours; the first to return will recover his chamber.”

D’Artagnan led away the Swiss in spite of lamentations on the part of
the hostess, who in reality found her heart inclining toward her former
lover, though she would not have been sorry to give a lesson to that
haughty musketeer who had affronted her by the refusal of her hand.

It was night when the two adversaries reached the field of battle.
D’Artagnan politely begged the Swiss to yield to him the disputed
chamber; the Swiss refused by shaking his head, and drew his sword.

“Then you will lie here,” said D’Artagnan. “It is a wretched bed, but
that is not my fault, and it is you who have chosen it.” With these
words he drew in his turn and crossed swords with his adversary.

He had to contend against a strong wrist, but his agility was superior
to all force. The Swiss received two wounds and was not aware of it, by
reason of the cold; but suddenly feebleness, occasioned by loss of
blood, obliged him to sit down.

“There!” said D’Artagnan, “what did I tell you? Fortunately, you won’t
be laid up more than a fortnight. Remain here and I will send you your
clothes by the boy. Good-by! Oh, by the way, you’d better take lodging
in the Rue Montorgueil at the Chat Qui Pelote. You will be well fed
there, if the hostess remains the same. Adieu.”

Thereupon he returned in a lively mood to his room and sent to the
Swiss the things that belonged to him. The boy found him sitting where
D’Artagnan had left him, still overwhelmed by the coolness of his
adversary.

The boy, the hostess, and all the house had the same regard for
D’Artagnan that one would have for Hercules should he return to earth
to repeat his twelve labors.

But when he was alone with the hostess he said: “Now, pretty Madeleine,
you know the difference between a Swiss and a gentleman. As for you,
you have acted like a barmaid. So much the worse for you, for by such
conduct you have lost my esteem and my patronage. I have driven away
the Swiss to humiliate you, but I shall lodge here no longer. I will
not sleep where I must scorn. Ho, there, boy! Have my valise carried to
the Muid d’Amour, Rue des Bourdonnais. Adieu, madame.”

In saying these words D’Artagnan appeared at the same time majestic and
grieved. The hostess threw herself at his feet, asked his pardon and
held him back with a sweet violence. What more need be said? The spit
turned, the stove roared, the pretty Madeleine wept; D’Artagnan felt
himself invaded by hunger, cold and love. He pardoned, and having
pardoned he remained.

And this explains how D’Artagnan had quarters in the Rue Tiquetonne, at
the Hotel de la Chevrette.

D’Artagnan then returned home in thoughtful mood, finding a somewhat
lively pleasure in carrying Mazarin’s bag of money and thinking of that
fine diamond which he had once called his own and which he had seen on
the minister’s finger that night.

“Should that diamond ever fall into my hands again,” he reflected, “I
would turn it at once into money; I would buy with the proceeds certain
lands around my father’s chateau, which is a pretty place, well enough,
but with no land to it at all, except a garden about the size of the
Cemetery des Innocents; and I should wait in all my glory till some
rich heiress, attracted by my good looks, rode along to marry me. Then
I should like to have three sons; I should make the first a nobleman,
like Athos; the second a good soldier, like Porthos; the third an
excellent abbé, like Aramis. Faith! that would be a far better life
than I lead now; but Monsieur Mazarin is a mean wretch, who won’t
dispossess himself of his diamond in my favor.”

On entering the Rue Tiquetonne he heard a tremendous noise and found a
dense crowd near the house.

“Oho!” said he, “is the hotel on fire?” On approaching the hotel of the
Roe he found, however, that it was in front of the next house the mob
was collected. The people were shouting and running about with torches.
By the light of one of these torches D’Artagnan perceived men in
uniform.

He asked what was going on.

He was told that twenty citizens, headed by one man, had attacked a
carriage which was escorted by a troop of the cardinal’s bodyguard; but
a reinforcement having come up, the assailants had been put to flight
and the leader had taken refuge in the hotel next to his lodgings; the
house was now being searched.

In his youth D’Artagnan had often headed the bourgeoisie against the
military, but he was cured of all those hot-headed propensities;
besides, he had the cardinal’s hundred pistoles in his pocket, so he
went into the hotel without a word. There he found Madeleine alarmed
for his safety and anxious to tell him all the events of the evening,
but he cut her short by ordering her to put his supper in his room and
give him with it a bottle of good Burgundy.

He took his key and candle and went upstairs to his bedroom. He had
been contented, for the convenience of the house, to lodge in the
fourth story; and truth obliges us even to confess that his chamber was
just above the gutter and below the roof. His first care on entering it
was to lock up in an old bureau with a new lock his bag of money, and
then as soon as supper was ready he sent away the waiter who brought it
up and sat down to table.

Not to reflect on what had passed, as one might fancy. No, D’Artagnan
considered that things are never well done when they are not reserved
to their proper time. He was hungry; he supped, he went to bed. Neither
was he one of those who think that the necessary silence of the night
brings counsel with it. In the night he slept, but in the morning,
refreshed and calm, he was inspired with his clearest views of
everything. It was long since he had any reason for his morning’s
inspiration, but he always slept all night long. At daybreak he awoke
and took a turn around his room.

“In ’43,” he said, “just before the death of the late cardinal, I
received a letter from Athos. Where was I then? Let me see. Oh! at the
siege of Besancon I was in the trenches. He told me—let me think—what
was it? That he was living on a small estate—but where? I was just
reading the name of the place when the wind blew my letter away, I
suppose to the Spaniards; there’s no use in thinking any more about
Athos. Let me see: with regard to Porthos, I received a letter from
him, too. He invited me to a hunting party on his property in the month
of September, 1646. Unluckily, as I was then in Bearn, on account of my
father’s death, the letter followed me there. I had left Bearn when it
arrived and I never received it until the month of April, 1647; and as
the invitation was for September, 1646, I couldn’t accept it. Let me
look for this letter; it must be with my title deeds.”

D’Artagnan opened an old casket which stood in a corner of the room,
and which was full of parchments referring to an estate during a period
of two hundred years lost to his family. He uttered an exclamation of
delight, for the large handwriting of Porthos was discernible, and
underneath some lines traced by his worthy spouse.

D’Artagnan eagerly searched for the heading of this letter; it was
dated from the Chateau du Vallon.

Porthos had forgotten that any other address was necessary; in his
pride he fancied that every one must know the Chateau du Vallon.

“Devil take the vain fellow,” said D’Artagnan. “However, I had better
find him out first, since he can’t want money. Athos must have become
an idiot by this time from drinking. Aramis must have worn himself to a
shadow of his former self by constant genuflexion.”

He cast his eyes again on the letter. There was a postscript:

“I write by the same courier to our worthy friend Aramis in his
convent.”

“In his convent! What convent? There are about two hundred in Paris and
three thousand in France; and then, perhaps, on entering the convent he
changed his name. Ah! if I were but learned in theology I should
recollect what it was he used to dispute about with the curate of
Montdidier and the superior of the Jesuits, when we were at Crevecoeur;
I should know what doctrine he leans to and I should glean from that
what saint he has adopted as his patron.

“Well, suppose I go back to the cardinal and ask him for a passport
into all the convents one can find, even into the nunneries? It would
be a curious idea, and maybe I should find my friend under the name of
Achilles. But, no! I should lose myself in the cardinal’s opinion.
Great people only thank you for doing the impossible; what’s possible,
they say, they can effect themselves, and they are right. But let us
wait a little and reflect. I received a letter from him, the dear
fellow, in which he even asked me for some small service, which, in
fact, I rendered him. Yes, yes; but now what did I do with that
letter?”

D’Artagnan thought a moment and then went to the wardrobe in which hung
his old clothes. He looked for his doublet of the year 1648 and as he
had orderly habits, he found it hanging on its nail. He felt in the
pocket and drew from it a paper; it was the letter of Aramis:

“Monsieur D’Artagnan: You know that I have had a quarrel with a certain
gentleman, who has given me an appointment for this evening in the
Place Royale. As I am of the church, and the affair might injure me if
I should share it with any other than a sure friend like you, I write
to beg that you will serve me as second.

“You will enter by the Rue Neuve Sainte Catherine; under the second
lamp on the right you will find your adversary. I shall be with mine
under the third.

“Wholly yours,

“Aramis.”

D’Artagnan tried to recall his remembrances. He had gone to the
rendezvous, had encountered there the adversary indicated, whose name
he had never known, had given him a pretty sword-stroke on the arm,
then had gone toward Aramis, who at the same time came to meet him,
having already finished his affair. “It is over,” Aramis had said. “I
think I have killed the insolent fellow. But, dear friend, if you ever
need me you know that I am entirely devoted to you.” Thereupon Aramis
had given him a clasp of the hand and had disappeared under the
arcades.

So, then, he no more knew where Aramis was than where Athos and Porthos
were, and the affair was becoming a matter of great perplexity, when he
fancied he heard a pane of glass break in his room window. He thought
directly of his bag and rushed from the inner room where he was
sleeping. He was not mistaken; as he entered his bedroom a man was
getting in by the window.

“Ah! you scoundrel!” cried D’Artagnan, taking the man for a thief and
seizing his sword.

“Sir!” cried the man, “in the name of Heaven put your sword back into
the sheath and don’t kill me unheard. I’m no thief, but an honest
citizen, well off in the world, with a house of my own. My name is—ah!
but surely you are Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“And thou—Planchet!” cried the lieutenant.

“At your service, sir,” said Planchet, overwhelmed with joy; “if I were
still capable of serving you.”

“Perhaps so,” replied D’Artagnan. “But why the devil dost thou run
about the tops of houses at seven o’clock of the morning in the month
of January?”

“Sir,” said Planchet, “you must know; but, perhaps you ought not to
know——”

“Tell us what,” returned D’Artagnan, “but first put a napkin against
the window and draw the curtains.”

“Sir,” said the prudent Planchet, “in the first place, are you on good
terms with Monsieur de Rochefort?”

“Perfectly; one of my dearest friends.”

“Ah! so much the better!”

“But what has De Rochefort to do with this manner you have of invading
my room?”

“Ah, sir! I must first tell you that Monsieur de Rochefort is——”

Planchet hesitated.

“Egad, I know where he is,” said D’Artagnan. “He’s in the Bastile.”

“That is to say, he was there,” replied Planchet. “But in returning
thither last night, when fortunately you did not accompany him, as his
carriage was crossing the Rue de la Ferronnerie his guards insulted the
people, who began to abuse them. The prisoner thought this a good
opportunity for escape; he called out his name and cried for help. I
was there. I heard the name of Rochefort. I remembered him well. I said
in a loud voice that he was a prisoner, a friend of the Duc de
Beaufort, who called for help. The people were infuriated; they stopped
the horses and cut the escort to pieces, whilst I opened the doors of
the carriage and Monsieur de Rochefort jumped out and soon was lost
amongst the crowd. At this moment a patrol passed by. I was obliged to
sound a retreat toward the Rue Tiquetonne; I was pursued and took
refuge in the house next to this, where I have been concealed between
two mattresses. This morning I ventured to run along the gutters and——”

“Well,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “I am delighted that De Rochefort is
free, but as for thee, if thou shouldst fall into the hands of the
king’s servants they will hang thee without mercy. Nevertheless, I
promise thee thou shalt be hidden here, though I risk by concealing
thee neither more nor less than my lieutenancy, if it was found out
that I gave one rebel an asylum.”

“Ah! sir, you know well I would risk my life for you.”

“Thou mayst add that thou hast risked it, Planchet. I have not
forgotten all I owe thee. Sit down there and eat in security. I see
thee cast expressive glances at the remains of my supper.”

“Yes, sir; for all I’ve had since yesterday was a slice of bread and
butter, with preserves on it. Although I don’t despise sweet things in
proper time and place, I found the supper rather light.”

“Poor fellow!” said D’Artagnan. “Well, come; set to.”

“Ah, sir, you are going to save my life a second time!” cried Planchet.

And he seated himself at the table and ate as he did in the merry days
of the Rue des Fossoyeurs, whilst D’Artagnan walked to and fro and
thought how he could make use of Planchet under present circumstances.
While he turned this over in his mind Planchet did his best to make up
for lost time at table. At last he uttered a sigh of satisfaction and
paused, as if he had partially appeased his hunger.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, who thought that it was now a convenient time
to begin his interrogations, “dost thou know where Athos is?”

“No, sir,” replied Planchet.

“The devil thou dost not! Dost know where Porthos is?”

“No—not at all.”

“And Aramis?”

“Not in the least.”

“The devil! the devil! the devil!”

“But, sir,” said Planchet, with a look of shrewdness, “I know where
Bazin is.”

“Where is he?”

“At Notre Dame.”

“What has he to do at Notre Dame?”

“He is beadle.”

“Bazin beadle at Notre Dame! He must know where his master is!”

“Without a doubt he must.”

D’Artagnan thought for a moment, then took his sword and put on his
cloak to go out.

“Sir,” said Planchet, in a mournful tone, “do you abandon me thus to my
fate? Think, if I am found out here, the people of the house, who have
not seen me enter it, will take me for a thief.”

“True,” said D’Artagnan. “Let’s see. Canst thou speak any patois?”

“I can do something better than that, sir, I can speak Flemish.”

“Where the devil didst thou learn it?”

“In Artois, where I fought for years. Listen, sir. Goeden morgen,
mynheer, eth teen begeeray le weeten the ge sond heets omstand.”

“Which means?”

“Good-day, sir! I am anxious to know the state of your health.”

“He calls that a language! But never mind, that will do capitally.”

D’Artagnan opened the door and called out to a waiter to desire
Madeleine to come upstairs.

When the landlady made her appearance she expressed much astonishment
at seeing Planchet.

“My dear landlady,” said D’Artagnan, “I beg to introduce to you your
brother, who is arrived from Flanders and whom I am going to take into
my service.”

“My brother?”

“Wish your sister good-morning, Master Peter.”

“Wilkom, suster,” said Planchet.

“Goeden day, broder,” replied the astonished landlady.

“This is the case,” said D’Artagnan; “this is your brother, Madeleine;
you don’t know him perhaps, but I know him; he has arrived from
Amsterdam. You must dress him up during my absence. When I return,
which will be in about an hour, you must offer him to me as a servant,
and upon your recommendation, though he doesn’t speak a word of French,
I take him into my service. You understand?”

“That is to say, I guess your wishes, and that is all that’s
necessary,” said Madeleine.

“You are a precious creature, my pretty hostess, and I am much obliged
to you.”

The next moment D’Artagnan was on his way to Notre Dame.




Chapter VII.
Touches upon the Strange Effects a Half-pistole may have.


D’Artagnan, as he crossed the Pont Neuf, congratulated himself on
having found Planchet again, for at that time an intelligent servant
was essential to him; nor was he sorry that through Planchet and the
situation which he held in Rue des Lombards, a connection with the
bourgeoisie might be commenced, at that critical period when that class
were preparing to make war with the court party. It was like having a
spy in the enemy’s camp. In this frame of mind, grateful for the
accidental meeting with Planchet, pleased with himself, D’Artagnan
reached Notre Dame. He ran up the steps, entered the church, and
addressing a verger who was sweeping the chapel, asked him if he knew
Monsieur Bazin.

“Monsieur Bazin, the beadle?” said the verger. “Yes. There he is,
attending mass, in the chapel of the Virgin.”

D’Artagnan nearly jumped for joy; he had despaired of finding Bazin,
but now, he thought, since he held one end of the thread he would be
pretty sure to reach the other end.

He knelt down just opposite the chapel in order not to lose sight of
his man; and as he had almost forgotten his prayers and had omitted to
take a book with him, he made use of his time in gazing at Bazin.

Bazin wore his dress, it may be observed, with equal dignity and
saintly propriety. It was not difficult to understand that he had
gained the crown of his ambition and that the silver-mounted wand he
brandished was in his eyes as honorable a distinction as the marshal’s
baton which Condé threw, or did not throw, into the enemy’s line of
battle at Fribourg. His person had undergone a change, analogous to the
change in his dress; his figure had grown rotund and, as it were,
canonical. The striking points of his face were effaced; he had still a
nose, but his cheeks, fattened out, each took a portion of it unto
themselves; his chin had joined his throat; his eyes were swelled up
with the puffiness of his cheeks; his hair, cut straight in holy guise,
covered his forehead as far as his eyebrows.

The officiating priest was just finishing mass whilst D’Artagnan was
looking at Bazin; he pronounced the words of the holy Sacrament and
retired, giving the benediction, which was received by the kneeling
communicants, to the astonishment of D’Artagnan, who recognized in the
priest the coadjutor* himself, the famous Jean Francois Gondy, who at
that time, having a presentiment of the part he was to play, was
beginning to court popularity by almsgiving. It was to this end that he
performed from time to time some of those early masses which the common
people, generally, alone attended.

* A sacerdotal officer.


D’Artagnan knelt as well as the rest, received his share of the
benediction and made the sign of the cross; but when Bazin passed in
his turn, with his eyes raised to Heaven and walking, in all humility,
the very last, D’Artagnan pulled him by the hem of his robe.

Bazin looked down and started, as if he had seen a serpent.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” he cried; “Vade retro Satanas!”

“So, my dear Bazin!” said the officer, laughing, “this is the way you
receive an old friend.”

“Sir,” replied Bazin, “the true friends of a Christian are those who
aid him in working out his salvation, not those who hinder him in doing
so.”

“I don’t understand you, Bazin; nor can I see how I can be a
stumbling-block in the way of your salvation,” said D’Artagnan.

“You forget, sir, that you very nearly ruined forever that of my
master; and that it was owing to you that he was very nearly being
damned eternally for remaining a musketeer, whilst all the time his
true vocation was the church.”

“My dear Bazin, you ought to perceive,” said D’Artagnan, “from the
place in which you find me, that I am greatly changed in everything.
Age produces good sense, and, as I doubt not but that your master is on
the road to salvation, I want you to tell me where he is, that he may
help me to mine.”

“Rather say, to take him back with you into the world. Fortunately, I
don’t know where he is.”

“How!” cried D’Artagnan; “you don’t know where Aramis is?”

“Formerly,” replied Bazin, “Aramis was his name of perdition. By Aramis
is meant Simara, which is the name of a demon. Happily for him he has
ceased to bear that name.”

“And therefore,” said D’Artagnan, resolved to be patient to the end,
“it is not Aramis I seek, but the Abbé d’Herblay. Come, my dear Bazin,
tell me where he is.”

“Didn’t you hear me tell you, Monsieur d’Artagnan, that I don’t know
where he is?”

“Yes, certainly; but to that I answer that it is impossible.”

“It is, nevertheless, the truth, monsieur—the pure truth, the truth of
the good God.”

D’Artagnan saw clearly that he would get nothing out of this man, who
was evidently telling a falsehood in his pretended ignorance of the
abode of Aramis, but whose lies were bold and decided.

“Well, Bazin,” said D’Artagnan, “since you do not know where your
master lives, let us speak of it no more; let us part good friends.
Accept this half-pistole to drink to my health.”

“I do not drink”—Bazin pushed away with dignity the officer’s
hand—“’tis good only for the laity.”

“Incorruptible!” murmured D’Artagnan; “I am unlucky;” and whilst he was
lost in thought Bazin retreated toward the sacristy, and even there he
could not think himself safe until he had shut and locked the door
behind him.

D’Artagnan was still in deep thought when some one touched him on the
shoulder. He turned and was about to utter an exclamation of surprise
when the other made to him a sign of silence.

“You here, Rochefort?” he said, in a low voice.

“Hush!” returned Rochefort. “Did you know that I am at liberty?”

“I knew it from the fountain-head—from Planchet. And what brought you
here?”

“I came to thank God for my happy deliverance,” said Rochefort.

“And nothing more? I suppose that is not all.”

“To take my orders from the coadjutor and to see if we cannot wake up
Mazarin a little.”

“A bad plan; you’ll be shut up again in the Bastile.”

“Oh, as to that, I shall take care, I assure you. The air, the fresh,
free air is so good; besides,” and Rochefort drew a deep breath as he
spoke, “I am going into the country to make a tour.”

“Stop,” cried D’Artagnan; “I, too, am going.”

“And if I may without impertinence ask—where are you going?”

“To seek my friends.”

“What friends?”

“Those that you asked about yesterday.”

“Athos, Porthos and Aramis—you are looking for them?”

“Yes.”

“On honor?”

“What, then, is there surprising in that?”

“Nothing. Queer, though. And in whose behalf are you looking for them?”

“You are in no doubt on that score.”

“That is true.”

“Unfortunately, I have no idea where they are.”

“And you have no way to get news of them? Wait a week and I myself will
give you some.”

“A week is too long. I must find them within three days.”

“Three days are a short time and France is large.”

“No matter; you know the word must; with that word great things are
done.”

“And when do you set out?”

“I am now on my road.”

“Good luck to you.”

“And to you—a good journey.”

“Perhaps we shall meet on our road.”

“That is not probable.”

“Who knows? Chance is so capricious. Adieu, till we meet again!
Apropos, should Mazarin speak to you about me, tell him that I should
have requested you to acquaint him that in a short time he will see
whether I am, as he says, too old for action.”

And Rochefort went away with one of those diabolical smiles which used
formerly to make D’Artagnan shudder, but D’Artagnan could now see it
without alarm, and smiling in his turn, with an expression of
melancholy which the recollections called up by that smile could,
perhaps, alone give to his countenance, he said:

“Go, demon, do what thou wilt! It matters little now to me. There’s no
second Constance in the world.”

On his return to the cathedral, D’Artagnan saw Bazin, who was
conversing with the sacristan. Bazin was making, with his spare little
short arms, ridiculous gestures. D’Artagnan perceived that he was
enforcing prudence with respect to himself.

D’Artagnan slipped out of the cathedral and placed himself in ambuscade
at the corner of the Rue des Canettes; it was impossible that Bazin
should go out of the cathedral without his seeing him.

In five minutes Bazin made his appearance, looking in every direction
to see if he were observed, but he saw no one. Calmed by appearances he
ventured to walk on through the Rue Notre Dame. Then D’Artagnan rushed
out of his hiding place and arrived in time to see Bazin turn down the
Rue de la Juiverie and enter, in the Rue de la Calandre, a respectable
looking house; and this D’Artagnan felt no doubt was the habitation of
the worthy beadle. Afraid of making any inquiries at this house,
D’Artagnan entered a small tavern at the corner of the street and asked
for a cup of hypocras. This beverage required a good half-hour to
prepare. And D’Artagnan had time, therefore, to watch Bazin
unsuspected.

He perceived in the tavern a pert boy between twelve and fifteen years
of age whom he fancied he had seen not twenty minutes before under the
guise of a chorister. He questioned him, and as the boy had no interest
in deceiving, D’Artagnan learned that he exercised, from six o’clock in
the morning until nine, the office of chorister, and from nine o’clock
till midnight that of a waiter in the tavern.

Whilst he was talking to this lad a horse was brought to the door of
Bazin’s house. It was saddled and bridled. Almost immediately Bazin
came downstairs.

“Look!” said the boy, “there’s our beadle, who is going a journey.”

“And where is he going?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Forsooth, I don’t know.”

“Half a pistole if you can find out,” said D’Artagnan.

“For me?” cried the boy, his eyes sparkling with joy, “if I can find
out where Bazin is going? That is not difficult. You are not joking,
are you?”

“No, on the honor of an officer; there is the half-pistole;” and he
showed him the seductive coin, but did not give it him.

“I shall ask him.”

“Just the very way not to know. Wait till he is set out and then,
marry, come up, ask, and find out. The half-pistole is ready,” and he
put it back again into his pocket.

“I understand,” said the child, with that jeering smile which marks
especially the “gamin de Paris.” “Well, we must wait.”

They had not long to wait. Five minutes afterward Bazin set off on a
full trot, urging on his horse by the blows of a parapluie, which he
was in the habit of using instead of a riding whip.

Scarcely had he turned the corner of the Rue de la Juiverie when the
boy rushed after him like a bloodhound on full scent.

Before ten minutes had elapsed the child returned.

“Well!” said D’Artagnan.

“Well!” answered the boy, “the thing is done.”

“Where is he gone?”

“The half-pistole is for me?”

“Doubtless, answer me.”

“I want to see it. Give it me, that I may see it is not false.”

“There it is.”

The child put the piece of money into his pocket.

“And now, where is he gone?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“He is gone to Noisy.”

“How dost thou know?”

“Ah, faith! there was no great cunning necessary. I knew the horse he
rode; it belonged to the butcher, who lets it out now and then to M.
Bazin. Now I thought that the butcher would not let his horse out like
that without knowing where it was going. And he answered ‘that Monsieur
Bazin went to Noisy.’ ’Tis his custom. He goes two or three times a
week.”

“Dost thou know Noisy well?”

“I think so, truly; my nurse lives there.”

“Is there a convent at Noisy?”

“Isn’t there a great and grand one—the convent of Jesuits?”

“What is thy name?”

“Friquet.”

D’Artagnan wrote the child’s name in his tablets.

“Please, sir,” said the boy, “do you think I can gain any more
half-pistoles in any way?”

“Perhaps,” replied D’Artagnan.

And having got out all he wanted, he paid for the hypocras, which he
did not drink, and went quickly back to the Rue Tiquetonne.




Chapter VIII.
D’Artagnan, Going to a Distance to discover Aramis.


On entering the hotel D’Artagnan saw a man sitting in a corner by the
fire. It was Planchet, but so completely transformed, thanks to the old
clothes that the departing husband had left behind, that D’Artagnan
himself could hardly recognize him. Madeleine introduced him in
presence of all the servants. Planchet addressed the officer with a
fine Flemish phrase; the officer replied in words that belonged to no
language at all, and the bargain was concluded; Madeleine’s brother
entered D’Artagnan’s service.

The plan adopted by D’Artagnan was soon perfected. He resolved not to
reach Noisy in the day, for fear of being recognized; he had therefore
plenty of time before him, for Noisy is only three or four leagues from
Paris, on the road to Meaux.

He began his day by breakfasting substantially—a bad beginning when one
wants to employ the head, but an excellent precaution when one wants to
work the body; and about two o’clock he had his two horses saddled, and
followed by Planchet he quitted Paris by the Barriere de la Villete. A
most active search was still prosecuted in the house near the Hotel de
la Chevrette for the discovery of Planchet.

At about a league and a half from the city, D’Artagnan, finding that in
his impatience he had set out too soon, stopped to give the horses
breathing time. The inn was full of disreputable looking people, who
seemed as if they were on the point of commencing some nightly
expedition. A man, wrapped in a cloak, appeared at the door, but seeing
a stranger he beckoned to his companions, and two men who were drinking
in the inn went out to speak to him.

D’Artagnan, on his side, went up to the landlady, praised her
wine—which was a horrible production from the country of Montreuil—and
heard from her that there were only two houses of importance in the
village; one of these belonged to the Archbishop of Paris, and was at
that time the abode of his niece the Duchess of Longueville; the other
was a convent of Jesuits and was the property—a by no means unusual
circumstance—of these worthy fathers.

At four o’clock D’Artagnan recommenced his journey. He proceeded slowly
and in deep reverie. Planchet also was lost in thought, but the subject
of their reflections was not the same.

One word which their landlady had pronounced had given a particular
turn to D’Artagnan’s deliberations; this was the name of Madame de
Longueville.

That name was indeed one to inspire imagination and produce thought.
Madame de Longueville was one of the highest ladies in the realm; she
was also one of the greatest beauties at court. She had formerly been
suspected of an intimacy of too tender a nature with Coligny, who, for
her sake, had been killed in a duel, in the Place Royale, by the Duc de
Guise. She was now connected by bonds of a political nature with the
Prince de Marsillac, the eldest son of the old Duc de Rochefoucauld,
whom she was trying to inspire with an enmity toward the Duc de Condé,
her brother-in-law, whom she now hated mortally.

D’Artagnan thought of all these matters. He remembered how at the
Louvre he had often seen, as she passed by him in the full radiance of
her dazzling charms, the beautiful Madame de Longueville. He thought of
Aramis, who, without possessing any greater advantages than himself,
had formerly been the lover of Madame de Chevreuse, who had been to a
former court what Madame de Longueville was in that day; and he
wondered how it was that there should be in the world people who
succeed in every wish, some in ambition, others in love, whilst others,
either from chance, or from ill-luck, or from some natural defect or
impediment, remain half-way upon the road toward fulfilment of their
hopes and expectations.

He was confessing to himself that he belonged to the latter unhappy
class, when Planchet approached and said:

“I will lay a wager, your honor, that you and I are thinking of the
same thing.”

“I doubt it, Planchet,” replied D’Artagnan, “but what are you thinking
of?”

“I am thinking, sir, of those desperate looking men who were drinking
in the inn where we rested.”

“Always cautious, Planchet.”

“’Tis instinct, your honor.”

“Well, what does your instinct tell you now?”

“Sir, my instinct told me that those people were assembled there for
some bad purpose; and I was reflecting on what my instinct had told me,
in the darkest corner of the stable, when a man wrapped in a cloak and
followed by two other men, came in.”

“Ah ah!” said D’Artagnan, Planchet’s recital agreeing with his own
observations. “Well?”

“One of these two men said, ‘He must certainly be at Noisy, or be
coming there this evening, for I have seen his servant.’

“‘Art thou sure?’ said the man in the cloak.

“‘Yes, my prince.’”

“My prince!” interrupted D’Artagnan.

“Yes, ‘my prince;’ but listen. ‘If he is here’—this is what the other
man said—‘let’s see decidedly what to do with him.’

“‘What to do with him?’ answered the prince.

“‘Yes, he’s not a man to allow himself to be taken anyhow; he’ll defend
himself.’

“‘Well, we must try to take him alive. Have you cords to bind him with
and a gag to stop his mouth?’

“‘We have.’

“‘Remember that he will most likely be disguised as a horseman.’

“‘Yes, yes, my lord; don’t be uneasy.’

“‘Besides, I shall be there.’

“‘You will assure us that justice——’

“‘Yes, yes! I answer for all that,’ the prince said.

“‘Well, then, we’ll do our best.’ Having said that, they went out of
the stable.”

“Well, what matters all that to us?” said D’Artagnan. “This is one of
those attempts that happen every day.”

“Are you sure that we are not its objects?”

“We? Why?”

“Just remember what they said. ‘I have seen his servant,’ said one, and
that applies very well to me.”

“Well?”

“‘He must certainly be at Noisy, or be coming there this evening,’ said
the other; and that applies very well to you.”

“What else?”

“Then the prince said: ‘Take notice that in all probability he will be
disguised as a cavalier;’ which seems to me to leave no room for doubt,
since you are dressed as a cavalier and not as an officer of
musketeers. Now then, what do you say to that?”

“Alas! my dear Planchet,” said D’Artagnan, sighing, “we are
unfortunately no longer in those times in which princes would care to
assassinate me. Those were good old days; never fear—these people owe
us no grudge.”

“Is your honor sure?”

“I can answer for it they do not.”

“Well, we won’t speak of it any more, then;” and Planchet took his
place in D’Artagnan’s suite with that sublime confidence he had always
had in his master, which even fifteen years of separation had not
destroyed.

They had traveled onward about half a mile when Planchet came close up
to D’Artagnan.

“Stop, sir, look yonder,” he whispered; “don’t you see in the darkness
something pass by, like shadows? I fancy I hear horses’ feet.”

“Impossible!” returned D’Artagnan. “The ground is soaking wet; yet I
fancy, as thou sayest, that I see something.”

At this moment the neighing of a horse struck his ear, coming through
darkness and space.

“There are men somewhere about, but that’s of no consequence to us,”
said D’Artagnan; “let us ride onward.”

At about half-past eight o’clock they reached the first houses in
Noisy; every one was in bed and not a light was to be seen in the
village. The obscurity was broken only now and then by the still darker
lines of the roofs of houses. Here and there a dog barked behind a door
or an affrighted cat fled precipitately from the midst of the pavement
to take refuge behind a pile of faggots, from which retreat her eyes
would shine like peridores. These were the only living creatures that
seemed to inhabit the village.

Toward the middle of the town, commanding the principal open space,
rose a dark mass, separated from the rest of the world by two lanes and
overshadowed in the front by enormous lime-trees. D’Artagnan looked
attentively at the building.

“This,” he said to Planchet, “must be the archbishop’s chateau, the
abode of the fair Madame de Longueville; but the convent, where is
that?”

“The convent, your honor, is at the other end of the village; I know it
well.”

“Well, then, Planchet, gallop up to it whilst I tighten my horse’s
girth, and come back and tell me if there is a light in any of the
Jesuits’ windows.”

In about five minutes Planchet returned.

“Sir,” he said, “there is one window of the convent lighted up.”

“Hem! If I were a ‘Frondeur,’” said D’Artagnan, “I should knock here
and should be sure of a good supper. If I were a monk I should knock
yonder and should have a good supper there, too; whereas, ’tis very
possible that between the castle and the convent we shall sleep on hard
beds, dying with hunger and thirst.”

“Yes,” added Planchet, “like the famous ass of Buridan. Shall I knock?”

“Hush!” replied D’Artagnan; “the light no longer burns in yonder
window.”

“Do you hear nothing?” whispered Planchet.

“What is that noise?”

There came a sound like a whirlwind, at the same time two troops of
horsemen, each composed of ten men, sallied forth from each of the
lanes which encompassed the house and surrounded D’Artagnan and
Planchet.

“Heyday!” cried D’Artagnan, drawing his sword and taking refuge behind
his horse; “are you not mistaken? is it really for us that you mean
your attack?”

“Here he is! we have him!” cried the horsemen, rushing on D’Artagnan
with naked swords.

“Don’t let him escape!” said a loud voice.

“No, my lord; be assured we shall not.”

D’Artagnan thought it was now time for him to join in the conversation.

“Halloo, gentlemen!” he called out in his Gascon accent, “what do you
want? what do you demand?”

“That thou shalt soon know,” shouted a chorus of horsemen.

“Stop, stop!” cried he whom they had addressed as “my lord;” “’tis not
his voice.”

“Ah! just so, gentlemen! pray, do people get into a passion at random
at Noisy? Take care, for I warn you that the first man that comes
within the length of my sword—and my sword is long—I rip him up.”

The chieftain of the party drew near.

“What are you doing here?” he asked in a lofty tone, as that of one
accustomed to command.

“And you—what are you doing here?” replied D’Artagnan.

“Be civil, or I shall beat you; for although one may not choose to
proclaim oneself, one insists on respect suitable to one’s rank.”

“You don’t choose to discover yourself, because you are the leader of
an ambuscade,” returned D’Artagnan; “but with regard to myself, who am
traveling quietly with my own servant, I have not the same reasons as
you have to conceal my name.”

“Enough! enough! what is your name?”

“I shall tell you my name in order that you may know where to find me,
my lord, or my prince, as it may suit you best to be called,” said our
Gascon, who did not choose to seem to yield to a threat. “Do you know
Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“Lieutenant in the king’s musketeers?” said the voice; “you are
Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“I am.”

“Then you came here to defend him?”

“Him? whom?”

“The man we are seeking.”

“It seems,” said D’Artagnan, “that whilst I thought I was coming to
Noisy I have entered, without suspecting it, into the kingdom of
mysteries.”

“Come,” replied the same lofty tone, “answer! Are you waiting for him
underneath these windows? Did you come to Noisy to defend him?”

“I am waiting for no one,” replied D’Artagnan, who was beginning to be
angry. “I propose to defend no one but myself, and I shall defend
myself vigorously, I give you warning.”

“Very well,” said the voice; “go away from here and leave the place to
us.”

“Go away from here!” said D’Artagnan, whose purposes were in conflict
with that order, “that is not so easy, since I am on the point of
falling, and my horse, too, through fatigue; unless, indeed, you are
disposed to offer me a supper and a bed in the neighborhood.”

“Rascal!”

“Eh! monsieur!” said D’Artagnan, “I beg you will have a care what you
say; for if you utter another word like that, be you marquis, duke,
prince or king, I will thrust it down your throat! do you hear?”

“Well, well,” rejoined the leader, “there’s no doubt ’tis a Gascon who
is speaking, and therefore not the man we are looking for. Our blow has
failed for to-night; let us withdraw. We shall meet again, Master
d’Artagnan,” continued the leader, raising his voice.

“Yes, but never with the same advantages,” said D’Artagnan, in a tone
of raillery; “for when you meet me again you will perhaps be alone and
there will be daylight.”

“Very good, very good,” said the voice. “En route, gentlemen.”

And the troop, grumbling angrily, disappeared in the darkness and took
the road to Paris. D’Artagnan and Planchet remained for some moments
still on the defensive; then, as the noise of the horsemen became more
and more distant, they sheathed their swords.

“Thou seest, simpleton,” said D’Artagnan to his servant, “that they
wished no harm to us.”

“But to whom, then?”

“I’faith! I neither know nor care. What I do care for now, is to make
my way into the Jesuits’ convent; so to horse and let us knock at their
door. Happen what will, the devil take them, they can’t eat us.”

And he mounted his horse. Planchet had just done the same when an
unexpected weight fell upon the back of the horse, which sank down.

“Hey! your honor!” cried Planchet, “I’ve a man behind me.”

D’Artagnan turned around and plainly saw two human forms on Planchet’s
horse.

“’Tis then the devil that pursues!” he cried; drawing his sword and
preparing to attack the new foe.

“No, no, dear D’Artagnan,” said the figure, “’tis not the devil, ’tis
Aramis; gallop fast, Planchet, and when you come to the end of the
village turn swiftly to the left.”

And Planchet, with Aramis behind him, set off at full gallop, followed
by D’Artagnan, who began to think he was in the merry maze of some
fantastic dream.




Chapter IX.
The Abbé D’Herblay.


At the extremity of the village Planchet turned to the left in
obedience to the orders of Aramis, and stopped underneath the window
which had light in it. Aramis alighted and clapped his hands three
times. Immediately the window was opened and a ladder of rope was let
down from it.

“My friend,” said Aramis, “if you like to ascend I shall be delighted
to receive you.”

“Ah,” said D’Artagnan, “is that the way you return to your apartment?”

“After nine at night, pardieu!” said Aramis, “the rule of the convent
is very severe.”

“Pardon me, my dear friend,” said D’Artagnan, “I think you said
‘pardieu!’”

“Do you think so?” said Aramis, smiling; “it is possible. You have no
idea, my dear fellow, how one acquires bad habits in these cursed
convents, or what evil ways all these men of the church have, with whom
I am obliged to live. But will you not go up?”

“Pass on before me, I beg of you.”

“As the late cardinal used to say to the late king, ‘only to show you
the way, sire.’” And Aramis ascended the ladder quickly and reached the
window in an instant.

D’Artagnan followed, but less nimbly, showing plainly that this mode of
ascent was not one to which he was accustomed.

“I beg your pardon,” said Aramis, noticing his awkwardness; “if I had
known that I was to have the honor of your visit I should have procured
the gardener’s ladder; but for me alone this is good enough.”

“Sir,” said Planchet when he saw D’Artagnan on the summit of the
ladder, “this way is easy for Monsieur Aramis and even for you; in case
of necessity I might also climb up, but my two horses cannot mount the
ladder.”

“Take them to yonder shed, my friend,” said Aramis, pointing to a low
building on the plain; “there you will find hay and straw for them;
then come back here and clap your hands three times, and we will give
you wine and food. Marry, forsooth, people don’t die of hunger here.”

And Aramis, drawing in the ladder, closed the window. D’Artagnan then
looked around attentively.

Never was there an apartment at the same time more warlike and more
elegant. At each corner were arranged trophies, presenting to view
swords of all sorts, and on the walls hung four great pictures
representing in their ordinary military costume the Cardinal de
Lorraine, the Cardinal de Richelieu, the Cardinal de la Valette, and
the Archbishop of Bordeaux. Exteriorly, nothing in the room showed that
it was the habitation of an abbé. The hangings were of damask, the
carpets from Alencon, and the bed, especially, had more the look of a
fine lady’s couch, with its trimmings of fine lace and its embroidered
counterpane, than that of a man who had made a vow that he would
endeavor to gain Heaven by fasting and mortification.

“You are examining my den,” said Aramis. “Ah, my dear fellow, excuse
me; I am lodged like a Chartreux. But what are you looking for?”

“I am looking for the person who let down the ladder. I see no one and
yet the ladder didn’t come down of itself.”

“No, it is Bazin.”

“Ah! ah!” said D’Artagnan.

“But,” continued Aramis, “Bazin is a well trained servant, and seeing
that I was not alone he discreetly retired. Sit down, my dear friend,
and let us talk.” And Aramis pushed forward a large easy-chair, in
which D’Artagnan stretched himself out.

“In the first place, you will sup with me, will you not?” asked Aramis.

“Yes, if you really wish it,” said D’Artagnan, “and even with great
pleasure, I confess; the journey has given me a devil of an appetite.”

“Ah, my poor friend!” said Aramis, “you will find meagre fare; you were
not expected.”

“Am I then threatened with the omelet of Crevecoeur?”

“Oh, let us hope,” said Aramis, “that with the help of God and of Bazin
we shall find something better than that in the larder of the worthy
Jesuit fathers. Bazin, my friend, come here.”

The door opened and Bazin entered; on perceiving the musketeer he
uttered an exclamation that was almost a cry of despair.

“My dear Bazin,” said D’Artagnan, “I am delighted to see with what
wonderful composure you can tell a lie even in church!”

“Sir,” replied Bazin, “I have been taught by the good Jesuit fathers
that it is permitted to tell a falsehood when it is told in a good
cause.”

“So far well,” said Aramis; “we are dying of hunger. Serve us up the
best supper you can, and especially give us some good wine.”

Bazin bowed low, sighed, and left the room.

“Now we are alone, dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, “tell me how the
devil you managed to alight upon the back of Planchet’s horse.”

“I’faith!” answered Aramis, “as you see, from Heaven.”

“From Heaven,” replied D’Artagnan, shaking his head; “you have no more
the appearance of coming from thence than you have of going there.”

“My friend,” said Aramis, with a look of imbecility on his face which
D’Artagnan had never observed whilst he was in the musketeers, “if I
did not come from Heaven, at least I was leaving Paradise, which is
almost the same.”

“Here, then, is a puzzle for the learned,” observed D’Artagnan, “until
now they have never been able to agree as to the situation of Paradise;
some place it on Mount Ararat, others between the rivers Tigris and
Euphrates; it seems that they have been looking very far away for it,
while it was actually very near. Paradise is at Noisy le Sec, upon the
site of the archbishop’s chateau. People do not go out from it by the
door, but by the window; one doesn’t descend here by the marble steps
of a peristyle, but by the branches of a lime-tree; and the angel with
a flaming sword who guards this elysium seems to have changed his
celestial name of Gabriel into that of the more terrestrial one of the
Prince de Marsillac.”

Aramis burst into a fit of laughter.

“You were always a merry companion, my dear D’Artagnan,” he said, “and
your witty Gascon fancy has not deserted you. Yes, there is something
in what you say; nevertheless, do not believe that it is Madame de
Longueville with whom I am in love.”

“A plague on’t! I shall not do so. After having been so long in love
with Madame de Chevreuse, you would hardly lay your heart at the feet
of her mortal enemy!”

“Yes,” replied Aramis, with an absent air; “yes, that poor duchess! I
once loved her much, and to do her justice, she was very useful to us.
Eventually she was obliged to leave France. He was a relentless enemy,
that damned cardinal,” continued Aramis, glancing at the portrait of
the old minister. “He had even given orders to arrest her and would
have cut off her head had she not escaped with her waiting-maid—poor
Kitty! I have heard that she met with a strange adventure in I don’t
know what village, with I don’t know what curé, of whom she asked
hospitality and who, having but one chamber, and taking her for a
cavalier, offered to share it with her. For she had a wonderful way of
dressing as a man, that dear Marie; I know only one other woman who can
do it as well. So they made this song about her: ‘_Laboissiere, dis
moi_.’ You know it, don’t you?”

“No, sing it, please.”

Aramis immediately complied, and sang the song in a very lively manner.

“Bravo!” cried D’Artagnan, “you sing charmingly, dear Aramis. I do not
perceive that singing masses has spoiled your voice.”

“My dear D’Artagnan,” replied Aramis, “you understand, when I was a
musketeer I mounted guard as seldom as I could; now when I am an abbé I
say as few masses as I can. But to return to our duchess.”

“Which—the Duchess de Chevreuse or the Duchess de Longueville?”

“Have I not already told you that there is nothing between me and the
Duchess de Longueville? Little flirtations, perhaps, and that’s all.
No, I spoke of the Duchess de Chevreuse; did you see her after her
return from Brussels, after the king’s death?”

“Yes, she is still beautiful.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “I saw her also at that time. I gave her good
advice, by which she did not profit. I ventured to tell her that
Mazarin was the lover of Anne of Austria. She wouldn’t believe me,
saying that she knew Anne of Austria, who was too proud to love such a
worthless coxcomb. After that she plunged into the cabal headed by the
Duke of Beaufort; and the ‘coxcomb’ arrested De Beaufort and banished
Madame de Chevreuse.”

“You know,” resumed D’Artagnan, “that she has had leave to return to
France?”

“Yes she is come back and is going to commit some fresh folly or
another.”

“Oh, but this time perhaps she will follow your advice.”

“Oh, this time,” returned Aramis, “I haven’t seen her; she is much
changed.”

“In that respect unlike you, my dear Aramis, for you are still the
same; you have still your beautiful dark hair, still your elegant
figure, still your feminine hands, which are admirably suited to a
prelate.”

“Yes,” replied Aramis, “I am extremely careful of my appearance. Do you
know that I am growing old? I am nearly thirty-seven.”

“Mind, Aramis”—D’Artagnan smiled as he spoke—“since we are together
again, let us agree on one point: what age shall we be in future?”

“How?”

“Formerly I was your junior by two or three years, and if I am not
mistaken I am turned forty years old.”

“Indeed! Then ’tis I who am mistaken, for you have always been a good
chronologist. By your reckoning I must be forty-three at least. The
devil I am! Don’t let it out at the Hotel Rambouillet; it would ruin
me,” replied the abbé.

“Don’t be afraid,” said D’Artagnan. “I never go there.”

“Why, what in the world,” cried Aramis, “is that animal Bazin doing?
Bazin! Hurry up there, you rascal; we are mad with hunger and thirst!”

Bazin entered at that moment carrying a bottle in each hand.

“At last,” said Aramis, “we are ready, are we?”

“Yes, monsieur, quite ready,” said Bazin; “but it took me some time to
bring up all the——”

“Because you always think you have on your shoulders your beadle’s
robe, and spend all your time reading your breviary. But I give you
warning that if in polishing your chapel utensils you forget how to
brighten up my sword, I will make a great fire of your blessed images
and will see that you are roasted on it.”

Bazin, scandalized, made a sign of the cross with the bottle in his
hand. D’Artagnan, more surprised than ever at the tone and manners of
the Abbé d’Herblay, which contrasted so strongly with those of the
Musketeer Aramis, remained staring with wide-open eyes at the face of
his friend.

Bazin quickly covered the table with a damask cloth and arranged upon
it so many things, gilded, perfumed, appetizing, that D’Artagnan was
quite overcome.

“But you expected some one then?” asked the officer.

“Oh,” said Aramis, “I always try to be prepared; and then I knew you
were seeking me.”

“From whom?”

“From Master Bazin, to be sure; he took you for the devil, my dear
fellow, and hastened to warn me of the danger that threatened my soul
if I should meet again a companion so wicked as an officer of
musketeers.”

“Oh, monsieur!” said Bazin, clasping his hands supplicatingly.

“Come, no hypocrisy! you know that I don’t like it. You will do much
better to open the window and let down some bread, a chicken and a
bottle of wine to your friend Planchet, who has been this last hour
killing himself clapping his hands.”

Planchet, in fact, had bedded and fed his horses, and then coming back
under the window had repeated two or three times the signal agreed
upon.

Bazin obeyed, fastened to the end of a cord the three articles
designated and let them down to Planchet, who then went satisfied to
his shed.

“Now to supper,” said Aramis.

The two friends sat down and Aramis began to cut up fowls, partridges
and hams with admirable skill.

“The deuce!” cried D’Artagnan; “do you live in this way always?”

“Yes, pretty well. The coadjutor has given me dispensations from
fasting on the jours maigres, on account of my health; then I have
engaged as my cook the cook who lived with Lafollone—you know the man I
mean?—the friend of the cardinal, and the famous epicure whose grace
after dinner used to be, ‘Good Lord, do me the favor to cause me to
digest what I have eaten.’”

“Nevertheless he died of indigestion, in spite of his grace,” said
D’Artagnan.

“What can you expect?” replied Aramis, in a tone of resignation. “Every
man that’s born must fulfil his destiny.”

“If it be not an indelicate question,” resumed D’Artagnan, “have you
grown rich?”

“Oh, Heaven! no. I make about twelve thousand francs a year, without
counting a little benefice of a thousand crowns the prince gave me.”

“And how do you make your twelve thousand francs? By your poems?”

“No, I have given up poetry, except now and then to write a drinking
song, some gay sonnet or some innocent epigram; I compose sermons, my
friend.”

“What! sermons? Do you preach them?”

“No; I sell them to those of my cloth who wish to become great
orators.”

“Ah, indeed! and you have not been tempted by the hopes of reputation
yourself?”

“I should, my dear D’Artagnan, have been so, but nature said ‘No.’ When
I am in the pulpit, if by chance a pretty woman looks at me, I look at
her again: if she smiles, I smile too. Then I speak at random; instead
of preaching about the torments of hell I talk of the joys of Paradise.
An event took place in the Church of St. Louis au Marais. A gentleman
laughed in my face. I stopped short to tell him that he was a fool; the
congregation went out to get stones to stone me with, but whilst they
were away I found means to conciliate the priests who were present, so
that my foe was pelted instead of me. ’Tis true that he came the next
morning to my house, thinking that he had to do with an abbé—like all
other abbés.”

“And what was the end of the affair?”

“We met in the Place Royale—Egad! you know about it.”

“Was I not your second?” cried D’Artagnan.

“You were; you know how I settled the matter.”

“Did he die?”

“I don’t know. But, at all events, I gave him absolution in articulo
mortis. ’Tis enough to kill the body, without killing the soul.”

Bazin made a despairing sign which meant that while perhaps he approved
the moral he altogether disapproved the tone in which it was uttered.

“Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “you don’t seem to be aware that I can
see you in that mirror, and you forget that once for all I have
forbidden all signs of approbation or disapprobation. You will do me
the favor to bring us some Spanish wine and then to withdraw. Besides,
my friend D’Artagnan has something to say to me privately, have you
not, D’Artagnan?”

D’Artagnan nodded his head and Bazin retired, after placing on the
table the Spanish wine.

The two friends, left alone, remained silent, face to face. Aramis
seemed to await a comfortable digestion; D’Artagnan, to be preparing
his exordium. Each of them, when the other was not looking, hazarded a
sly glance. It was Aramis who broke the silence.

“What are you thinking of, D’Artagnan?” he began.

“I was thinking, my dear old friend, that when you were a musketeer you
turned your thoughts incessantly to the church, and now that you are an
abbé you are perpetually longing to be once more a musketeer.”

“’Tis true; man, as you know,” said Aramis, “is a strange animal, made
up of contradictions. Since I became an abbé I dream of nothing but
battles.”

“That is apparent in your surroundings; you have rapiers here of every
form and to suit the most exacting taste. Do you still fence well?”

“I—I fence as well as you did in the old time—better still, perhaps; I
do nothing else all day.”

“And with whom?”

“With an excellent master-at-arms that we have here.”

“What! here?”

“Yes, here, in this convent, my dear fellow. There is everything in a
Jesuit convent.”

“Then you would have killed Monsieur de Marsillac if he had come alone
to attack you, instead of at the head of twenty men?”

“Undoubtedly,” said Aramis, “and even at the head of his twenty men, if
I could have drawn without being recognized.”

“God pardon me!” said D’Artagnan to himself, “I believe he has become
more Gascon than I am!” Then aloud: “Well, my dear Aramis, do you ask
me why I came to seek you?”

“No, I have not asked you that,” said Aramis, with his subtle manner;
“but I have expected you to tell me.”

“Well, I sought you for the single purpose of offering you a chance to
kill Monsieur de Marsillac whenever you please, prince though he is.”

“Hold on! wait!” said Aramis; “that is an idea!”

“Of which I invite you to take advantage, my friend. Let us see; with
your thousand crowns from the abbey and the twelve thousand francs you
make by selling sermons, are you rich? Answer frankly.”

“I? I am as poor as Job, and were you to search my pockets and my boxes
I don’t believe you would find a hundred pistoles.”

“Peste! a hundred pistoles!” said D’Artagnan to himself; “he calls that
being as poor as Job! If I had them I should think myself as rich as
Croesus.” Then aloud: “Are you ambitious?”

“As Enceladus.”

“Well, my friend, I bring you the means of becoming rich, powerful, and
free to do whatever you wish.”

The shadow of a cloud passed over Aramis’s face as quickly as that
which in August passes over the field of grain; but quick as it was, it
did not escape D’Artagnan’s observation.

“Speak on,” said Aramis.

“One question first. Do you take any interest in politics?”

A gleam of light shone in Aramis’s eyes, as brief as the shadow that
had passed over his face, but not so brief but that it was seen by
D’Artagnan.

“No,” Aramis replied.

“Then proposals from any quarter will be agreeable to you, since for
the moment you have no master but God?”

“It is possible.”

“Have you, my dear Aramis, thought sometimes of those happy, happy,
happy days of youth we passed laughing, drinking, and fighting each
other for play?”

“Certainly, and more than once regretted them; it was indeed a glorious
time.”

“Well, those splendidly wild days may chance to come again; I am
commissioned to find out my companions and I began by you, who were the
very soul of our society.”

Aramis bowed, rather with respect than pleasure at the compliment.

“To meddle in politics,” he exclaimed, in a languid voice, leaning back
in his easy-chair. “Ah! dear D’Artagnan! see how regularly I live and
how easy I am here. We have experienced the ingratitude of ‘the great,’
as you well know.”

“’Tis true,” replied D’Artagnan. “Yet the great sometimes repent of
their ingratitude.”

“In that case it would be quite another thing. Come! let’s be merciful
to every sinner! Besides, you are right in another respect, which is in
thinking that if we were to meddle in politics there could not be a
better time than the present.”

“How can you know that? You who never interest yourself in politics?”

“Ah! without caring about them myself, I live among those who are much
occupied in them. Poet as I am, I am intimate with Sarazin, who is
devoted to the Prince de Conti, and with Monsieur de Bois-Robert, who,
since the death of Cardinal Richelieu, is of all parties or any party;
so that political discussions have not altogether been uninteresting to
me.”

“I have no doubt of it,” said D’Artagnan.

“Now, my dear friend, look upon all I tell you as merely the statement
of a monk—of a man who resembles an echo—repeating simply what he
hears. I understand that Mazarin is at this very moment extremely
uneasy as to the state of affairs; that his orders are not respected
like those of our former bugbear, the deceased cardinal, whose portrait
as you see hangs yonder—for whatever may be thought of him, it must be
allowed that Richelieu was great.”

“I will not contradict you there,” said D’Artagnan.

“My first impressions were favorable to the minister; I said to myself
that a minister is never loved, but that with the genius this one was
said to have he would eventually triumph over his enemies and would
make himself feared, which in my opinion is much more to be desired
than to be loved——”

D’Artagnan made a sign with his head which indicated that he entirely
approved that doubtful maxim.

“This, then,” continued Aramis, “was my first opinion; but as I am very
ignorant in matters of this kind and as the humility which I profess
obliges me not to rest on my own judgment, but to ask the opinion of
others, I have inquired—Eh!—my friend——”

Aramis paused.

“Well? what?” asked his friend.

“Well, I must mortify myself. I must confess that I was mistaken.
Monsieur de Mazarin is not a man of genius, as I thought, he is a man
of no origin—once a servant of Cardinal Bentivoglio, and he got on by
intrigue. He is an upstart, a man of no name, who will only be the tool
of a party in France. He will amass wealth, he will injure the king’s
revenue and pay to himself the pensions which Richelieu paid to others.
He is neither a gentleman in manner nor in feeling, but a sort of
buffoon, a punchinello, a pantaloon. Do you know him? I do not.”

“Hem!” said D’Artagnan, “there is some truth in what you say.”

“Ah! it fills me with pride to find that, thanks to a common sort of
penetration with which I am endowed, I am approved by a man like you,
fresh from the court.”

“But you speak of him, not of his party, his resources.”

“It is true—the queen is for him.”

“Something in his favor.”

“But he will never have the king.”

“A mere child.”

“A child who will be of age in four years. Then he has neither the
parliament nor the people with him—they represent the wealth of the
country; nor the nobles nor the princes, who are the military power of
France.”

D’Artagnan scratched his ear. He was forced to confess to himself that
this reasoning was not only comprehensive, but just.

“You see, my poor friend, that I am sometimes bereft of my ordinary
thoughtfulness; perhaps I am wrong in speaking thus to you, who have
evidently a leaning to Mazarin.”

“I!” cried D’Artagnan, “not in the least.”

“You spoke of a mission.”

“Did I? I was wrong then, no, I said what you say—there is a crisis at
hand. Well! let’s fly the feather before the wind; let us join with
that side to which the wind will carry it and resume our adventurous
life. We were once four valiant knights—four hearts fondly united; let
us unite again, not our hearts, which have never been severed, but our
courage and our fortunes. Here’s a good opportunity for getting
something better than a diamond.”

“You are right, D’Artagnan; I held a similar project, but as I had not
nor ever shall have your fruitful, vigorous imagination, the idea was
suggested to me. Every one nowadays wants auxiliaries; propositions
have been made to me and I confess to you frankly that the coadjutor
has made me speak out.”

“Monsieur de Gondy! the cardinal’s enemy?”

“No; the king’s friend,” said Aramis; “the king’s friend, you
understand. Well, it is a question of serving the king, the gentleman’s
duty.”

“But the king is with Mazarin.”

“He is, but not willingly; in appearance, not heart; and that is
exactly the snare the king’s enemies are preparing for the poor child.”

“Ah! but this is, indeed, civil war which you propose to me, dear
Aramis.”

“War for the king.”

“Yet the king will be at the head of the army on Mazarin’s side.”

“But his heart will be in the army commanded by the Duc de Beaufort.”

“Monsieur de Beaufort? He is at Vincennes.”

“Did I say Monsieur de Beaufort? Monsieur de Beaufort or another.
Monsieur de Beaufort or Monsieur le Prince.”

“But Monsieur le Prince is to set out for the army; he is entirely
devoted to the cardinal.”

“Oh oh!” said Aramis, “there are questions between them at this very
moment. And besides, if it is not the prince, then Monsieur de Gondy——”

“But Monsieur de Gondy is to be made a cardinal; they are soliciting
the hat for him.”

“And are there no cardinals that can fight? Come now, recall the four
cardinals that at the head of armies have equalled Monsieur de
Guebriant and Monsieur de Gassion.”

“But a humpbacked general!

“Under the cuirass the hump will not be seen. Besides, remember that
Alexander was lame and Hannibal had but one eye.”

“Do you see any great advantage in adhering to this party?” asked
D’Artagnan.

“I foresee in it the aid of powerful princes.”

“With the enmity of the government.”

“Counteracted by parliament and insurrections.”

“That may be done if they can separate the king from his mother.”

“That may be done,” said Aramis.

“Never!” cried D’Artagnan. “You, Aramis, know Anne of Austria better
than I do. Do you think she will ever forget that her son is her
safeguard, her shield, the pledge for her dignity, for her fortune and
her life? Should she forsake Mazarin she must join her son and go over
to the princes’ side; but you know better than I do that there are
certain reasons why she can never abandon Mazarin.”

“Perhaps you are right,” said Aramis, thoughtfully; “therefore I shall
not pledge myself.”

“To them or to us, do you mean, Aramis?”

“To no one. I am a priest,” resumed Aramis. “What have I to do with
politics? I am not obliged to read any breviary. I have a jolly little
circle of witty abbés and pretty women; everything goes on smoothly, so
certainly, dear friend, I shall not meddle in politics.”

“Well, listen, my dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan; “your philosophy
convinces me, on my honor. I don’t know what devil of an insect stung
me and made me ambitious. I have a post by which I live; at the death
of Monsieur de Tréville, who is old, I may be a captain, which is a
very snug berth for a once penniless Gascon. Instead of running after
adventures I shall accept an invitation from Porthos; I shall go and
shoot on his estate. You know he has estates—Porthos?”

“I should think so, indeed. Ten leagues of wood, of marsh land and
valleys; he is lord of the hill and the plain and is now carrying on a
suit for his feudal rights against the Bishop of Noyon!”

“Good,” said D’Artagnan to himself. “That’s what I wanted to know.
Porthos is in Picardy.”

Then aloud:

“And he has taken his ancient name of Vallon?”

“To which he adds that of Bracieux, an estate which has been a barony,
by my troth.”

“So that Porthos will be a baron.”

“I don’t doubt it. The ‘Baroness Porthos’ will sound particularly
charming.”

And the two friends began to laugh.

“So,” D’Artagnan resumed, “you will not become a partisan of
Mazarin’s?”

“Nor you of the Prince de Condé?”

“No, let us belong to no party, but remain friends; let us be neither
Cardinalists nor Frondists.”

“Adieu, then.” And D’Artagnan poured out a glass of wine.

“To old times,” he said.

“Yes,” returned Aramis. “Unhappily, those times are past.”

“Nonsense! They will return,” said D’Artagnan. “At all events, if you
want me, remember the Rue Tiquetonne, Hotel de la Chevrette.”

“And I shall be at the convent of Jesuits; from six in the morning to
eight at night come by the door. From eight in the evening until six in
the morning come in by the window.”

“Adieu, dear friend.”

“Oh, I can’t let you go so! I will go with you.” And he took his sword
and cloak.

“He wants to be sure that I go away,” said D’Artagnan to himself.

Aramis whistled for Bazin, but Bazin was asleep in the ante-chamber,
and Aramis was obliged to shake him by the ear to awake him.

Bazin stretched his arms, rubbed his eyes, and tried to go to sleep
again.

“Come, come, sleepy head; quick, the ladder!”

“But,” said Bazin, yawning portentously, “the ladder is still at the
window.”

“The other one, the gardener’s. Didn’t you see that Monsieur d’Artagnan
mounted with difficulty? It will be even more difficult to descend.”

D’Artagnan was about to assure Aramis that he could descend easily,
when an idea came into his head which silenced him.

Bazin uttered a profound sigh and went out to look for the ladder.
Presently a good, solid, wooden ladder was placed against the window.

“Now then,” said D’Artagnan, “this is something like; this is a means
of communication. A woman could go up a ladder like that.”

Aramis’s searching look seemed to seek his friend’s thought even at the
bottom of his heart, but D’Artagnan sustained the inquisition with an
air of admirable simplicity. Besides, at that moment he put his foot on
the first step of the ladder and began his descent. In a moment he was
on the ground. Bazin remained at the window.

“Stay there,” said Aramis; “I shall return immediately.”

The two friends went toward the shed. At their approach Planchet came
out leading the two horses.

“That is good to see,” said Aramis. “There is a servant active and
vigilant, not like that lazy fellow Bazin, who is no longer good for
anything since he became connected with the church. Follow us,
Planchet; we shall continue our conversation to the end of the
village.”

They traversed the width of the village, talking of indifferent things,
then as they reached the last houses:

“Go, then, dear friend,” said Aramis, “follow your own career. Fortune
lavishes her smiles upon you; do not let her flee from your embrace. As
for me, I remain in my humility and indolence. Adieu!”

“Thus ’tis quite decided,” said D’Artagnan, “that what I have to offer
to you does not tempt you?”

“On the contrary, it would tempt me were I any other man,” rejoined
Aramis; “but I repeat, I am made up of contradictions. What I hate
to-day I adore to-morrow, and vice versa. You see that I cannot, like
you, for instance, settle on any fixed plan.”

“Thou liest, subtile one,” said D’Artagnan to himself. “Thou alone, on
the contrary, knowest how to choose thy object and to gain it
stealthily.”

The friends embraced. They descended into the plain by the ladder.
Planchet met them hard by the shed. D’Artagnan jumped into the saddle,
then the old companions in arms again shook hands. D’Artagnan and
Planchet spurred their steeds and took the road to Paris.

But after he had gone about two hundred steps D’Artagnan stopped short,
alighted, threw the bridle of his horse over the arm of Planchet and
took the pistols from his saddle-bow to fasten them to his girdle.

“What’s the matter?” asked Planchet.

“This is the matter: be he ever so cunning he shall never say I was his
dupe. Stand here, don’t stir, turn your back to the road and wait for
me.”

Having thus spoken, D’Artagnan cleared the ditch by the roadside and
crossed the plain so as to wind around the village. He had observed
between the house that Madame de Longueville inhabited and the convent
of the Jesuits, an open space surrounded by a hedge.

The moon had now risen and he could see well enough to retrace his
road.

He reached the hedge and hid himself behind it; in passing by the house
where the scene which we have related took place, he remarked that the
window was again lighted up and he was convinced that Aramis had not
yet returned to his own apartment and that when he did it would not be
alone.

In truth, in a few minutes he heard steps approaching and low whispers.

Close to the hedge the steps stopped.

D’Artagnan knelt down near the thickest part of the hedge.

Two men, to the astonishment of D’Artagnan, appeared shortly; soon,
however, his surprise vanished, for he heard the murmurs of a soft,
harmonious voice; one of these two men was a woman disguised as a
cavalier.

“Calm yourself, dear Rene,” said the soft voice, “the same thing will
never happen again. I have discovered a sort of subterranean passage
which runs beneath the street and we shall only have to raise one of
the marble slabs before the door to open you an entrance and an
outlet.”

“Oh!” answered another voice, which D’Artagnan instantly recognized as
that of Aramis. “I swear to you, princess, that if your reputation did
not depend on precautions and if my life alone were jeopardized——”

“Yes, yes! I know you are as brave and venturesome as any man in the
world, but you do not belong to me alone; you belong to all our party.
Be prudent! sensible!”

“I always obey, madame, when I am commanded by so gentle a voice.”

He kissed her hand tenderly.

“Ah!” exclaimed the cavalier with a soft voice.

“What’s the matter?” asked Aramis.

“Do you not see that the wind has blown off my hat?”

Aramis rushed after the fugitive hat. D’Artagnan took advantage of the
circumstance to find a place in the hedge not so thick, where his
glance could penetrate to the supposed cavalier. At that instant, the
moon, inquisitive, perhaps, like D’Artagnan, came from behind a cloud
and by her light D’Artagnan recognized the large blue eyes, the golden
hair and the classic head of the Duchess de Longueville.

Aramis returned, laughing, one hat on his head and the other in his
hand; and he and his companion resumed their walk toward the convent.

“Good!” said D’Artagnan, rising and brushing his knees; “now I have
thee—thou art a Frondeur and the lover of Madame de Longueville.”




Chapter X.
Monsieur Porthos du Vallon de Bracieux de Pierrefonds.


Thanks to what Aramis had told him, D’Artagnan, who knew already that
Porthos called himself Du Vallon, was now aware that he styled himself,
from his estate, De Bracieux; and that he was, on account of this
estate, engaged in a lawsuit with the Bishop of Noyon. It was, then, in
the neighborhood of Noyon that he must seek that estate. His itinerary
was promptly determined: he would go to Dammartin, from which place two
roads diverge, one toward Soissons, the other toward Compiegne; there
he would inquire concerning the Bracieux estate and go to the right or
to the left according to the information obtained.

Planchet, who was still a little concerned for his safety after his
recent escapade, declared that he would follow D’Artagnan even to the
end of the world, either by the road to the right or by that to the
left; only he begged his former master to set out in the evening, for
greater security to himself. D’Artagnan suggested that he should send
word to his wife, so that she might not be anxious about him, but
Planchet replied with much sagacity that he was very sure his wife
would not die of anxiety through not knowing where he was, while he,
Planchet, remembering her incontinence of tongue, would die of anxiety
if she did know.

This reasoning seemed to D’Artagnan so satisfactory that he no further
insisted; and about eight o’clock in the evening, the time when the
vapors of night begin to thicken in the streets, he left the Hotel de
la Chevrette, and followed by Planchet set forth from the capital by
way of the Saint Denis gate.

At midnight the two travelers were at Dammartin, but it was then too
late to make inquiries—the host of the Cygne de la Croix had gone to
bed.

The next morning D’Artagnan summoned the host, one of those sly Normans
who say neither yes nor no and fear to commit themselves by giving a
direct answer. D’Artagnan, however, gathered from his equivocal replies
that the road to the right was the one he ought to take, and on that
uncertain information he resumed his journey. At nine in the morning he
reached Nanteuil and stopped for breakfast. His host here was a good
fellow from Picardy, who gave him all the information he needed. The
Bracieux estate was a few leagues from Villars-Cotterets.

D’Artagnan was acquainted with Villars-Cotterets, having gone thither
with the court on several occasions; for at that time Villars-Cotterets
was a royal residence. He therefore shaped his course toward that place
and dismounted at the Dauphin d’Or. There he ascertained that the
Bracieux estate was four leagues distant, but that Porthos was not at
Bracieux. Porthos had, in fact, been involved in a dispute with the
Bishop of Noyon in regard to the Pierrefonds property, which adjoined
his own, and weary at length of a legal controversy which was beyond
his comprehension, he put an end to it by purchasing Pierrefonds and
added that name to his others. He now called himself Du Vallon de
Bracieux de Pierrefonds, and resided on his new estate.

The travelers were therefore obliged to stay at the hotel until the
next day; the horses had done ten leagues that day and needed rest. It
is true they might have taken others, but there was a great forest to
pass through and Planchet, as we have seen, had no liking for forests
after dark.

There was another thing that Planchet had no liking for and that was
starting on a journey with a hungry stomach. Accordingly, D’Artagnan,
on awaking, found his breakfast waiting for him. It need not be said
that Planchet in resuming his former functions resumed also his former
humility and was not ashamed to make his breakfast on what was left by
D’Artagnan.

It was nearly eight o’clock when they set out again. Their course was
clearly defined: they were to follow the road toward Compiegne and on
emerging from the forest turn to the right.

The morning was beautiful, and in this early springtime the birds sang
on the trees and the sunbeams shone through the misty glades, like
curtains of golden gauze.

In other parts of the forest the light could scarcely penetrate through
the foliage, and the stems of two old oak trees, the refuge of the
squirrel, startled by the travelers, were in deep shadow.

There came up from all nature in the dawn of day a perfume of herbs,
flowers and leaves, which delighted the heart. D’Artagnan, sick of the
closeness of Paris, thought that when a man had three names of his
different estates joined one to another, he ought to be very happy in
such a paradise; then he shook his head, saying, “If I were Porthos and
D’Artagnan came to make me such a proposition as I am going to make to
him, I know what I should say to it.”

As to Planchet, he thought of little or nothing, but was happy as a
hunting-hound in his old master’s company.

At the extremity of the wood D’Artagnan perceived the road that had
been described to him, and at the end of the road he saw the towers of
an immense feudal castle.

“Oh! oh!” he said, “I fancied this castle belonged to the ancient
branch of Orleans. Can Porthos have negotiated for it with the Duc de
Longueville?”

“Faith!” exclaimed Planchet, “here’s land in good condition; if it
belongs to Monsieur Porthos I wish him joy.”

“Zounds!” cried D’Artagnan, “don’t call him Porthos, nor even Vallon;
call him De Bracieux or De Pierrefonds; thou wilt knell out damnation
to my mission otherwise.”

As he approached the castle which had first attracted his eye,
D’Artagnan was convinced that it could not be there that his friend
dwelt; the towers, though solid and as if built yesterday, were open
and broken. One might have fancied that some giant had cleaved them
with blows from a hatchet.

On arriving at the extremity of the castle D’Artagnan found himself
overlooking a beautiful valley, in which, at the foot of a charming
little lake, stood several scattered houses, which, humble in their
aspect, and covered, some with tiles, others with thatch, seemed to
acknowledge as their sovereign lord a pretty chateau, built about the
beginning of the reign of Henry IV., and surmounted by four stately,
gilded weather-cocks. D’Artagnan no longer doubted that this was
Porthos’s pleasant dwelling place.

The road led straight up to the chateau which, compared to its ancestor
on the hill, was exactly what a fop of the coterie of the Duc d’Enghein
would have been beside a knight in steel armor in the time of Charles
VII. D’Artagnan spurred his horse on and pursued his road, followed by
Planchet at the same pace.

In ten minutes D’Artagnan reached the end of an alley regularly planted
with fine poplars and terminating in an iron gate, the points and
crossed bars of which were gilt. In the midst of this avenue was a
nobleman, dressed in green and with as much gilding about him as the
iron gate, riding on a tall horse. On his right hand and his left were
two footmen, with the seams of their dresses laced. A considerable
number of clowns were assembled and rendered homage to their lord.

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan to himself, “can this be the Seigneur du Vallon
de Bracieux de Pierrefonds? Well-a-day! how he has shrunk since he gave
up the name of Porthos!”

“This cannot be Monsieur Porthos,” observed Planchet replying, as it
were, to his master’s thoughts. “Monsieur Porthos was six feet high;
this man is scarcely five.”

“Nevertheless,” said D’Artagnan, “the people are bowing very low to
this person.”

As he spoke, he rode toward the tall horse—to the man of importance and
his valets. As he approached he seemed to recognize the features of
this individual.

“Jesu!” cried Planchet, “can it be?”

At this exclamation the man on horseback turned slowly and with a lofty
air, and the two travelers could see, displayed in all their
brilliancy, the large eyes, the vermilion visage, and the eloquent
smile of—Mousqueton.

It was indeed Mousqueton—Mousqueton, as fat as a pig, rolling about
with rude health, puffed out with good living, who, recognizing
D’Artagnan and acting very differently from the hypocrite Bazin,
slipped off his horse and approached the officer with his hat off, so
that the homage of the assembled crowd was turned toward this new sun,
which eclipsed the former luminary.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan! Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried Mousqueton, his fat
cheeks swelling out and his whole frame perspiring with joy; “Monsieur
d’Artagnan! oh! what joy for my lord and master, Du Vallon de Bracieux
de Pierrefonds!”

“Thou good Mousqueton! where is thy master?”

“You stand upon his property!”

“But how handsome thou art—how fat! thou hast prospered and grown
stout!” and D’Artagnan could not restrain his astonishment at the
change good fortune had produced on the once famished one.

“Hey, yes, thank God, I am pretty well,” said Mousqueton.

“But hast thou nothing to say to thy friend Planchet?”

“How, my friend Planchet? Planchet—art thou there?” cried Mousqueton,
with open arms and eyes full of tears.

“My very self,” replied Planchet; “but I wanted first to see if thou
wert grown proud.”

“Proud toward an old friend? never, Planchet! thou wouldst not have
thought so hadst thou known Mousqueton well.”

“So far so well,” answered Planchet, alighting, and extending his arms
to Mousqueton, the two servants embraced with an emotion which touched
those who were present and made them suppose that Planchet was a great
lord in disguise, so highly did they estimate the position of
Mousqueton.

“And now, sir,” resumed Mousqueton, when he had rid himself of
Planchet, who had in vain tried to clasp his hands behind his friend’s
fat back, “now, sir, allow me to leave you, for I could not permit my
master to hear of your arrival from any but myself; he would never
forgive me for not having preceded you.”

“This dear friend,” said D’Artagnan, carefully avoiding to utter either
the former name borne by Porthos or his new one, “then he has not
forgotten me?”

“Forgotten—he!” cried Mousqueton; “there’s not a day, sir, that we
don’t expect to hear that you were made marshal either instead of
Monsieur de Gassion, or of Monsieur de Bassompierre.”

On D’Artagnan’s lips there played one of those rare and melancholy
smiles which seemed to emanate from the depth of his soul—the last
trace of youth and happiness that had survived life’s disillusions.

“And you—fellows,” resumed Mousqueton, “stay near Monsieur le Comte
d’Artagnan and pay him every attention in your power whilst I go to
prepare my lord for his visit.”

And mounting his horse Mousqueton rode off down the avenue on the grass
at a hand gallop.

“Ah, there! there’s something promising,” said D’Artagnan. “No
mysteries, no cloak to hide one’s self in, no cunning policy here;
people laugh outright, they weep for joy here. I see nothing but faces
a yard broad; in short, it seems to me that nature herself wears a
holiday garb, and that the trees, instead of leaves and flowers, are
covered with red and green ribbons as on gala days.”

“As for me,” said Planchet, “I seem to smell, from this place, even, a
most delectable perfume of fine roast meat, and to see the scullions in
a row by the hedge, hailing our approach. Ah! sir, what a cook must
Monsieur Pierrefonds have, when he was so fond of eating and drinking,
even whilst he was only called Monsieur Porthos!”

“Say no more!” cried D’Artagnan. “If the reality corresponds with
appearances I am lost; for a man so well off will never change his
happy condition, and I shall fail with him, as I have already done with
Aramis.”




Chapter XI.
Wealth does not necessarily produce Happiness.


D’Artagnan passed through the iron gate and arrived in front of the
chateau. He alighted as he saw a species of giant on the steps. Let us
do justice to D’Artagnan. Independently of every selfish wish, his
heart palpitated with joy when he saw that tall form and martial
demeanor, which recalled to him a good and brave man.

He ran to Porthos and threw himself into his arms; the whole body of
servants, arranged in a semi-circle at a respectful distance, looked on
with humble curiosity. Mousqueton, at the head of them, wiped his eyes.
Porthos linked his arm in that of his friend.

“Ah! how delightful to see you again, dear friend!” he cried, in a
voice which was now changed from a baritone into a bass, “you’ve not
then forgotten me?”

“Forget you! oh! dear Du Vallon, does one forget the happiest days of
flowery youth, one’s dearest friends, the dangers we have dared
together? On the contrary, there is not an hour we have passed together
that is not present to my memory.”

“Yes, yes,” said Porthos, trying to give to his mustache a curl which
it had lost whilst he had been alone. “Yes, we did some fine things in
our time and we gave that poor cardinal a few threads to unravel.”

And he heaved a sigh.

“Under any circumstances,” he resumed, “you are welcome, my dear
friend; you will help me to recover my spirits; to-morrow we will hunt
the hare on my plain, which is a superb tract of land, or pursue the
deer in my woods, which are magnificent. I have four harriers which are
considered the swiftest in the county, and a pack of hounds which are
unequalled for twenty leagues around.”

And Porthos heaved another sigh.

“But, first,” interposed D’Artagnan, “you must present me to Madame du
Vallon.”

A third sigh from Porthos.

“I lost Madame du Vallon two years ago,” he said, “and you find me
still in affliction on that account. That was the reason why I left my
Chateau du Vallon near Corbeil, and came to my estate, Bracieux. Poor
Madame du Vallon! her temper was uncertain, but she came at last to
accustom herself to my little ways and understand my little wishes.”

“So you are free now, and rich?”

“Alas!” groaned Porthos, “I am a widower and have forty thousand francs
a year. Let us go to breakfast.”

“I shall be happy to do so; the morning air has made me hungry.”

“Yes,” said Porthos; “my air is excellent.”

They went into the chateau; there was nothing but gilding, high and
low; the cornices were gilt, the mouldings were gilt, the legs and arms
of the chairs were gilt. A table, ready set out, awaited them.

“You see,” said Porthos, “this is my usual style.”

“Devil take me!” answered D’Artagnan, “I wish you joy of it. The king
has nothing like it.”

“No,” answered Porthos, “I hear it said that he is very badly fed by
the cardinal, Monsieur de Mazarin. Taste this cutlet, my dear
D’Artagnan; ’tis off one of my sheep.”

“You have very tender mutton and I wish you joy of it.” said
D’Artagnan.

“Yes, the sheep are fed in my meadows, which are excellent pasture.”

“Give me another cutlet.”

“No, try this hare, which I had killed yesterday in one of my warrens.”

“Zounds! what a flavor!” cried D’Artagnan; “ah! they are fed on thyme
only, your hares.”

“And how do you like my wine?” asked Porthos; “it is pleasant, isn’t
it?”

“Capital!”

“It is nothing, however, but a wine of the country.”

“Really?”

“Yes, a small declivity to the south, yonder on my hill, gives me
twenty hogsheads.”

“Quite a vineyard, hey?”

Porthos sighed for the fifth time—D’Artagnan had counted his sighs. He
became curious to solve the problem.

“Well now,” he said, “it seems, my dear friend, that something vexes
you; you are ill, perhaps? That health, which——”

“Excellent, my dear friend; better than ever. I could kill an ox with a
blow of my fist.”

“Well, then, family affairs, perhaps?”

“Family! I have, happily, only myself in the world to care for.”

“But what makes you sigh?”

“My dear fellow,” replied Porthos, “to be candid with you, I am not
happy.”

“You are not happy, Porthos? You who have chateau, meadows, mountains,
woods—you who have forty thousand francs a year—you—are—not—happy?”

“My dear friend, all those things I have, but I am a hermit in the
midst of superfluity.”

“Surrounded, I suppose, only by clodhoppers, with whom you could not
associate.”

Porthos turned rather pale and drank off a large glass of wine.

“No; but just think, there are paltry country squires who have all some
title or another and pretend to go back as far as Charlemagne, or at
least to Hugh Capet. When I first came here; being the last comer, it
was for me to make the first advances. I made them, but you know, my
dear friend, Madame du Vallon——”

Porthos, in pronouncing these words, seemed to gulp down something.

“Madame du Vallon was of doubtful gentility. She had, in her first
marriage—I don’t think, D’Artagnan, I am telling you anything
new—married a lawyer; they thought that ‘nauseous;’ you can understand
that’s a word bad enough to make one kill thirty thousand men. I have
killed two, which has made people hold their tongues, but has not made
me their friend. So that I have no society; I live alone; I am sick of
it—my mind preys on itself.”

D’Artagnan smiled. He now saw where the breastplate was weak, and
prepared the blow.

“But now,” he said, “that you are a widower, your wife’s connection
cannot injure you.”

“Yes, but understand me; not being of a race of historic fame, like the
De Courcys, who were content to be plain sirs, or the Rohans, who
didn’t wish to be dukes, all these people, who are all either vicomtes
or comtes go before me at church in all the ceremonies, and I can say
nothing to them. Ah! If I only were a——”

“A baron, don’t you mean?” cried D’Artagnan, finishing his friend’s
sentence.

“Ah!” cried Porthos; “would I were but a baron!”

“Well, my friend, I am come to give you this very title which you wish
for so much.”

Porthos gave a start that shook the room; two or three bottles fell and
were broken. Mousqueton ran thither, hearing the noise.

Porthos waved his hand to Mousqueton to pick up the bottles.

“I am glad to see,” said D’Artagnan, “that you have still that honest
lad with you.”

“He is my steward,” replied Porthos; “he will never leave me. Go away
now, Mouston.”

“So he’s called Mouston,” thought D’Artagnan; “’tis too long a word to
pronounce ‘Mousqueton.’”

“Well,” he said aloud, “let us resume our conversation later, your
people may suspect something; there may be spies about. You can
suppose, Porthos, that what I have to say relates to most important
matters.”

“Devil take them; let us walk in the park,” answered Porthos, “for the
sake of digestion.”

“Egad,” said D’Artagnan, “the park is like everything else and there
are as many fish in your pond as rabbits in your warren; you are a
happy man, my friend since you have not only retained your love of the
chase, but acquired that of fishing.”

“My friend,” replied Porthos, “I leave fishing to Mousqueton,—it is a
vulgar pleasure,—but I shoot sometimes; that is to say, when I am dull,
and I sit on one of those marble seats, have my gun brought to me, my
favorite dog, and I shoot rabbits.”

“Really, how very amusing!”

“Yes,” replied Porthos, with a sigh, “it is amusing.”

D’Artagnan now no longer counted the sighs. They were innumerable.

“However, what had you to say to me?” he resumed; “let us return to
that subject.”

“With pleasure,” replied D’Artagnan; “I must, however, first frankly
tell you that you must change your mode of life.”

“How?”

“Go into harness again, gird on your sword, run after adventures, and
leave as in old times a little of your fat on the roadside.”

“Ah! hang it!” said Porthos.

“I see you are spoiled, dear friend; you are corpulent, your arm has no
longer that movement of which the late cardinal’s guards have so many
proofs.”

“Ah! my fist is strong enough I swear,” cried Porthos, extending a hand
like a shoulder of mutton.

“So much the better.”

“Are we then to go to war?”

“By my troth, yes.”

“Against whom?”

“Are you a politician, friend?”

“Not in the least.”

“Are you for Mazarin or for the princes?”

“I am for no one.”

“That is to say, you are for us. Well, I tell you that I come to you
from the cardinal.”

This speech was heard by Porthos in the same sense as if it had still
been in the year 1640 and related to the true cardinal.

“Ho! ho! What are the wishes of his eminence?”

“He wishes to have you in his service.”

“And who spoke to him of me?”

“Rochefort—you remember him?”

“Yes, pardieu! It was he who gave us so much trouble and kept us on the
road so much; you gave him three sword-wounds in three separate
engagements.”

“But you know he is now our friend?”

“No, I didn’t know that. So he cherishes no resentment?”

“You are mistaken, Porthos,” said D’Artagnan. “It is I who cherish no
resentment.”

Porthos didn’t understand any too clearly; but then we know that
understanding was not his strong point. “You say, then,” he continued,
“that the Count de Rochefort spoke of me to the cardinal?”

“Yes, and the queen, too.”

“The queen, do you say?”

“To inspire us with confidence she has even placed in Mazarin’s hands
that famous diamond—you remember all about it—that I once sold to
Monsieur des Essarts and of which, I don’t know how, she has regained
possession.”

“But it seems to me,” said Porthos, “that she would have done much
better if she had given it back to you.”

“So I think,” replied D’Artagnan; “but kings and queens are strange
beings and have odd fancies; nevertheless, since they are the ones who
have riches and honors, we are devoted to them.”

“Yes, we are devoted to them,” repeated Porthos; “and you—to whom are
you devoted now?”

“To the king, the queen, and to the cardinal; moreover, I have answered
for your devotion also.”

“And you say that you have made certain conditions on my behalf?”

“Magnificent, my dear fellow, magnificent! In the first place you have
plenty of money, haven’t you? forty thousand francs income, I think you
said.”

Porthos began to be suspicious. “Eh! my friend,” said he, “one never
has too much money. Madame du Vallon left things in much disorder; I am
not much of a hand at figures, so that I live almost from hand to
mouth.”

“He is afraid I have come to borrow money,” thought D’Artagnan. “Ah, my
friend,” said he, “it is all the better if you are in difficulties.”

“How is it all the better?”

“Yes, for his eminence will give you all that you want—land, money, and
titles.”

“Ah! ah! ah!” said Porthos, opening his eyes at that last word.

“Under the other cardinal,” continued D’Artagnan, “we didn’t know
enough to make our profits; this, however, doesn’t concern you, with
your forty thousand francs income, the happiest man in the world, it
seems to me.”

Porthos sighed.

“At the same time,” continued D’Artagnan, “notwithstanding your forty
thousand francs a year, and perhaps even for the very reason that you
have forty thousand francs a year, it seems to me that a little coronet
would do well on your carriage, hey?”

“Yes indeed,” said Porthos.

“Well, my dear friend, win it—it is at the point of your sword. We
shall not interfere with each other—your object is a title; mine,
money. If I can get enough to rebuild Artagnan, which my ancestors,
impoverished by the Crusades, allowed to fall into ruins, and to buy
thirty acres of land about it, that is all I wish. I shall retire and
die tranquilly—at home.”

“For my part,” said Porthos, “I desire to be made a baron.”

“You shall be one.”

“And have you not seen any of our other friends?”

“Yes, I have seen Aramis.”

“And what does he wish? To be a bishop?”

“Aramis,” answered D’Artagnan, who did not wish to undeceive Porthos,
“Aramis, fancy, has become a monk and a Jesuit, and lives like a bear.
My offers did not arouse him,—did not even tempt him.”

“So much the worse! He was a clever man. And Athos?”

“I have not yet seen him. Do you know where I shall find him?”

“Near Blois. He is called Bragelonne. Only imagine, my dear friend.
Athos, who was of as high birth as the emperor and who inherits one
estate which gives him the title of comte, what is he to do with all
those dignities—the Comte de la Fere, Comte de Bragelonne?”

“And he has no children with all these titles?”

“Ah!” said Porthos, “I have heard that he had adopted a young man who
resembles him greatly.”

“What, Athos? Our Athos, who was as virtuous as Scipio? Have you seen
him?

“No.”

“Well, I shall see him to-morrow and tell him about you; but I’m
afraid, entre nous, that his liking for wine has aged and degraded
him.”

“Yes, he used to drink a great deal,” replied Porthos.

“And then he was older than any of us,” added D’Artagnan.

“Some years only. His gravity made him look older than he was.”

“Well then, if we can get Athos, all will be well. If we cannot, we
will do without him. We two are worth a dozen.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, smiling at the remembrance of his former exploits;
“but we four, altogether, would be equal to thirty-six, more especially
as you say the work will not be child’s play. Will it last long?”

“By’r Lady! two or three years perhaps.”

“So much the better,” cried Porthos. “You have no idea, my friend, how
my bones ache since I came here. Sometimes on a Sunday, I take a ride
in the fields and on the property of my neighbours, in order to pick up
a nice little quarrel, which I am really in want of, but nothing
happens. Either they respect or they fear me, which is more likely, but
they let me trample down the clover with my dogs, insult and obstruct
every one, and I come back still more weary and low-spirited, that’s
all. At any rate, tell me: there’s more chance of fighting in Paris, is
there not?”

“In that respect, my dear friend, it’s delightful. No more edicts, no
more of the cardinal’s guards, no more De Jussacs, nor other
bloodhounds. I’Gad! underneath a lamp in an inn, anywhere, they ask
‘Are you one of the Fronde?’ They unsheathe, and that’s all that is
said. The Duke de Guise killed Monsieur de Coligny in the Place Royale
and nothing was said of it.”

“Ah, things go on gaily, then,” said Porthos.

“Besides which, in a short time,” resumed D’Artagnan, “We shall have
set battles, cannonades, conflagrations and there will be great
variety.”

“Well, then, I decide.”

“I have your word, then?”

“Yes, ’tis given. I shall fight heart and soul for Mazarin; but——”

“But?”

“But he must make me a baron.”

“Zounds!” said D’Artagnan, “that’s settled already; I will be
responsible for the barony.”

On this promise being given, Porthos, who had never doubted his
friend’s assurance, turned back with him toward the castle.




Chapter XII.
Porthos was Discontented with his Condition.


As they returned toward the castle, D’Artagnan thought of the miseries
of poor human nature, always dissatisfied with what it has, ever
desirous of what it has not.

In the position of Porthos, D’Artagnan would have been perfectly happy;
and to make Porthos contented there was wanting—what? five letters to
put before his three names, a tiny coronet to paint upon the panels of
his carriage!

“I shall pass all my life,” thought D’Artagnan, “in seeking for a man
who is really contented with his lot.”

Whilst making this reflection, chance seemed, as it were, to give him
the lie direct. When Porthos had left him to give some orders he saw
Mousqueton approaching. The face of the steward, despite one slight
shade of care, light as a summer cloud, seemed a physiognomy of
absolute felicity.

“Here is what I am looking for,” thought D’Artagnan; “but alas! the
poor fellow does not know the purpose for which I am here.”

He then made a sign for Mousqueton to come to him.

“Sir,” said the servant, “I have a favour to ask you.”

“Speak out, my friend.”

“I am afraid to do so. Perhaps you will think, sir, that prosperity has
spoiled me?”

“Art thou happy, friend?” asked D’Artagnan.

“As happy as possible; and yet, sir, you may make me even happier than
I am.”

“Well, speak, if it depends on me.”

“Oh, sir! it depends on you only.”

“I listen—I am waiting to hear.”

“Sir, the favor I have to ask of you is, not to call me ‘Mousqueton’
but ‘Mouston.’ Since I have had the honor of being my lord’s steward I
have taken the last name as more dignified and calculated to make my
inferiors respect me. You, sir, know how necessary subordination is in
any large establishment of servants.”

D’Artagnan smiled; Porthos wanted to lengthen out his names, Mousqueton
to cut his short.

“Well, my dear Mouston,” he said, “rest satisfied. I will call thee
Mouston; and if it makes thee happy I will not ‘tutoyer’ you any
longer.”

“Oh!” cried Mousqueton, reddening with joy; “if you do me, sir, such
honor, I shall be grateful all my life; it is too much to ask.”

“Alas!” thought D’Artagnan, “it is very little to offset the unexpected
tribulations I am bringing to this poor devil who has so warmly
welcomed me.”

“Will monsieur remain long with us?” asked Mousqueton, with a serene
and glowing countenance.

“I go to-morrow, my friend,” replied D’Artagnan.

“Ah, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “then you have come here only to
awaken our regrets.”

“I fear that is true,” said D’Artagnan, in a low tone.

D’Artagnan was secretly touched with remorse, not at inducing Porthos
to enter into schemes in which his life and fortune would be in
jeopardy, for Porthos, in the title of baron, had his object and
reward; but poor Mousqueton, whose only wish was to be called
Mouston—was it not cruel to snatch him from the delightful state of
peace and plenty in which he was?

He was thinking of these matters when Porthos summoned him to dinner.

“What! to dinner?” said D’Artagnan. “What time is it, then?”

“Eh! why, it is after one o’clock.”

“Your home is a paradise, Porthos; one takes no note of time. I follow
you, though I am not hungry.”

“Come, if one can’t always eat, one can always drink—a maxim of poor
Athos, the truth of which I have discovered since I began to be
lonely.”

D’Artagnan, who as a Gascon, was inclined to sobriety, seemed not so
sure as his friend of the truth of Athos’s maxim, but he did his best
to keep up with his host. Meanwhile his misgivings in regard to
Mousqueton recurred to his mind and with greater force because
Mousqueton, though he did not himself wait on the table, which would
have been beneath him in his new position, appeared at the door from
time to time and evinced his gratitude to D’Artagnan by the quality of
the wine he directed to be served. Therefore, when, at dessert, upon a
sign from D’Artagnan, Porthos had sent away his servants and the two
friends were alone:

“Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “who will attend you in your campaigns?”

“Why,” replied Porthos, “Mouston, of course.”

This was a blow to D’Artagnan. He could already see the intendant’s
beaming smile change to a contortion of grief. “But,” he said, “Mouston
is not so young as he was, my dear fellow; besides, he has grown fat
and perhaps has lost his fitness for active service.”

“That may be true,” replied Porthos; “but I am used to him, and
besides, he wouldn’t be willing to let me go without him, he loves me
so much.”

“Oh, blind self-love!” thought D’Artagnan.

“And you,” asked Porthos, “haven’t you still in your service your old
lackey, that good, that brave, that intelligent—-what, then, is his
name?”

“Planchet—yes, I have found him again, but he is lackey no longer.”

“What is he, then?”

“With his sixteen hundred francs—you remember, the sixteen hundred
francs he earned at the siege of La Rochelle by carrying a letter to
Lord de Winter—he has set up a little shop in the Rue des Lombards and
is now a confectioner.”

“Ah, he is a confectioner in the Rue des Lombards! How does it happen,
then, that he is in your service?”

“He has been guilty of certain escapades and fears he may be
disturbed.” And the musketeer narrated to his friend Planchet’s
adventure.

“Well,” said Porthos, “if any one had told you in the old times that
the day would come when Planchet would rescue Rochefort and that you
would protect him in it——”

“I should not have believed him; but men are changed by events.”

“There is nothing truer than that,” said Porthos; “but what does not
change, or changes for the better, is wine. Taste of this; it is a
Spanish wine which our friend Athos thought much of.”

At that moment the steward came in to consult his master upon the
proceedings of the next day and also with regard to the shooting party
which had been proposed.

“Tell me, Mouston,” said Porthos, “are my arms in good condition?”

“Your arms, my lord—what arms?”

“Zounds! my weapons.”

“What weapons?”

“My military weapons.”

“Yes, my lord; at any rate, I think so.”

“Make sure of it, and if they want it, have them burnished up. Which is
my best cavalry horse?”

“Vulcan.”

“And the best hack?”

“Bayard.”

“What horse dost thou choose for thyself?”

“I like Rustaud, my lord; a good animal, whose paces suit me.”

“Strong, thinkest thou?”

“Half Norman, half Mecklenburger; will go night and day.”

“That will do for us. See to these horses. Polish up or make some one
else polish my arms. Then take pistols with thee and a hunting-knife.”

“Are we then going to travel, my lord?” asked Mousqueton, rather
uneasy.

“Something better still, Mouston.”

“An expedition, sir?” asked the steward, whose roses began to change
into lilies.

“We are going to return to the service, Mouston,” replied Porthos,
still trying to restore his mustache to the military curl it had long
lost.

“Into the service—the king’s service?” Mousqueton trembled; even his
fat, smooth cheeks shook as he spoke, and he looked at D’Artagnan with
an air of reproach; he staggered, and his voice was almost choked.

“Yes and no. We shall serve in a campaign, seek out all sorts of
adventures—return, in short, to our former life.”

These last words fell on Mousqueton like a thunderbolt. It was those
very terrible old days that made the present so excessively delightful,
and the blow was so great he rushed out, overcome, and forgot to shut
the door.

The two friends remained alone to speak of the future and to build
castles in the air. The good wine which Mousqueton had placed before
them traced out in glowing drops to D’Artagnan a fine perspective,
shining with quadruples and pistoles, and showed to Porthos a blue
ribbon and a ducal mantle; they were, in fact, asleep on the table when
the servants came to light them to their bed.

Mousqueton was, however, somewhat consoled by D’Artagnan, who the next
day told him that in all probability war would always be carried on in
the heart of Paris and within reach of the Chateau du Vallon, which was
near Corbeil, or Bracieux, which was near Melun, and of Pierrefonds,
which was between Compiegne and Villars-Cotterets.

“But—formerly—it appears,” began Mousqueton timidly.

“Oh!” said D’Artagnan, “we don’t now make war as we did formerly.
To-day it’s a sort of diplomatic arrangement; ask Planchet.”

Mousqueton inquired, therefore, the state of the case of his old
friend, who confirmed the statement of D’Artagnan. “But,” he added, “in
this war prisoners stand a chance of being hung.”

“The deuce they do!” said Mousqueton; “I think I should like the siege
of Rochelle better than this war, then!”

Porthos, meantime, asked D’Artagnan to give him his instructions how to
proceed on his journey.

“Four days,” replied his friend, “are necessary to reach Blois; one day
to rest there; three or four days to return to Paris. Set out,
therefore, in a week, with your suite, and go to the Hotel de la
Chevrette, Rue Tiquetonne, and there await me.”

“That’s agreed,” said Porthos.

“As to myself, I shall go around to see Athos; for though I don’t think
his aid worth much, one must with one’s friends observe all due
politeness,” said D’Artagnan.

The friends then took leave of each other on the very border of the
estate of Pierrefonds, to which Porthos escorted his friend.

“At least,” D’Artagnan said to himself, as he took the road to
Villars-Cotterets, “at least I shall not be alone in my undertaking.
That devil, Porthos, is a man of prodigious strength; still, if Athos
joins us, well, we shall be three of us to laugh at Aramis, that little
coxcomb with his too good luck.”

At Villars-Cotterets he wrote to the cardinal:

“My Lord,—I have already one man to offer to your eminence, and he is
well worth twenty men. I am just setting out for Blois. The Comte de la
Fere inhabits the Castle of Bragelonne, in the environs of that city.”




Chapter XIII.
Two Angelic Faces.


The road was long, but the horses upon which D’Artagnan and Planchet
rode had been refreshed in the well supplied stables of the Lord of
Bracieux; the master and servant rode side by side, conversing as they
went, for D’Artagnan had by degrees thrown off the master and Planchet
had entirely ceased to assume the manners of a servant. He had been
raised by circumstances to the rank of a confidant to his master. It
was many years since D’Artagnan had opened his heart to any one; it
happened, however, that these two men, on meeting again, assimilated
perfectly. Planchet was in truth no vulgar companion in these new
adventures; he was a man of uncommonly sound sense. Without courting
danger he never shrank from an encounter; in short, he had been a
soldier and arms ennoble a man; it was, therefore, on the footing of
friends that D’Artagnan and Planchet arrived in the neighborhood of
Blois.

Going along, D’Artagnan, shaking his head, said:

“I know that my going to Athos is useless and absurd; but still I owe
this courtesy to my old friend, a man who had in him material for the
most noble and generous of characters.”

“Oh, Monsieur Athos was a noble gentleman,” said Planchet, “was he not?
Scattering money round about him as Heaven sprinkles rain. Do you
remember, sir, that duel with the Englishman in the inclosure des
Carmes? Ah! how lofty, how magnificent Monsieur Athos was that day,
when he said to his adversary: ‘You have insisted on knowing my name,
sir; so much the worse for you, since I shall be obliged to kill you.’
I was near him, those were his exact words, when he stabbed his foe as
he said he would, and his adversary fell without saying, ‘Oh!’ ’Tis a
noble gentleman—Monsieur Athos.”

“Yes, true as Gospel,” said D’Artagnan; “but one single fault has
swallowed up all these fine qualities.”

“I remember well,” said Planchet, “he was fond of drinking—in truth, he
drank, but not as other men drink. One seemed, as he raised the wine to
his lips, to hear him say, ‘Come, juice of the grape, and chase away my
sorrows.’ And how he used to break the stem of a glass or the neck of a
bottle! There was no one like him for that.”

“And now,” replied D’Artagnan, “behold the sad spectacle that awaits
us. This noble gentleman with his lofty glance, this handsome cavalier,
so brilliant in feats of arms that every one was surprised that he held
in his hand a sword only instead of a baton of command! Alas! we shall
find him changed into a broken down old man, with garnet nose and eyes
that slobber; we shall find him extended on some lawn, whence he will
look at us with a languid eye and peradventure will not recognize us.
God knows, Planchet, that I should fly from a sight so sad if I did not
wish to show my respect for the illustrious shadow of what was once the
Comte de la Fere, whom we loved so much.”

Planchet shook his head and said nothing. It was evident that he shared
his master’s apprehensions.

“And then,” resumed D’Artagnan, “to this decrepitude is probably added
poverty, for he must have neglected the little that he had, and the
dirty scoundrel, Grimaud, more taciturn than ever and still more
drunken than his master—stay, Planchet, it breaks my heart to merely
think of it.”

“I fancy myself there and that I see him staggering and hear him
stammering,” said Planchet, in a piteous tone, “but at all events we
shall soon know the real state of things, for I imagine that those
lofty walls, now turning ruby in the setting sun, are the walls of
Blois.”

“Probably; and those steeples, pointed and sculptured, that we catch a
glimpse of yonder, are similar to those that I have heard described at
Chambord.”

At this moment one of those heavy wagons, drawn by bullocks, which
carry the wood cut in the fine forests of the country to the ports of
the Loire, came out of a byroad full of ruts and turned on that which
the two horsemen were following. A man carrying a long switch with a
nail at the end of it, with which he urged on his slow team, was
walking with the cart.

“Ho! friend,” cried Planchet.

“What’s your pleasure, gentlemen?” replied the peasant, with a purity
of accent peculiar to the people of that district and which might have
put to shame the cultured denizens of the Sorbonne and the Rue de
l’Universite.

“We are looking for the house of Monsieur de la Fere,” said D’Artagnan.

The peasant took off his hat on hearing this revered name.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “the wood that I am carting is his; I cut it in
his copse and I am taking it to the chateau.”

D’Artagnan determined not to question this man; he did not wish to hear
from another what he had himself said to Planchet.

“The chateau!” he said to himself, “what chateau? Ah, I understand!
Athos is not a man to be thwarted; he, like Porthos, has obliged his
peasantry to call him ‘my lord,’ and to dignify his pettifogging place
by the name of chateau. He had a heavy hand—dear old Athos—after
drinking.”

D’Artagnan, after asking the man the right way, continued his route,
agitated in spite of himself at the idea of seeing once more that
singular man whom he had so truly loved and who had contributed so much
by advice and example to his education as a gentleman. He checked by
degrees the speed of his horse and went on, his head drooping as if in
deep thought.

Soon, as the road turned, the Chateau de la Valliere appeared in view;
then, a quarter of a mile beyond, a white house, encircled in
sycamores, was visible at the farther end of a group of trees, which
spring had powdered with a snow of flowers.

On beholding this house, D’Artagnan, calm as he was in general, felt an
unusual disturbance within his heart—so powerful during the whole
course of life are the recollections of youth. He proceeded,
nevertheless, and came opposite to an iron gate, ornamented in the
taste of the period.

Through the gate was seen kitchen-gardens, carefully attended to, a
spacious courtyard, in which neighed several horses held by valets in
various liveries, and a carriage, drawn by two horses of the country.

“We are mistaken,” said D’Artagnan. “This cannot be the establishment
of Athos. Good heavens! suppose he is dead and that this property now
belongs to some one who bears his name. Alight, Planchet, and inquire,
for I confess that I have scarcely courage so to do.”

Planchet alighted.

“Thou must add,” said D’Artagnan, “that a gentleman who is passing by
wishes to have the honor of paying his respects to the Comte de la
Fere, and if thou art satisfied with what thou hearest, then mention my
name!”

Planchet, leading his horse by the bridle, drew near to the gate and
rang the bell, and immediately a servant-man with white hair and of
erect stature, notwithstanding his age, presented himself.

“Does Monsieur le Comte de la Fere live here?” asked Planchet.

“Yes, monsieur, it is here he lives,” the servant replied to Planchet,
who was not in livery.

“A nobleman retired from service, is he not?”

“Yes.”

“And who had a lackey named Grimaud?” persisted Planchet, who had
prudently considered that he couldn’t have too much information.

“Monsieur Grimaud is absent from the chateau for the time being,” said
the servitor, who, little used as he was to such inquiries, began to
examine Planchet from head to foot.

“Then,” cried Planchet joyously, “I see well that it is the same Comte
de la Fere whom we seek. Be good enough to open to me, for I wish to
announce to monsieur le comte that my master, one of his friends, is
here, and wishes to greet him.”

“Why didn’t you say so?” said the servitor, opening the gate. “But
where is your master?”

“He is following me.”

The servitor opened the gate and walked before Planchet, who made a
sign to D’Artagnan. The latter, his heart palpitating more than ever,
entered the courtyard without dismounting.

Whilst Planchet was standing on the steps before the house he heard a
voice say:

“Well, where is this gentleman and why do they not bring him here?”

This voice, the sound of which reached D’Artagnan, reawakened in his
heart a thousand sentiments, a thousand recollections that he had
forgotten. He vaulted hastily from his horse, whilst Planchet, with a
smile on his lips, advanced toward the master of the house.

“But I know you, my lad,” said Athos, appearing on the threshold.

“Oh, yes, monsieur le comte, you know me and I know you. I am
Planchet—Planchet, whom you know well.” But the honest servant could
say no more, so much was he overcome by this unexpected interview.

“What, Planchet, is Monsieur d’Artagnan here?”

“Here I am, my friend, dear Athos!” cried D’Artagnan, in a faltering
voice and almost staggering from agitation.

At these words a visible emotion was expressed on the beautiful
countenance and calm features of Athos. He rushed toward D’Artagnan
with eyes fixed upon him and clasped him in his arms. D’Artagnan,
equally moved, pressed him also closely to him, whilst tears stood in
his eyes. Athos then took him by the hand and led him into the
drawing-room, where there were several people. Every one arose.

“I present to you,” he said, “Monsieur le Chevalier D’Artagnan,
lieutenant of his majesty’s musketeers, a devoted friend and one of the
most excellent, brave gentlemen that I have ever known.”

D’Artagnan received the compliments of those who were present in his
own way, and whilst the conversation became general he looked earnestly
at Athos.

Strange! Athos was scarcely aged at all! His fine eyes, no longer
surrounded by that dark line which nights of dissipation pencil too
infallibly, seemed larger, more liquid than ever. His face, a little
elongated, had gained in calm dignity what it had lost in feverish
excitement. His hand, always wonderfully beautiful and strong, was set
off by a ruffle of lace, like certain hands by Titian and Vandyck. He
was less stiff than formerly. His long, dark hair, softly powdered here
and there with silver tendrils, fell elegantly over his shoulders in
wavy curls; his voice was still youthful, as if belonging to a Hercules
of twenty-five, and his magnificent teeth, which he had preserved white
and sound, gave an indescribable charm to his smile.

Meanwhile the guests, seeing that the two friends were longing to be
alone, prepared to depart, when a noise of dogs barking resounded
through the courtyard and many persons said at the same moment:

“Ah! ’tis Raoul, who is come home.”

Athos, as the name of Raoul was pronounced, looked inquisitively at
D’Artagnan, in order to see if any curiosity was painted on his face.
But D’Artagnan was still in confusion and turned around almost
mechanically when a fine young man of fifteen years of age, dressed
simply, but in perfect taste, entered the room, raising, as he came,
his hat, adorned with a long plume of scarlet feathers.

Nevertheless, D’Artagnan was struck by the appearance of this new
personage. It seemed to explain to him the change in Athos; a
resemblance between the boy and the man explained the mystery of this
regenerated existence. He remained listening and gazing.

“Here you are, home again, Raoul,” said the comte.

“Yes, sir,” replied the youth, with deep respect, “and I have performed
the commission that you gave me.”

“But what’s the matter, Raoul?” said Athos, very anxiously. “You are
pale and agitated.”

“Sir,” replied the young man, “it is on account of an accident which
has happened to our little neighbor.”

“To Mademoiselle de la Valliere?” asked Athos, quickly.

“What is it?” cried many persons present.

“She was walking with her nurse Marceline, in the place where the
woodmen cut the wood, when, passing on horseback, I stopped. She saw me
also and in trying to jump from the end of a pile of wood on which she
had mounted, the poor child fell and was not able to rise again. I fear
that she has badly sprained her ankle.”

“Oh, heavens!” cried Athos. “And her mother, Madame de Saint-Remy, have
they yet told her of it?”

“No, sir, Madame de Saint-Remy is at Blois with the Duchess of Orleans.
I am afraid that what was first done was unskillful, if not worse than
useless. I am come, sir, to ask your advice.”

“Send directly to Blois, Raoul; or, rather, take horse and ride
immediately yourself.”

Raoul bowed.

“But where is Louise?” asked the comte.

“I have brought her here, sir, and I have deposited her in charge of
Charlotte, who, till better advice comes, has bathed the foot in cold
well-water.”

The guests now all took leave of Athos, excepting the old Duc de Barbe,
who, as an old friend of the family of La Valliere, went to see little
Louise and offered to take her to Blois in his carriage.

“You are right, sir,” said Athos. “She will be the sooner with her
mother. As for you, Raoul, I am sure it is your fault, some giddiness
or folly.”

“No, sir, I assure you,” muttered Raoul, “it is not.”

“Oh, no, no, I declare it is not!” cried the young girl, while Raoul
turned pale at the idea of his being perhaps the cause of her disaster.

“Nevertheless, Raoul, you must go to Blois and you must make your
excuses and mine to Madame de Saint-Remy.”

The youth looked pleased. He again took in his strong arms the little
girl, whose pretty golden head and smiling face rested on his shoulder,
and placed her gently in the carriage; then jumping on his horse with
the elegance of a first-rate esquire, after bowing to Athos and
D’Artagnan, he went off close by the door of the carriage, on somebody
inside of which his eyes were riveted.




Chapter XIV.
The Castle of Bragelonne.


Whilst this scene was going on, D’Artagnan remained with open mouth and
a confused gaze. Everything had turned out so differently from what he
expected that he was stupefied with wonder.

Athos, who had been observing him and guessing his thoughts, took his
arm and led him into the garden.

“Whilst supper is being prepared,” he said, smiling, “you will not, my
friend, be sorry to have the mystery which so puzzles you cleared up.”

“True, monsieur le comte,” replied D’Artagnan, who felt that by degrees
Athos was resuming that great influence which aristocracy had over him.

Athos smiled.

“First and foremost, dear D’Artagnan, we have no title such as count
here. When I call you ‘chevalier,’ it is in presenting you to my
guests, that they may know who you are. But to you, D’Artagnan, I am, I
hope, still dear Athos, your comrade, your friend. Do you intend to
stand on ceremony because you are less attached to me than you were?”

“Oh! God forbid!”

“Then let us be as we used to be; let us be open with each other. You
are surprised at what you see here?”

“Extremely.”

“But above all things, I am a marvel to you?”

“I confess it.”

“I am still young, am I not? Should you not have known me again, in
spite of my eight-and-forty years of age?”

“On the contrary, I do not find you the same person at all.”

“I understand,” cried Athos, with a gentle blush. “Everything,
D’Artagnan, even folly, has its limit.”

“Then your means, it appears, are improved; you have a capital
house—your own, I presume? You have a park, and horses, servants.”

Athos smiled.

“Yes, I inherited this little property when I quitted the army, as I
told you. The park is twenty acres—twenty, comprising kitchen-gardens
and a common. I have two horses,—I do not count my servant’s bobtailed
nag. My sporting dogs consist of two pointers, two harriers and two
setters. But then all this extravagance is not for myself,” added
Athos, laughing.

“Yes, I see, for the young man Raoul,” said D’Artagnan.

“You guess aright, my friend; this youth is an orphan, deserted by his
mother, who left him in the house of a poor country priest. I have
brought him up. It is Raoul who has worked in me the change you see; I
was dried up like a miserable tree, isolated, attached to nothing on
earth; it was only a deep affection that could make me take root again
and drag me back to life. This child has caused me to recover what I
had lost. I had no longer any wish to live for myself, I have lived for
him. I have corrected the vices that I had; I have assumed the virtues
that I had not. Precept something, but example more. I may be mistaken,
but I believe that Raoul will be as accomplished a gentleman as our
degenerate age could display.”

The remembrance of Milady recurred to D’Artagnan.

“And you are happy?” he said to his friend.

“As happy as it is allowed to one of God’s creatures to be on this
earth; but say out all you think, D’Artagnan, for you have not yet done
so.”

“You are too bad, Athos; one can hide nothing from you,” answered
D’Artagnan. “I wished to ask you if you ever feel any emotions of
terror resembling——”

“Remorse! I finish your phrase. Yes and no. I do not feel remorse,
because that woman, I profoundly hold, deserved her punishment. Had she
one redeeming trait? I doubt it. I do not feel remorse, because had we
allowed her to live she would have persisted in her work of
destruction. But I do not mean, my friend that we were right in what we
did. Perhaps all blood demands some expiation. Hers had been
accomplished; it remains, possibly, for us to accomplish ours.”

“I have sometimes thought as you do, Athos.”

“She had a son, that unhappy woman?”

“Yes.”

“Have you ever heard of him?”

“Never.”

“He must be about twenty-three years of age,” said Athos, in a low
tone. “I often think of that young man, D’Artagnan.”

“Strange! for I had forgotten him,” said the lieutenant.

Athos smiled; the smile was melancholy.

“And Lord de Winter—do you know anything about him?”

“I know that he is in high favor with Charles I.”

“The fortunes of that monarch now are at low water. He shed the blood
of Strafford; that confirms what I said just now—blood will have blood.
And the queen?”

“What queen?”

“Madame Henrietta of England, daughter of Henry IV.”

“She is at the Louvre, as you know.”

“Yes, and I hear in bitter poverty. Her daughter, during the severest
cold, was obliged for want of fire to remain in bed. Do you grasp
that?” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; “the daughter of Henry IV.
shivering for want of a fagot! Why did she not ask from any one of us a
home instead of from Mazarin? She should have wanted nothing.”

“Have you ever seen the queen of England?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“No; but my mother, as a child, saw her. Did I ever tell you that my
mother was lady of honor to Marie de Medici?”

“Never. You know, Athos, you never spoke much of such matters.”

“Ah, mon Dieu, yes, you are right,” Athos replied; “but then there must
be some occasion for speaking.”

“Porthos wouldn’t have waited for it so patiently,” said D’Artagnan,
with a smile.

“Every one according to his nature, my dear D’Artagnan. Porthos, in
spite of a touch of vanity, has many excellent qualities. Have you seen
him?”

“I left him five days ago,” said D’Artagnan, and he portrayed with
Gascon wit and sprightliness the magnificence of Porthos in his Chateau
of Pierrefonds; nor did he neglect to launch a few arrows of wit at the
excellent Monsieur Mouston.

“I sometimes wonder,” replied Athos, smiling at that gayety which
recalled the good old days, “that we could form an association of men
who would be, after twenty years of separation, still so closely bound
together. Friendship throws out deep roots in honest hearts,
D’Artagnan. Believe me, it is only the evil-minded who deny friendship;
they cannot understand it. And Aramis?”

“I have seen him also,” said D’Artagnan; “but he seemed to me cold.”

“Ah, you have seen Aramis?” said Athos, turning on D’Artagnan a
searching look. “Why, it is a veritable pilgrimage, my dear friend,
that you are making to the Temple of Friendship, as the poets would
say.”

“Why, yes,” replied D’Artagnan, with embarrassment.

“Aramis, you know,” continued Athos, “is naturally cold, and then he is
always involved in intrigues with women.”

“I believe he is at this moment in a very complicated one,” said
D’Artagnan.

Athos made no reply.

“He is not curious,” thought D’Artagnan.

Athos not only failed to reply, he even changed the subject of
conversation.

“You see,” said he, calling D’Artagnan’s attention to the fact that
they had come back to the chateau after an hour’s walk, “we have made a
tour of my domains.”

“All is charming and everything savors of nobility,” replied
D’Artagnan.

At this instant they heard the sound of horses’ feet.

“’Tis Raoul who has come back,” said Athos; “and we can now hear how
the poor child is.”

In fact, the young man appeared at the gate, covered with dust, entered
the courtyard, leaped from his horse, which he consigned to the charge
of a groom, and then went to greet the count and D’Artagnan.

“Monsieur,” said Athos, placing his hand on D’Artagnan’s shoulder,
“monsieur is the Chevalier D’Artagnan of whom you have often heard me
speak, Raoul.”

“Monsieur,” said the young man, saluting again and more profoundly,
“monsieur le comte has pronounced your name before me as an example
whenever he wished to speak of an intrepid and generous gentleman.”

That little compliment could not fail to move D’Artagnan. He extended a
hand to Raoul and said:

“My young friend, all the praises that are given me should be passed on
to the count here; for he has educated me in everything and it is not
his fault that his pupil profited so little from his instructions. But
he will make it up in you I am sure. I like your manner, Raoul, and
your politeness has touched me.”

Athos was more delighted than can be told. He looked at D’Artagnan with
an expression of gratitude and then bestowed on Raoul one of those
strange smiles, of which children are so proud when they receive them.

“Now,” said D’Artagnan to himself, noticing that silent play of
countenance, “I am sure of it.”

“I hope the accident has been of no consequence?”

“They don’t yet know, sir, on account of the swelling; but the doctor
is afraid some tendon has been injured.”

At this moment a little boy, half peasant, half foot-boy, came to
announce supper.

Athos led his guest into a dining-room of moderate size, the windows of
which opened on one side on a garden, on the other on a hot-house full
of magnificent flowers.

D’Artagnan glanced at the dinner service. The plate was magnificent,
old, and appertaining to the family. D’Artagnan stopped to look at a
sideboard on which was a superb ewer of silver.

“That workmanship is divine!” he exclaimed.

“Yes, a chef d’oeuvre of the great Florentine sculptor, Benvenuto
Cellini,” replied Athos.

“What battle does it represent?”

“That of Marignan, just at the point where one of my forefathers is
offering his sword to Francis I., who has broken his. It was on that
occasion that my ancestor, Enguerrand de la Fere, was made a knight of
the Order of St. Michael; besides which, the king, fifteen years
afterward, gave him also this ewer and a sword which you may have seen
formerly in my house, also a lovely specimen of workmanship. Men were
giants in those times,” said Athos; “now we are pigmies in comparison.
Let us sit down to supper. Call Charles,” he added, addressing the boy
who waited.

“My good Charles, I particularly recommend to your care Planchet, the
laquais of Monsieur D’Artagnan. He likes good wine; now you have the
key of the cellar. He has slept a long time on a hard bed, so he won’t
object to a soft one; take every care of him, I beg of you.” Charles
bowed and retired.

“You think of everything,” said D’Artagnan; “and I thank you for
Planchet, my dear Athos.”

Raoul stared on hearing this name and looked at the count to be quite
sure that it was he whom the lieutenant thus addressed.

“That name sounds strange to you,” said Athos, smiling; “it was my nom
de guerre when Monsieur D’Artagnan, two other gallant friends and
myself performed some feats of arms at the siege of La Rochelle, under
the deceased cardinal and Monsieur de Bassompierre. My friend is still
so kind as to address me by that old and well beloved appellation,
which makes my heart glad when I hear it.”

“’Tis an illustrious name,” said the lieutenant, “and had one day
triumphal honors paid to it.”

“What do you mean, sir?” inquired Raoul.

“You have not forgotten St. Gervais, Athos, and the napkin which was
converted into a banner?” and he then related to Raoul the story of the
bastion, and Raoul fancied he was listening to one of those deeds of
arms belonging to days of chivalry, so gloriously recounted by Tasso
and Ariosto.

“D’Artagnan does not tell you, Raoul,” said Athos, in his turn, “that
he was reckoned one of the finest swordsmen of his time—a knuckle of
iron, a wrist of steel, a sure eye and a glance of fire; that’s what
his adversary met with. He was eighteen, only three years older than
you are, Raoul, when I saw him set to work, pitted against tried men.”

“And did Monsieur D’Artagnan come off the conqueror?” asked the young
man, with glistening eye.

“I killed one man, if I recollect rightly,” replied D’Artagnan, with a
look of inquiry directed to Athos; “another I disarmed or wounded, I
don’t remember which.”

“Wounded!” said Athos; “it was a phenomenon of skill.”

The young man would willingly have prolonged this conversation far into
the night, but Athos pointed out to him that his guest must need
repose. D’Artagnan would fain have declared that he was not fatigued,
but Athos insisted on his retiring to his chamber, conducted thither by
Raoul.




Chapter XV.
Athos as a Diplomatist.


D’Artagnan retired to bed—not to sleep, but to think over all he had
heard that evening. Being naturally goodhearted, and having had once a
liking for Athos, which had grown into a sincere friendship, he was
delighted at thus meeting a man full of intelligence and moral
strength, instead of a drunkard. He admitted without annoyance the
continued superiority of Athos over himself, devoid as he was of that
jealousy which might have saddened a less generous disposition; he was
delighted also that the high qualities of Athos appeared to promise
favorably for his mission. Nevertheless, it seemed to him that Athos
was not in all respects sincere and frank. Who was the youth he had
adopted and who bore so striking a resemblance to him? What could
explain Athos’s having re-entered the world and the extreme sobriety he
had observed at table? The absence of Grimaud, whose name had never
once been uttered by Athos, gave D’Artagnan uneasiness. It was evident
either that he no longer possessed the confidence of his friend, or
that Athos was bound by some invisible chain, or that he had been
forewarned of the lieutenant’s visit.

He could not help thinking of M. Rochefort, whom he had seen in Notre
Dame; could De Rochefort have forestalled him with Athos? Again, the
moderate fortune which Athos possessed, concealed as it was, so
skillfully, seemed to show a regard for appearances and to betray a
latent ambition which might be easily aroused. The clear and vigorous
intellect of Athos would render him more open to conviction than a less
able man would be. He would enter into the minister’s schemes with the
more ardor, because his natural activity would be doubled by necessity.

Resolved to seek an explanation on all these points on the following
day, D’Artagnan, in spite of his fatigue, prepared for an attack and
determined that it should take place after breakfast. He determined to
cultivate the good-will of the youth Raoul and, either whilst fencing
with him or when out shooting, to extract from his simplicity some
information which would connect the Athos of old times with the Athos
of the present. But D’Artagnan at the same time, being a man of extreme
caution, was quite aware what injury he should do himself, if by any
indiscretion or awkwardness he should betray has manoeuvering to the
experienced eye of Athos. Besides, to tell truth, whilst D’Artagnan was
quite disposed to adopt a subtle course against the cunning of Aramis
or the vanity of Porthos, he was ashamed to equivocate with Athos,
true-hearted, open Athos. It seemed to him that if Porthos and Aramis
deemed him superior to them in the arts of diplomacy, they would like
him all the better for it; but that Athos, on the contrary, would
despise him.

“Ah! why is not Grimaud, the taciturn Grimaud, here?” thought
D’Artagnan, “there are so many things his silence would have told me;
with Grimaud silence was another form of eloquence!”

There reigned a perfect stillness in the house. D’Artagnan had heard
the door shut and the shutters barred; the dogs became in their turn
silent. At last a nightingale, lost in a thicket of shrubs, in the
midst of its most melodious cadences had fluted low and lower into
stillness and fallen asleep. Not a sound was heard in the castle,
except of a footstep up and down, in the chamber above—as he supposed,
the bedroom of Athos.

“He is walking about and thinking,” thought D’Artagnan; “but of what?
It is impossible to know; everything else might be guessed, but not
that.”

At length Athos went to bed, apparently, for the noise ceased.

Silence and fatigue together overcame D’Artagnan and sleep overtook him
also. He was not, however, a good sleeper. Scarcely had dawn gilded his
window curtains when he sprang out of bed and opened the windows.
Somebody, he perceived, was in the courtyard, moving stealthily. True
to his custom of never passing anything over that it was within his
power to know, D’Artagnan looked out of the window and perceived the
close red coat and brown hair of Raoul.

The young man was opening the door of the stable. He then, with
noiseless haste, took out the horse that he had ridden on the previous
evening, saddled and bridled it himself and led the animal into the
alley to the right of the kitchen-garden, opened a side door which
conducted him to a bridle road, shut it after him, and D’Artagnan saw
him pass by like a dart, bending, as he went, beneath the pendent
flowery branches of maple and acacia. The road, as D’Artagnan had
observed, was the way to Blois.

“So!” thought the Gascon “here’s a young blade who has already his love
affair, who doesn’t at all agree with Athos in his hatred to the fair
sex. He’s not going to hunt, for he has neither dogs nor arms; he’s not
going on a message, for he goes secretly. Why does he go in secret? Is
he afraid of me or of his father? for I am sure the count is his
father. By Jove! I shall know about that soon, for I shall soon speak
out to Athos.”

Day was now advanced; all the noises that had ceased the night before
reawakened, one after the other. The bird on the branch, the dog in his
kennel, the sheep in the field, the boats moored in the Loire, even,
became alive and vocal. The latter, leaving the shore, abandoned
themselves gaily to the current. The Gascon gave a last twirl to his
mustache, a last turn to his hair, brushed, from habit, the brim of his
hat with the sleeve of his doublet, and went downstairs. Scarcely had
he descended the last step of the threshold when he saw Athos bent down
toward the ground, as if he were looking for a crown-piece in the dust.

“Good-morning, my dear host,” cried D’Artagnan.

“Good-day to you; have you slept well?”

“Excellently, Athos, but what are you looking for? You are perhaps a
tulip fancier?”

“My dear friend, if I am, you must not laugh at me for being so. In the
country people alter; one gets to like, without knowing it, all those
beautiful objects that God causes to spring from the earth, which are
despised in cities. I was looking anxiously for some iris roots I
planted here, close to this reservoir, and which some one has trampled
upon this morning. These gardeners are the most careless people in the
world; in bringing the horse out to the water they’ve allowed him to
walk over the border.”

D’Artagnan began to smile.

“Ah! you think so, do you?”

And he took his friend along the alley, where a number of tracks like
those which had trampled down the flowerbeds, were visible.

“Here are the horse’s hoofs again, it seems, Athos,” he said
carelessly.

“Yes, indeed, the marks are recent.”

“Quite so,” replied the lieutenant.

“Who went out this morning?” Athos asked, uneasily. “Has any horse got
loose?”

“Not likely,” answered the Gascon; “these marks are regular.”

“Where is Raoul?” asked Athos; “how is it that I have not seen him?”

“Hush!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, putting his finger on his lips; and he
related what he had seen, watching Athos all the while.

“Ah, he’s gone to Blois; the poor boy——”

“Wherefore?”

“Ah, to inquire after the little La Valliere; she has sprained her
foot, you know.”

“You think he has?”

“I am sure of it,” said Athos; “don’t you see that Raoul is in love?”

“Indeed! with whom—with a child seven years old?”

“Dear friend, at Raoul’s age the heart is so expansive that it must
encircle one object or another, fancied or real. Well, his love is half
real, half fanciful. She is the prettiest little creature in the world,
with flaxen hair, blue eyes,—at once saucy and languishing.”

“But what say you to Raoul’s fancy?”

“Nothing—I laugh at Raoul; but this first desire of the heart is
imperious. I remember, just at his age, how deep in love I was with a
Grecian statue which our good king, then Henry IV., gave my father,
insomuch that I was mad with grief when they told me that the story of
Pygmalion was nothing but a fable.”

“It is mere want of occupation. You do not make Raoul work, so he takes
his own way of employing himself.”

“Exactly; therefore I think of sending him away from here.”

“You will be wise to do so.”

“No doubt of it; but it will break his heart. So long as three or four
years ago he used to adorn and adore his little idol, whom he will some
day fall in love with in right earnest if he remains here. The parents
of little La Valliere have for a long time perceived and been amused at
it; now they begin to look concerned.”

“Nonsense! However, Raoul must be diverted from this fancy. Send him
away or you will never make a man of him.”

“I think I shall send him to Paris.”

“So!” thought D’Artagnan, and it seemed to him that the moment for
attack had arrived.

“Suppose,” he said, “we roughly chalk out a career for this young man.
I wish to consult you about some thing.”

“Do so.”

“Do you think it is time for us to enter the service?”

“But are you not still in the service—you, D’Artagnan?”

“I mean active service. Our former life, has it still no attractions
for you? would you not be happy to begin anew in my society and in that
of Porthos, the exploits of our youth?”

“Do you propose to me to do so, D’Artagnan?”

“Decidedly and honestly.”

“On whose side?” asked Athos, fixing his clear, benevolent glance on
the countenance of the Gascon.

“Ah, devil take it, you speak in earnest——”

“And must have a definite answer. Listen, D’Artagnan. There is but one
person, or rather, one cause, to whom a man like me can be useful—that
of the king.”

“Exactly,” answered the musketeer.

“Yes, but let us understand each other,” returned Athos, seriously. “If
by the cause of the king you mean that of Monsieur de Mazarin, we do
not understand each other.”

“I don’t say exactly,” answered the Gascon, confused.

“Come, D’Artagnan, don’t let us play a sidelong game; your hesitation,
your evasion, tells me at once on whose side you are; for that party no
one dares openly to recruit, and when people recruit for it, it is with
averted eyes and humble voice.”

“Ah! my dear Athos!”

“You know that I am not alluding to you; you are the pearl of brave,
bold men. I speak of that spiteful and intriguing Italian—of the pedant
who has tried to put on his own head a crown which he stole from under
a pillow—of the scoundrel who calls his party the party of the king—who
wants to send the princes of the blood to prison, not daring to kill
them, as our great cardinal—our cardinal did—of the miser, who weighs
his gold pieces and keeps the clipped ones for fear, though he is rich,
of losing them at play next morning—of the impudent fellow who insults
the queen, as they say—so much the worse for her—and who is going in
three months to make war upon us, in order that he may retain his
pensions; is that the master whom you propose to me? I thank you,
D’Artagnan.”

“You are more impetuous than you were,” returned D’Artagnan. “Age has
warmed, not chilled your blood. Who informed you this was the master I
propose to you? Devil take it,” he muttered to himself, “don’t let me
betray my secrets to a man not inclined to entertain them.”

“Well, then,” said Athos, “what are your schemes? what do you propose?”

“Zounds! nothing more than natural. You live on your estate, happy in
golden mediocrity. Porthos has, perhaps, sixty thousand francs income.
Aramis has always fifty duchesses quarreling over the priest, as they
quarreled formerly over the musketeer; but I—what have I in the world?
I have worn my cuirass these twenty years, kept down in this inferior
rank, without going forward or backward, hardly half living. In fact, I
am dead. Well! when there is some idea of being resuscitated, you say
he’s a scoundrel, an impudent fellow, a miser, a bad master! By Jove! I
am of your opinion, but find me a better one or give me the means of
living.”

Athos was for a few moments thoughtful.

“Good! D’Artagnan is for Mazarin,” he said to himself.

From that moment he grew very guarded.

On his side D’Artagnan became more cautious also.

“You spoke to me,” Athos resumed, “of Porthos; have you persuaded him
to seek his fortune? But he has wealth, I believe, already.”

“Doubtless he has. But such is man, we always want something more than
we already have.”

“What does Porthos wish for?”

“To be a baron.”

“Ah, true! I forgot,” said Athos, laughing.

“’Tis true!” thought the Gascon, “where has he heard it? Does he
correspond with Aramis? Ah! if I knew that he did I should know all.”

The conversation was interrupted by the entrance of Raoul.

“Is our little neighbor worse?” asked D’Artagnan, seeing a look of
vexation on the face of the youth.

“Ah, sir!” replied Raoul, “her fall is a very serious one, and without
any ostensible injury, the physician fears she will be lame for life.”

“This is terrible,” said Athos.

“And what makes me all the more wretched, sir, is, that I was the cause
of this misfortune.”

“How so?” asked Athos.

“It was to run to meet me that she leaped from that pile of wood.”

“There’s only one remedy, dear Raoul—that is, to marry her as a
compensation.” remarked D’Artagnan.

“Ah, sir!” answered Raoul, “you joke about a real misfortune; that is
cruel, indeed.”

The good understanding between the two friends was not in the least
altered by the morning’s skirmish. They breakfasted with a good
appetite, looking now and then at poor Raoul, who with moist eyes and a
full heart, scarcely ate at all.

After breakfast two letters arrived for Athos, who read them with
profound attention, whilst D’Artagnan could not restrain himself from
jumping up several times on seeing him read these epistles, in one of
which, there being at the time a very strong light, he perceived the
fine writing of Aramis. The other was in a feminine hand, long, and
crossed.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan to Raoul, seeing that Athos wished to be alone,
“come, let us take a turn in the fencing gallery; that will amuse you.”

And they both went into a low room where there were foils, gloves,
masks, breastplates, and all the accessories for a fencing match.

In a quarter of an hour Athos joined them and at the same moment
Charles brought in a letter for D’Artagnan, which a messenger had just
desired might be instantly delivered.

It was now Athos’s turn to take a sly look.

D’Artagnan read the letter with apparent calmness and said, shaking his
head:

“See, dear friend, what it is to belong to the army. Faith, you are
indeed right not to return to it. Monsieur de Tréville is ill, so my
company can’t do without me; there! my leave is at an end!”

“Do you return to Paris?” asked Athos, quickly.

“Egad! yes; but why don’t you come there also?”

Athos colored a little and answered:

“Should I go, I shall be delighted to see you there.”

“Halloo, Planchet!” cried the Gascon from the door, “we must set out in
ten minutes; give the horses some hay.”

Then turning to Athos he added:

“I seem to miss something here. I am really sorry to go away without
having seen Grimaud.”

“Grimaud!” replied Athos. “I’m surprised you have never so much as
asked after him. I have lent him to a friend——”

“Who will understand the signs he makes?” returned D’Artagnan.

“I hope so.”

The friends embraced cordially; D’Artagnan pressed Raoul’s hand.

“Will you not come with me?” he said; “I shall pass by Blois.”

Raoul turned toward Athos, who showed him by a secret sign that he did
not wish him to go.

“No, monsieur,” replied the young man; “I will remain with monsieur le
comte.”

“Adieu, then, to both, my good friends,” said D’Artagnan; “may God
preserve you! as we used to say when we said good-bye to each other in
the late cardinal’s time.”

Athos waved his hand, Raoul bowed, and D’Artagnan and Planchet set out.

The count followed them with his eyes, his hands resting on the
shoulders of the youth, whose height was almost equal to his own; but
as soon as they were out of sight he said:

“Raoul, we set out to-night for Paris.”

“Eh?” cried the young man, turning pale.

“You may go and offer your adieux and mine to Madame de Saint-Remy. I
shall wait for you here till seven.”

The young man bent low, with an expression of sorrow and gratitude
mingled, and retired in order to saddle his horse.

As to D’Artagnan, scarcely, on his side, was he out of sight when he
drew from his pocket a letter, which he read over again:

“Return immediately to Paris.—J. M——.”

“The epistle is laconic,” said D’Artagnan; “and if there had not been a
postscript, probably I should not have understood it; but happily there
is a postscript.”

And he read that welcome postscript, which made him forget the
abruptness of the letter.

“P. S.—Go to the king’s treasurer, at Blois; tell him your name and
show him this letter; you will receive two hundred pistoles.”

“Assuredly,” said D’Artagnan, “I admire this piece of prose. The
cardinal writes better than I thought. Come, Planchet, let us pay a
visit to the king’s treasurer and then set off.”

“Toward Paris, sir?”

“Toward Paris.”

And they set out at as hard a canter as their horses could maintain.




Chapter XVI.
The Duc de Beaufort.


The circumstances that had hastened the return of D’Artagnan to Paris
were as follows:

One evening, when Mazarin, according to custom, went to visit the
queen, in passing the guard-chamber he heard loud voices; wishing to
know on what topic the soldiers were conversing, he approached with his
wonted wolf-like step, pushed open the door and put his head close to
the chink.

There was a dispute among the guards.

“I tell you,” one of them was saying, “that if Coysel predicted that,
’tis as good as true; I know nothing about it, but I have heard say
that he’s not only an astrologer, but a magician.”

“Deuce take it, friend, if he’s one of thy friends thou wilt ruin him
in saying so.”

“Why?”

“Because he may be tried for it.”

“Ah! absurd! they don’t burn sorcerers nowadays.”

“No? ’Tis not a long time since the late cardinal burnt Urban Grandier,
though.”

“My friend, Urban Grandier wasn’t a sorcerer, he was a learned man. He
didn’t predict the future, he knew the past—often a more dangerous
thing.”

Mazarin nodded an assent, but wishing to know what this prediction was,
about which they disputed, he remained in the same place.

“I don’t say,” resumed the guard, “that Coysel is not a sorcerer, but I
say that if his prophecy gets wind, it’s a sure way to prevent it’s
coming true.”

“How so?”

“Why, in this way: if Coysel says loud enough for the cardinal to hear
him, on such or such a day such a prisoner will escape, ’tis plain that
the cardinal will take measures of precaution and that the prisoner
will not escape.”

“Good Lord!” said another guard, who might have been thought asleep on
a bench, but who had lost not a syllable of the conversation, “do you
suppose that men can escape their destiny? If it is written yonder, in
Heaven, that the Duc de Beaufort is to escape, he will escape; and all
the precautions of the cardinal will not prevent it.”

Mazarin started. He was an Italian and therefore superstitious. He
walked straight into the midst of the guards, who on seeing him were
silent.

“What were you saying?” he asked with his flattering manner; “that
Monsieur de Beaufort had escaped, were you not?”

“Oh, no, my lord!” said the incredulous soldier. “He’s well guarded
now; we only said he would escape.”

“Who said so?”

“Repeat your story, Saint Laurent,” replied the man, turning to the
originator of the tale.

“My lord,” said the guard, “I have simply mentioned the prophecy I
heard from a man named Coysel, who believes that, be he ever so closely
watched and guarded, the Duke of Beaufort will escape before
Whitsuntide.”

“Coysel is a madman!” returned the cardinal.

“No,” replied the soldier, tenacious in his credulity; “he has foretold
many things which have come to pass; for instance, that the queen would
have a son; that Monsieur Coligny would be killed in a duel with the
Duc de Guise; and finally, that the coadjutor would be made cardinal.
Well! the queen has not only one son, but two; then, Monsieur de
Coligny was killed, and——”

“Yes,” said Mazarin, “but the coadjutor is not yet made cardinal!”

“No, my lord, but he will be,” answered the guard.

Mazarin made a grimace, as if he meant to say, “But he does not wear
the cardinal’s cap;” then he added:

“So, my friend, it’s your opinion that Monsieur de Beaufort will
escape?”

“That’s my idea, my lord; and if your eminence were to offer to make me
at this moment governor of the castle of Vincennes, I should refuse it.
After Whitsuntide it would be another thing.”

There is nothing so convincing as a firm conviction. It has its own
effect upon the most incredulous; and far from being incredulous,
Mazarin was superstitious. He went away thoughtful and anxious and
returned to his own room, where he summoned Bernouin and desired him to
fetch thither in the morning the special guard he had placed over
Monsieur de Beaufort and to awaken him whenever he should arrive.

The guard had, in fact, touched the cardinal in the tenderest point.
During the whole five years in which the Duc de Beaufort had been in
prison not a day had passed in which the cardinal had not felt a secret
dread of his escape. It was not possible, as he knew well, to confine
for the whole of his life the grandson of Henry IV., especially when
this young prince was scarcely thirty years of age. But however and
whensoever he did escape, what hatred he must cherish against him to
whom he owed his long imprisonment; who had taken him, rich, brave,
glorious, beloved by women, feared by men, to cut off his life’s best,
happiest years; for it is not life, it is merely existence, in prison!
Meantime, Mazarin redoubled his surveillance over the duke. But like
the miser in the fable, he could not sleep for thinking of his
treasure. Often he awoke in the night, suddenly, dreaming that he had
been robbed of Monsieur de Beaufort. Then he inquired about him and had
the vexation of hearing that the prisoner played, drank, sang, but that
whilst playing, drinking, singing, he often stopped short to vow that
Mazarin should pay dear for all the amusements he had forced him to
enter into at Vincennes.

So much did this one idea haunt the cardinal even in his sleep, that
when at seven in the morning Bernouin came to arouse him, his first
words were: “Well, what’s the matter? Has Monsieur de Beaufort escaped
from Vincennes?”

“I do not think so, my lord,” said Bernouin; “but you will hear about
him, for La Ramee is here and awaits the commands of your eminence.”

“Tell him to come in,” said Mazarin, arranging his pillows, so that he
might receive the visitor sitting up in bed.

The officer entered, a large fat man, with an open physiognomy. His air
of perfect serenity made Mazarin uneasy.

“Approach, sir,” said the cardinal.

The officer obeyed.

“Do you know what they are saying here?”

“No, your eminence.”

“Well, they say that Monsieur de Beaufort is going to escape from
Vincennes, if he has not done so already.”

The officer’s face expressed complete stupefaction. He opened at once
his little eyes and his great mouth, to inhale better the joke his
eminence deigned to address to him, and ended by a burst of laughter,
so violent that his great limbs shook in hilarity as they would have
done in an ague.

“Escape! my lord—escape! Your eminence does not then know where
Monsieur de Beaufort is?”

“Yes, I do, sir; in the donjon of Vincennes.”

“Yes, sir; in a room, the walls of which are seven feet thick, with
grated windows, each bar as thick as my arm.”

“Sir,” replied Mazarin, “with perseverance one may penetrate through a
wall; with a watch-spring one may saw through an iron bar.”

“Then my lord does not know that there are eight guards about him, four
in his chamber, four in the antechamber, and that they never leave
him.”

“But he leaves his room, he plays at tennis at the Mall?”

“Sir, those amusements are allowed; but if your eminence wishes it, we
will discontinue the permission.”

“No, no!” cried Mazarin, fearing that should his prisoner ever leave
his prison he would be the more exasperated against him if he thus
retrenched his amusement. He then asked with whom he played.

“My lord, either with the officers of the guard, with the other
prisoners, or with me.”

“But does he not approach the walls while playing?”

“Your eminence doesn’t know those walls; they are sixty feet high and I
doubt if Monsieur de Beaufort is sufficiently weary of life to risk his
neck by jumping off.”

“Hum!” said the cardinal, beginning to feel more comfortable. “You mean
to say, then, my dear Monsieur la Ramee——”

“That unless Monsieur de Beaufort can contrive to metamorphose himself
into a little bird, I will continue answerable for him.”

“Take care! you assert a great deal,” said Mazarin. “Monsieur de
Beaufort told the guards who took him to Vincennes that he had often
thought what he should do in case he were put into prison, and that he
had found out forty ways of escaping.”

“My lord, if among these forty there had been one good way he would
have been out long ago.”

“Come, come; not such a fool as I fancied!” thought Mazarin.

“Besides, my lord must remember that Monsieur de Chavigny is governor
of Vincennes,” continued La Ramee, “and that Monsieur de Chavigny is
not friendly to Monsieur de Beaufort.”

“Yes, but Monsieur de Chavigny is sometimes absent.”

“When he is absent I am there.”

“But when you leave him, for instance?”

“Oh! when I leave him, I place in my stead a bold fellow who aspires to
be his majesty’s special guard. I promise you he keeps a good watch
over the prisoner. During the three weeks that he has been with me, I
have only had to reproach him with one thing—being too severe with the
prisoners.”

“And who is this Cerberus?”

“A certain Monsieur Grimaud, my lord.”

“And what was he before he went to Vincennes?”

“He was in the country, as I was told by the person who recommended him
to me.”

“And who recommended this man to you?”

“The steward of the Duc de Grammont.”

“He is not a gossip, I hope?”

“Lord a mercy, my lord! I thought for a long time that he was dumb; he
answers only by signs. It seems his former master accustomed him to
that.”

“Well, dear Monsieur la Ramee,” replied the cardinal “let him prove a
true and thankful keeper and we will shut our eyes upon his rural
misdeeds and put on his back a uniform to make him respectable, and in
the pockets of that uniform some pistoles to drink to the king’s
health.”

Mazarin was large in promises,—quite unlike the virtuous Monsieur
Grimaud so bepraised by La Ramee; for he said nothing and did much.

It was now nine o’clock. The cardinal, therefore, got up, perfumed
himself, dressed, and went to the queen to tell her what had detained
him. The queen, who was scarcely less afraid of Monsieur de Beaufort
than the cardinal himself, and who was almost as superstitious as he
was, made him repeat word for word all La Ramee’s praises of his
deputy. Then, when the cardinal had ended:

“Alas, sir! why have we not a Grimaud near every prince?”

“Patience!” replied Mazarin, with his Italian smile; “that may happen
one day; but in the meantime——”

“Well, in the meantime?”

“I shall still take precautions.”

And he wrote to D’Artagnan to hasten his return.




Chapter XVII.
Duc de Beaufort amused his Leisure Hours in the Donjon of Vincennes.


The captive who was the source of so much alarm to the cardinal and
whose means of escape disturbed the repose of the whole court, was
wholly unconscious of the terror he caused at the Palais Royal.

He had found himself so strictly guarded that he soon perceived the
fruitlessness of any attempt at escape. His vengeance, therefore,
consisted in coining curses on the head of Mazarin; he even tried to
make some verses on him, but soon gave up the attempt, for Monsieur de
Beaufort had not only not received from Heaven the gift of versifying,
he had the greatest difficulty in expressing himself in prose.

The duke was the grandson of Henry IV. and Gabrielle d’Estrees—as
good-natured, as brave, as proud, and above all, as Gascon as his
ancestor, but less elaborately educated. After having been for some
time after the death of Louis XIII. the favorite, the confidant, the
first man, in short, at the court, he had been obliged to yield his
place to Mazarin and so became the second in influence and favor; and
eventually, as he was stupid enough to be vexed at this change of
position, the queen had had him arrested and sent to Vincennes in
charge of Guitant, who made his appearance in these pages in the
beginning of this history and whom we shall see again. It is
understood, of course, that when we say “the queen,” Mazarin is meant.

During the five years of this seclusion, which would have improved and
matured the intellect of any other man, M. de Beaufort, had he not
affected to brave the cardinal, despise princes, and walk alone without
adherents or disciples, would either have regained his liberty or made
partisans. But these considerations never occurred to the duke and
every day the cardinal received fresh accounts of him which were as
unpleasant as possible to the minister.

After having failed in poetry, Monsieur de Beaufort tried drawing. He
drew portraits, with a piece of coal, of the cardinal; and as his
talents did not enable him to produce a very good likeness, he wrote
under the picture that there might be little doubt regarding the
original: “Portrait of the Illustrious Coxcomb, Mazarin.” Monsieur de
Chavigny, the governor of Vincennes, waited upon the duke to request
that he would amuse himself in some other way, or that at all events,
if he drew likenesses, he would not put mottoes underneath them. The
next day the prisoner’s room was full of pictures and mottoes. Monsieur
de Beaufort, in common with many other prisoners, was bent upon doing
things that were prohibited; and the only resource the governor had
was, one day when the duke was playing at tennis, to efface all these
drawings, consisting chiefly of profiles. M. de Beaufort did not
venture to draw the cardinal’s fat face.

The duke thanked Monsieur de Chavigny for having, as he said, cleaned
his drawing-paper for him; he then divided the walls of his room into
compartments and dedicated each of these compartments to some incident
in Mazarin’s life. In one was depicted the “Illustrious Coxcomb”
receiving a shower of blows from Cardinal Bentivoglio, whose servant he
had been; another, the “Illustrious Mazarin” acting the part of
Ignatius Loyola in a tragedy of that name; a third, the “Illustrious
Mazarin” stealing the portfolio of prime minister from Monsieur de
Chavigny, who had expected to have it; a fourth, the “Illustrious
Coxcomb Mazarin” refusing to give Laporte, the young king’s valet,
clean sheets, and saving that “it was quite enough for the king of
France to have clean sheets every three months.”

The governor, of course, thought proper to threaten his prisoner that
if he did not give up drawing such pictures he should be obliged to
deprive him of all the means of amusing himself in that manner. To this
Monsieur de Beaufort replied that since every opportunity of
distinguishing himself in arms was taken from him, he wished to make
himself celebrated in the arts; since he could not be a Bayard, he
would become a Raphael or a Michael Angelo. Nevertheless, one day when
Monsieur de Beaufort was walking in the meadow his fire was put out,
his charcoal all removed, taken away; and thus his means of drawing
utterly destroyed.

The poor duke swore, fell into a rage, yelled, and declared that they
wished to starve him to death as they had starved the Marechal Ornano
and the Grand Prior of Vendome; but he refused to promise that he would
not make any more drawings and remained without any fire in the room
all the winter.

His next act was to purchase a dog from one of his keepers. With this
animal, which he called Pistache, he was often shut up for hours alone,
superintending, as every one supposed, its education. At last, when
Pistache was sufficiently well trained, Monsieur de Beaufort invited
the governor and officers of Vincennes to attend a representation which
he was going to have in his apartment.

The party assembled, the room was lighted with waxlights, and the
prisoner, with a bit of plaster he had taken out of the wall of his
room, had traced a long white line, representing a cord, on the floor.
Pistache, on a signal from his master, placed himself on this line,
raised himself on his hind paws, and holding in his front paws a wand
with which clothes used to be beaten, he began to dance upon the line
with as many contortions as a rope-dancer. Having been several times up
and down it, he gave the wand back to his master and began without
hesitation to perform the same evolutions over again.

The intelligent creature was received with loud applause.

The first part of the entertainment being concluded Pistache was
desired to say what o’clock it was; he was shown Monsieur de Chavigny’s
watch; it was then half-past six; the dog raised and dropped his paw
six times; the seventh he let it remain upraised. Nothing could be
better done; a sun-dial could not have shown the hour with greater
precision.

Then the question was put to him who was the best jailer in all the
prisons in France.

The dog performed three evolutions around the circle and laid himself,
with the deepest respect, at the feet of Monsieur de Chavigny, who at
first seemed inclined to like the joke and laughed long and loud, but a
frown succeeded, and he bit his lips with vexation.

Then the duke put to Pistache this difficult question, who was the
greatest thief in the world?

Pistache went again around the circle, but stopped at no one, and at
last went to the door and began to scratch and bark.

“See, gentlemen,” said M. de Beaufort, “this wonderful animal, not
finding here what I ask for, seeks it out of doors; you shall, however,
have his answer. Pistache, my friend, come here. Is not the greatest
thief in the world, Monsieur (the king’s secretary) Le Camus, who came
to Paris with twenty francs in his pocket and who now possesses ten
millions?”

The dog shook his head.

“Then is it not,” resumed the duke, “the Superintendent Emery, who gave
his son, when he was married, three hundred thousand francs and a
house, compared to which the Tuileries are a heap of ruins and the
Louvre a paltry building?”

The dog again shook his head as if to say “no.”

“Then,” said the prisoner, “let’s think who it can be. Can it be, can
it possibly be, the ‘Illustrious Coxcomb, Mazarin de Piscina,’ hey?”

Pistache made violent signs that it was, by raising and lowering his
head eight or ten times successively.

“Gentlemen, you see,” said the duke to those present, who dared not
even smile, “that it is the ‘Illustrious Coxcomb’ who is the greatest
thief in the world; at least, according to Pistache.”

“Let us go on to another of his exercises.”

“Gentlemen!”—there was a profound silence in the room when the duke
again addressed them—“do you not remember that the Duc de Guise taught
all the dogs in Paris to jump for Mademoiselle de Pons, whom he styled
‘the fairest of the fair?’ Pistache is going to show you how superior
he is to all other dogs. Monsieur de Chavigny, be so good as to lend me
your cane.”

Monsieur de Chavigny handed his cane to Monsieur de Beaufort. Monsieur
de Beaufort placed it horizontally at the height of one foot.

“Now, Pistache, my good dog, jump the height of this cane for Madame de
Montbazon.”

“But,” interposed Monsieur de Chavigny, “it seems to me that Pistache
is only doing what other dogs have done when they jumped for
Mademoiselle de Pons.”

“Stop,” said the duke, “Pistache, jump for the queen.” And he raised
his cane six inches higher.

The dog sprang, and in spite of the height jumped lightly over it.

“And now,” said the duke, raising it still six inches higher, “jump for
the king.”

The dog obeyed and jumped quickly over the cane.

“Now, then,” said the duke, and as he spoke, lowered the cane almost
level with the ground; “Pistache, my friend, jump for the ‘Illustrious
Coxcomb, Mazarin de Piscina.’”

The dog turned his back to the cane.

“What,” asked the duke, “what do you mean?” and he gave him the cane
again, first making a semicircle from the head to the tail of Pistache.
“Jump then, Monsieur Pistache.”

But Pistache, as at first, turned round on his legs and stood with his
back to the cane.

Monsieur de Beaufort made the experiment a third time, but by this time
Pistache’s patience was exhausted; he threw himself furiously upon the
cane, wrested it from the hands of the prince and broke it with his
teeth.

Monsieur de Beaufort took the pieces out of his mouth and presented
them with great formality to Monsieur de Chavigny, saying that for that
evening the entertainment was ended, but in three months it should be
repeated, when Pistache would have learned a few new tricks.

Three days afterward Pistache was found dead—poisoned.

Then the duke said openly that his dog had been killed by a drug with
which they meant to poison him; and one day after dinner he went to
bed, calling out that he had pains in his stomach and that Mazarin had
poisoned him.

This fresh impertinence reached the ears of the cardinal and alarmed
him greatly. The donjon of Vincennes was considered very unhealthy and
Madame de Rambouillet had said that the room in which the Marechal
Ornano and the Grand Prior de Vendome had died was worth its weight in
arsenic—a bon mot which had great success. So it was ordered the
prisoner was henceforth to eat nothing that had not previously been
tasted, and La Ramee was in consequence placed near him as taster.

Every kind of revenge was practiced upon the duke by the governor in
return for the insults of the innocent Pistache. De Chavigny, who,
according to report, was a son of Richelieu’s, and had been a creature
of the late cardinal’s, understood tyranny. He took from the duke all
the steel knives and silver forks and replaced them with silver knives
and wooden forks, pretending that as he had been informed that the duke
was to pass all his life at Vincennes, he was afraid of his prisoner
attempting suicide. A fortnight afterward the duke, going to the tennis
court, found two rows of trees about the size of his little finger
planted by the roadside; he asked what they were for and was told that
they were to shade him from the sun on some future day. One morning the
gardener went to him and told him, as if to please him, that he was
going to plant a bed of asparagus for his especial use. Now, since, as
every one knows, asparagus takes four years in coming to perfection,
this civility infuriated Monsieur de Beaufort.

At last his patience was exhausted. He assembled his keepers, and
notwithstanding his well-known difficulty of utterance, addressed them
as follows:

“Gentlemen! will you permit a grandson of Henry IV. to be overwhelmed
with insults and ignominy?

“Odds fish! as my grandfather used to say, I once reigned in Paris! do
you know that? I had the king and Monsieur the whole of one day in my
care. The queen at that time liked me and called me the most honest man
in the kingdom. Gentlemen and citizens, set me free; I shall go to the
Louvre and strangle Mazarin. You shall be my body-guard. I will make
you all captains, with good pensions! Odds fish! On! march forward!”

But eloquent as he might be, the eloquence of the grandson of Henry IV.
did not touch those hearts of stone; not one man stirred, so Monsieur
de Beaufort was obliged to be satisfied with calling them all kinds of
rascals underneath the sun.

Sometimes, when Monsieur de Chavigny paid him a visit, the duke used to
ask him what he should think if he saw an army of Parisians, all fully
armed, appear at Vincennes to deliver him from prison.

“My lord,” answered De Chavigny, with a low bow, “I have on the
ramparts twenty pieces of artillery and in my casemates thirty thousand
guns. I should bombard the troops till not one grain of gunpowder was
unexploded.”

“Yes, but after you had fired off your thirty thousand guns they would
take the donjon; the donjon being taken, I should be obliged to let
them hang you—at which I should be most unhappy, certainly.”

And in his turn the duke bowed low to Monsieur de Chavigny.

“For myself, on the other hand, my lord,” returned the governor, “when
the first rebel should pass the threshold of my postern doors I should
be obliged to kill you with my own hand, since you were confided
peculiarly to my care and as I am obliged to give you up, dead or
alive.”

And once more he bowed low before his highness.

These bitter-sweet pleasantries lasted ten minutes, sometimes longer,
but always finished thus:

Monsieur de Chavigny, turning toward the door, used to call out:
“Halloo! La Ramee!”

La Ramee came into the room.

“La Ramee, I recommend Monsieur le Duc to you, particularly; treat him
as a man of his rank and family ought to be treated; that is, never
leave him alone an instant.”

La Ramee became, therefore, the duke’s dinner guest by compulsion—an
eternal keeper, the shadow of his person; but La Ramee—gay, frank,
convivial, fond of play, a great hand at tennis, had one defect in the
duke’s eyes—his incorruptibility.

Now, although La Ramee appreciated, as of a certain value, the honor of
being shut up with a prisoner of so great importance, still the
pleasure of living in intimacy with the grandson of Henry IV. hardly
compensated for the loss of that which he had experienced in going from
time to time to visit his family.

One may be a jailer or a keeper and at the same time a good father and
husband. La Ramee adored his wife and children, whom now he could only
catch a glimpse of from the top of the wall, when in order to please
him they used to walk on the opposite side of the moat. ’Twas too brief
an enjoyment, and La Ramee felt that the gayety of heart he had
regarded as the cause of health (of which it was perhaps rather the
result) would not long survive such a mode of life.

He accepted, therefore, with delight, an offer made to him by his
friend the steward of the Duc de Grammont, to give him a substitute; he
also spoke of it to Monsieur de Chavigny, who promised that he would
not oppose it in any way—that is, if he approved of the person
proposed.

We consider it useless to draw a physical or moral portrait of Grimaud;
if, as we hope, our readers have not wholly forgotten the first part of
this work, they must have preserved a clear idea of that estimable
individual, who is wholly unchanged, except that he is twenty years
older, an advance in life that has made him only more silent; although,
since the change that had been working in himself, Athos had given
Grimaud permission to speak.

But Grimaud had for twelve or fifteen years preserved habitual silence,
and a habit of fifteen or twenty years’ duration becomes second nature.




Chapter XVIII.
Grimaud begins his Functions.


Grimaud thereupon presented himself with his smooth exterior at the
donjon of Vincennes. Now Monsieur de Chavigny piqued himself on his
infallible penetration; for that which almost proved that he was the
son of Richelieu was his everlasting pretension; he examined
attentively the countenance of the applicant for place and fancied that
the contracted eyebrows, thin lips, hooked nose, and prominent
cheek-bones of Grimaud were favorable signs. He addressed about twelve
words to him; Grimaud answered in four.

“Here’s a promising fellow and it is I who have found out his merits,”
said Monsieur de Chavigny. “Go,” he added, “and make yourself agreeable
to Monsieur la Ramee, and tell him that you suit me in all respects.”

Grimaud had every quality that could attract a man on duty who wishes
to have a deputy. So, after a thousand questions which met with only a
word in reply, La Ramee, fascinated by this sobriety in speech, rubbed
his hands and engaged Grimaud.

“My orders?” asked Grimaud.

“They are these; never to leave the prisoner alone; to keep away from
him every pointed or cutting instrument, and to prevent his conversing
any length of time with the keepers.”

“Those are all?” asked Grimaud.

“All now,” replied La Ramee.

“Good,” answered Grimaud; and he went right to the prisoner.

The duke was in the act of combing his beard, which he had allowed to
grow, as well as his hair, in order to reproach Mazarin with his
wretched appearance and condition. But having some days previously seen
from the top of the donjon Madame de Montbazon pass in her carriage,
and still cherishing an affection for that beautiful woman, he did not
wish to be to her what he wished to be to Mazarin, and in the hope of
seeing her again, had asked for a leaden comb, which was allowed him.
The comb was to be a leaden one, because his beard, like that of most
fair people, was rather red; he therefore dyed it thus whilst combing
it.

As Grimaud entered he saw this comb on the tea-table; he took it up,
and as he took it he made a low bow.

The duke looked at this strange figure with surprise. The figure put
the comb in its pocket.

“Ho! hey! what’s that?” cried the duke. “Who is this creature?”

Grimaud did not answer, but bowed a second time.

“Art thou dumb?” cried the duke.

Grimaud made a sign that he was not.

“What art thou, then? Answer! I command thee!” said the duke.

“A keeper,” replied Grimaud.

“A keeper!” reiterated the duke; “there was nothing wanting in my
collection, except this gallows-bird. Halloo! La Ramee! some one!”

La Ramee ran in haste to obey the call.

“Who is this wretch who takes my comb and puts it in his pocket?” asked
the duke.

“One of your guards, my prince; a man of talent and merit, whom you
will like, as I and Monsieur de Chavigny do, I am sure.”

“Why does he take my comb?”

“Why do you take my lord’s comb?” asked La Ramee.

Grimaud drew the comb from his pocket and passing his fingers over the
largest teeth, pronounced this one word, “Pointed.”

“True,” said La Ramee.

“What does the animal say?” asked the duke.

“That the king has forbidden your lordship to have any pointed
instrument.”

“Are you mad, La Ramee? You yourself gave me this comb.”

“I was very wrong, my lord, for in giving it to you I acted in
opposition to my orders.”

The duke looked furiously at Grimaud.

“I perceive that this creature will be my particular aversion,” he
muttered.

Grimaud, nevertheless, was resolved for certain reasons not at once to
come to a full rupture with the prisoner; he wanted to inspire, not a
sudden repugnance, but a good, sound, steady hatred; he retired,
therefore, and gave place to four guards, who, having breakfasted,
could attend on the prisoner.

A fresh practical joke now occurred to the duke. He had asked for
crawfish for his breakfast on the following morning; he intended to
pass the day in making a small gallows and hang one of the finest of
these fish in the middle of his room—the red color evidently conveying
an allusion to the cardinal—so that he might have the pleasure of
hanging Mazarin in effigy without being accused of having hung anything
more significant than a crawfish.

The day was employed in preparations for the execution. Every one grows
childish in prison, but the character of Monsieur de Beaufort was
particularly disposed to become so. In the course of his morning’s walk
he collected two or three small branches from a tree and found a small
piece of broken glass, a discovery that quite delighted him. When he
came home he formed his handkerchief into a loop.

Nothing of all this escaped Grimaud, but La Ramee looked on with the
curiosity of a father who thinks that he may perhaps get a cheap idea
concerning a new toy for his children. The guards looked on it with
indifference. When everything was ready, the gallows hung in the middle
of the room, the loop made, and when the duke had cast a glance upon
the plate of crawfish, in order to select the finest specimen among
them, he looked around for his piece of glass; it had disappeared.

“Who has taken my piece of glass?” asked the duke, frowning. Grimaud
made a sign to denote that he had done so.

“What! thou again! Why didst thou take it?”

“Yes—why?” asked La Ramee.

Grimaud, who held the piece of glass in his hand, said: “Sharp.”

“True, my lord!” exclaimed La Ramee. “Ah! deuce take it! we have a
precious fellow here!”

“Monsieur Grimaud!” said the duke, “for your sake I beg of you, never
come within the reach of my fist!”

“Hush! hush!” cried La Ramee, “give me your gibbet, my lord. I will
shape it out for you with my knife.”

And he took the gibbet and shaped it out as neatly as possible.

“That’s it,” said the duke, “now make me a little hole in the floor
whilst I go and fetch the culprit.”

La Ramee knelt down and made a hole in the floor; meanwhile the duke
hung the crawfish up by a thread. Then he placed the gibbet in the
middle of the room, bursting with laughter.

La Ramee laughed also and the guards laughed in chorus; Grimaud,
however, did not even smile. He approached La Ramee and showing him the
crawfish hung up by the thread:

“Cardinal,” he said.

“Hung by order of his Highness the Duc de Beaufort!” cried the
prisoner, laughing violently, “and by Master Jacques Chrysostom La
Ramee, the king’s commissioner.”

La Ramee uttered a cry of horror and rushed toward the gibbet, which he
broke at once and threw the pieces out of the window. He was going to
throw the crawfish out also, when Grimaud snatched it from his hands.

“Good to eat!” he said, and put it in his pocket.

This scene so enchanted the duke that at the moment he forgave Grimaud
for his part in it; but on reflection he hated him more and more, being
convinced he had some evil motive for his conduct.

But the story of the crab made a great noise through the interior of
the donjon and even outside. Monsieur de Chavigny, who at heart
detested the cardinal, took pains to tell the story to two or three
friends, who put it into immediate circulation.

The prisoner happened to remark among the guards one man with a very
good countenance; and he favored this man the more as Grimaud became
the more and more odious to him. One morning he took this man on one
side and had succeeded in speaking to him, when Grimaud entered and
seeing what was going on approached the duke respectfully, but took the
guard by the arm.

“Go away,” he said.

The guard obeyed.

“You are insupportable!” cried the duke; “I shall beat you.”

Grimaud bowed.

“I will break every bone in your body!” cried the duke.

Grimaud bowed, but stepped back.

“Mr. Spy,” cried the duke, more and more enraged, “I will strangle you
with my own hands.”

And he extended his hands toward Grimaud, who merely thrust the guard
out and shut the door behind him. At the same time he felt the duke’s
arms on his shoulders like two iron claws; but instead either of
calling out or defending himself, he placed his forefinger on his lips
and said in a low tone:

“Hush!” smiling as he uttered the word.

A gesture, a smile and a word from Grimaud, all at once, were so
unusual that his highness stopped short, astounded.

Grimaud took advantage of that instant to draw from his vest a charming
little note with an aristocratic seal, and presented it to the duke
without a word.

The duke, more and more bewildered, let Grimaud loose and took the
note.

“From Madame de Montbazon?” he cried.

Grimaud nodded assent.

The duke tore open the note, passed his hands over his eyes, for he was
dazzled and confused, and read:

“My Dear Duke,—You may entirely confide in the brave lad who will give
you this note; he has consented to enter the service of your keeper and
to shut himself up at Vincennes with you, in order to prepare and
assist your escape, which we are contriving. The moment of your
deliverance is at hand; have patience and courage and remember that in
spite of time and absence all your friends continue to cherish for you
the sentiments they have so long professed and truly entertained.

“Yours wholly and most affectionately

“Marie de Montbazon.

“P.S.—I sign my full name, for I should be vain if I could suppose that
after five years of absence you would remember my initials.”

The poor duke became perfectly giddy. What for five years he had been
wanting—a faithful servant, a friend, a helping hand—seemed to have
fallen from Heaven just when he expected it the least.

“Oh, dearest Marie! she thinks of me, then, after five years of
separation! Heavens! there is constancy!” Then turning to Grimaud, he
said:

“And thou, my brave fellow, thou consentest thus to aid me?”

Grimaud signified his assent.

“And you have come here with that purpose?”

Grimaud repeated the sign.

“And I was ready to strangle you!” cried the duke.

Grimaud smiled.

“Wait, then,” said the duke, fumbling in his pocket. “Wait,” he
continued, renewing his fruitless search; “it shall not be said that
such devotion to a grandson of Henry IV. went without recompense.”

The duke’s endeavors evinced the best intention in the world, but one
of the precautions taken at Vincennes was that of allowing prisoners to
keep no money. Whereupon Grimaud, observing the duke’s disappointment,
drew from his pocket a purse filled with gold and handed it to him.

“Here is what you are looking for,” he said.

The duke opened the purse and wanted to empty it into Grimaud’s hands,
but Grimaud shook his head.

“Thank you, monseigneur,” he said, drawing back; “I am paid.”

The duke went from one surprise to another. He held out his hand.
Grimaud drew near and kissed it respectfully. The grand manner of Athos
had left its mark on Grimaud.

“What shall we do? and when? and how proceed?”

“It is now eleven,” answered Grimaud. “Let my lord at two o’clock ask
leave to make up a game at tennis with La Ramee and let him send two or
three balls over the ramparts.”

“And then?”

“Your highness will approach the walls and call out to a man who works
in the moat to send them back again.”

“I understand,” said the duke.

Grimaud made a sign that he was going away.

“Ah!” cried the duke, “will you not accept any money from me?”

“I wish my lord would make me one promise.”

“What! speak!”

“’Tis this: when we escape together, that I shall go everywhere and be
always first; for if my lord should be overtaken and caught, there’s
every chance of his being brought back to prison, whereas if I am
caught the least that can befall me is to be—hung.”

“True, on my honor as a gentleman it shall be as thou dost suggest.”

“Now,” resumed Grimaud, “I’ve only one thing more to ask—that your
highness will continue to detest me.”

“I’ll try,” said the duke.

At this moment La Ramee, after the interview we have described with the
cardinal, entered the room. The duke had thrown himself, as he was wont
to do in moments of dullness and vexation, on his bed. La Ramee cast an
inquiring look around him and observing the same signs of antipathy
between the prisoner and his guardian he smiled in token of his inward
satisfaction. Then turning to Grimaud:

“Very good, my friend, very good. You have been spoken of in a
promising quarter and you will soon, I hope, have news that will be
agreeable to you.”

Grimaud saluted in his politest manner and withdrew, as was his custom
on the entrance of his superior.

“Well, my lord,” said La Ramee, with his rude laugh, “you still set
yourself against this poor fellow?”

“So! ’tis you, La Ramee; in faith, ’tis time you came back again. I
threw myself on the bed and turned my nose to the wall, that I mightn’t
break my promise and strangle Grimaud.”

“I doubt, however,” said La Ramee, in sprightly allusion to the silence
of his subordinate, “if he has said anything disagreeable to your
highness.”

“Pardieu! you are right—a mute from the East! I swear it was time for
you to come back, La Ramee, and I was eager to see you again.”

“Monseigneur is too good,” said La Ramee, flattered by the compliment.

“Yes,” continued the duke, “really, I feel bored today beyond the power
of description.”

“Then let us have a match in the tennis court,” exclaimed La Ramee.

“If you wish it.”

“I am at your service, my lord.”

“I protest, my dear La Ramee,” said the duke, “that you are a charming
fellow and that I would stay forever at Vincennes to have the pleasure
of your society.”

“My lord,” replied La Ramee, “I think if it depended on the cardinal
your wishes would be fulfilled.”

“What do you mean? Have you seen him lately?”

“He sent for me to-day.”

“Really! to speak to you about me?”

“Of what else do you imagine he would speak to me? Really, my lord, you
are his nightmare.”

The duke smiled with bitterness.

“Ah, La Ramee! if you would but accept my offers! I would make your
fortune.”

“How? you would no sooner have left prison than your goods would be
confiscated.”

“I shall no sooner be out of prison than I shall be master of Paris.”

“Pshaw! pshaw! I cannot hear such things said as that; this is a fine
conversation with an officer of the king! I see, my lord, I shall be
obliged to fetch a second Grimaud!”

“Very well, let us say no more about it. So you and the cardinal have
been talking about me? La Ramee, some day when he sends for you, you
must let me put on your clothes; I will go in your stead; I will
strangle him, and upon my honor, if that is made a condition I will
return to prison.”

“Monseigneur, I see well that I must call Grimaud.”

“Well, I am wrong. And what did the cuistre [pettifogger] say about
me?”

“I admit the word, monseigneur, because it rhymes with ministre
[minister]. What did he say to me? He told me to watch you.”

“And why so? why watch me?” asked the duke uneasily.

“Because an astrologer had predicted that you would escape.”

“Ah! an astrologer predicted that?” said the duke, starting in spite of
himself.

“Oh, mon Dieu! yes! those imbeciles of magicians can only imagine
things to torment honest people.”

“And what did you reply to his most illustrious eminence?”

“That if the astrologer in question made almanacs I would advise him
not to buy one.”

“Why not?”

“Because before you could escape you would have to be turned into a
bird.”

“Unfortunately, that is true. Let us go and have a game at tennis, La
Ramee.”

“My lord—I beg your highness’s pardon—but I must beg for half an hour’s
leave of absence.”

“Why?”

“Because Monseigneur Mazarin is a prouder man than his highness, though
not of such high birth: he forgot to ask me to breakfast.”

“Well, shall I send for some breakfast here?”

“No, my lord; I must tell you that the confectioner who lived opposite
the castle—Daddy Marteau, as they called him——”

“Well?”

“Well, he sold his business a week ago to a confectioner from Paris, an
invalid, ordered country air for his health.”

“Well, what have I to do with that?”

“Why, good Lord! this man, your highness, when he saw me stop before
his shop, where he has a display of things which would make your mouth
water, my lord, asked me to get him the custom of the prisoners in the
donjon. ‘I bought,’ said he, ‘the business of my predecessor on the
strength of his assurance that he supplied the castle; whereas, on my
honor, Monsieur de Chavigny, though I’ve been here a week, has not
ordered so much as a tartlet.’ ‘But,’ I then replied, ‘probably
Monsieur de Chavigny is afraid your pastry is not good.’ ‘My pastry not
good! Well, Monsieur La Ramee, you shall judge of it yourself and at
once.’ ‘I cannot,’ I replied; ‘it is absolutely necessary for me to
return to the chateau.’ ‘Very well,’ said he, ‘go and attend to your
affairs, since you seem to be in a hurry, but come back in half an
hour.’ ‘In half an hour?’ ‘Yes, have you breakfasted?’ ‘Faith, no.’
‘Well, here is a pate that will be ready for you, with a bottle of old
Burgundy.’ So, you see, my lord, since I am hungry, I would, with your
highness’s leave——” And La Ramee bent low.

“Go, then, animal,” said the duke; “but remember, I only allow you half
an hour.”

“May I promise your custom to the successor of Father Marteau, my
lord?”

“Yes, if he does not put mushrooms in his pies; thou knowest that
mushrooms from the wood of Vincennes are fatal to my family.”

La Ramee went out, but in five minutes one of the officers of the guard
entered in compliance with the strict orders of the cardinal that the
prisoner should never be left alone a moment.

But during these five minutes the duke had had time to read again the
note from Madame de Montbazon, which proved to the prisoner that his
friends were concerting plans for his deliverance, but in what way he
knew not.

But his confidence in Grimaud, whose petty persecutions he now
perceived were only a blind, increased, and he conceived the highest
opinion of his intellect and resolved to trust entirely to his
guidance.




Chapter XIX.
Pâtés made by the Successor of Father Marteau are described.


In half an hour La Ramee returned, full of glee, like most men who have
eaten, and more especially drank to their heart’s content. The pates
were excellent, the wine delicious.

The weather was fine and the game at tennis took place in the open air.

At two o’clock the tennis balls began, according to Grimaud’s
directions, to take the direction of the moat, much to the joy of La
Ramee, who marked fifteen whenever the duke sent a ball into the moat;
and very soon balls were wanting, so many had gone over. La Ramee then
proposed to send some one to pick them up, but the duke remarked that
it would be losing time; and going near the rampart himself and looking
over, he saw a man working in one of the numerous little gardens
cleared out by the peasants on the opposite side of the moat.

“Hey, friend!” cried the duke.

The man raised his head and the duke was about to utter a cry of
surprise. The peasant, the gardener, was Rochefort, whom he believed to
be in the Bastile.

“Well? Who’s up there?” said the man.

“Be so good as to collect and throw us back our balls,” said the duke.

The gardener nodded and began to fling up the balls, which were picked
up by La Ramee and the guard. One, however, fell at the duke’s feet,
and seeing that it was intended for him, he put it into his pocket.

La Ramee was in ecstasies at having beaten a prince of the blood.

The duke went indoors and retired to bed, where he spent, indeed, the
greater part of every day, as they had taken his books away. La Ramee
carried off all his clothes, in order to be certain that the duke would
not stir. However, the duke contrived to hide the ball under his
bolster and as soon as the door was closed he tore off the cover of the
ball with his teeth and found underneath the following letter:

My Lord,—Your friends are watching over you and the hour of your
deliverance is at hand. Ask day after to-morrow to have a pie supplied
you by the new confectioner opposite the castle, and who is no other
than Noirmont, your former maitre d’hotel. Do not open the pie till you
are alone. I hope you will be satisfied with its contents.

“Your highness’s most devoted servant,

“In the Bastile, as elsewhere,

“Comte de Rochefort.”

The duke, who had latterly been allowed a fire, burned the letter, but
kept the ball, and went to bed, hiding the ball under his bolster. La
Ramee entered; he smiled kindly on the prisoner, for he was an
excellent man and had taken a great liking for the captive prince. He
endeavored to cheer him up in his solitude.

“Ah, my friend!” cried the duke, “you are so good; if I could but do as
you do, and eat pates and drink Burgundy at the house of Father
Marteau’s successor.”

“’Tis true, my lord,” answered La Ramee, “that his pates are famous and
his wine magnificent.”

“In any case,” said the duke, “his cellar and kitchen might easily
excel those of Monsieur de Chavigny.”

“Well, my lord,” said La Ramee, falling into the trap, “what is there
to prevent your trying them? Besides, I have promised him your
patronage.”

“You are right,” said the duke. “If I am to remain here permanently, as
Monsieur Mazarin has kindly given me to understand, I must provide
myself with a diversion for my old age, I must turn gourmand.”

“My lord,” said La Ramee, “if you will take a bit of good advice, don’t
put that off till you are old.”

“Good!” said the Duc de Beaufort to himself, “every man in order that
he may lose his heart and soul, must receive from celestial bounty one
of the seven capital sins, perhaps two; it seems that Master La Ramee’s
is gluttony. Let us then take advantage of it.” Then, aloud:

“Well, my dear La Ramee! the day after to-morrow is a holiday.”

“Yes, my lord—Pentecost.”

“Will you give me a lesson the day after to-morrow?”

“In what?”

“In gastronomy?”

“Willingly, my lord.”

“But tete-a-tete. Send the guards to take their meal in the canteen of
Monsieur de Chavigny; we’ll have a supper here under your direction.”

“Hum!” said La Ramee.

The proposal was seductive, but La Ramee was an old stager, acquainted
with all the traps a prisoner was likely to set. Monsieur de Beaufort
had said that he had forty ways of getting out of prison. Did this
proposed breakfast cover some stratagem? He reflected, but he
remembered that he himself would have charge of the food and the wine
and therefore that no powder could be mixed with the food, no drug with
the wine. As to getting him drunk, the duke couldn’t hope to do that,
and he laughed at the mere thought of it. Then an idea came to him
which harmonized everything.

The duke had followed with anxiety La Ramee’s unspoken soliloquy,
reading it from point to point upon his face. But presently the
exempt’s face suddenly brightened.

“Well,” he asked, “that will do, will it not?”

“Yes, my lord, on one condition.”

“What?”

“That Grimaud shall wait on us at table.”

Nothing could be more agreeable to the duke, however, he had presence
of mind enough to exclaim:

“To the devil with your Grimaud! He will spoil the feast.”

“I will direct him to stand behind your chair, and since he doesn’t
speak, your highness will neither see nor hear him and with a little
effort can imagine him a hundred miles away.”

“Do you know, my friend, I find one thing very evident in all this, you
distrust me.”

“My lord, the day after to-morrow is Pentecost.”

“Well, what is Pentecost to me? Are you afraid that the Holy Spirit
will come as a tongue of fire to open the doors of my prison?”

“No, my lord; but I have already told you what that damned magician
predicted.”

“And what was it?”

“That the day of Pentecost would not pass without your highness being
out of Vincennes.”

“You believe in sorcerers, then, you fool?”

“I—-I mind them no more than that——” and he snapped his fingers; “but
it is my Lord Giulio who cares about them; as an Italian he is
superstitious.”

The duke shrugged his shoulders.

“Well, then,” with well acted good-humor, “I allow Grimaud, but no one
else; you must manage it all. Order whatever you like for supper—the
only thing I specify is one of those pies; and tell the confectioner
that I will promise him my custom if he excels this time in his
pies—not only now, but when I leave my prison.”

“Then you think you will some day leave it?” said La Ramee.

“The devil!” replied the prince; “surely, at the death of Mazarin. I am
fifteen years younger than he is. At Vincennes, ’tis true, one lives
faster——”

“My lord,” replied La Ramee, “my lord——”

“Or dies sooner, for it comes to the same thing.”

La Ramee was going out. He stopped, however, at the door for an
instant.

“Whom does your highness wish me to send to you?”

“Any one, except Grimaud.”

“The officer of the guard, then, with his chessboard?”

“Yes.”

Five minutes afterward the officer entered and the duke seemed to be
immersed in the sublime combinations of chess.

A strange thing is the mind, and it is wonderful what revolutions may
be wrought in it by a sign, a word, a hope. The duke had been five
years in prison, and now to him, looking back upon them, those five
years, which had passed so slowly, seemed not so long a time as were
the two days, the forty-eight hours, which still parted him from the
time fixed for his escape. Besides, there was one thing that engaged
his most anxious thought—in what way was the escape to be effected?
They had told him to hope for it, but had not told him what was to be
hidden in the mysterious pate. And what friends awaited him without? He
had friends, then, after five years in prison? If that were so he was
indeed a highly favored prince. He forgot that besides his friends of
his own sex, a woman, strange to say, had remembered him. It is true
that she had not, perhaps, been scrupulously faithful to him, but she
had remembered him; that was something.

So the duke had more than enough to think about; accordingly he fared
at chess as he had fared at tennis; he made blunder upon blunder and
the officer with whom he played found him easy game.

But his successive defeats did service to the duke in one way—they
killed time for him till eight o’clock in the evening; then would come
night, and with night, sleep. So, at least, the duke believed; but
sleep is a capricious fairy, and it is precisely when one invokes her
presence that she is most likely to keep him waiting. The duke waited
until midnight, turning on his mattress like St. Laurence on his
gridiron. Finally he slept.

But at daybreak he awoke. Wild dreams had disturbed his repose. He
dreamed that he was endowed with wings—he wished to fly away. For a
time these wings supported him, but when he reached a certain height
this new aid failed him. His wings were broken and he seemed to sink
into a bottomless abyss, whence he awoke, bathed in perspiration and
nearly as much overcome as if he had really fallen. He fell asleep
again and another vision appeared. He was in a subterranean passage by
which he was to leave Vincennes. Grimaud was walking before him with a
lantern. By degrees the passage narrowed, yet the duke continued his
course. At last it became so narrow that the fugitive tried in vain to
proceed. The sides of the walls seem to close in, even to press against
him. He made fruitless efforts to go on; it was impossible.
Nevertheless, he still saw Grimaud with his lantern in front,
advancing. He wished to call out to him but could not utter a word.
Then at the other extremity he heard the footsteps of those who were
pursuing him. These steps came on, came fast. He was discovered; all
hope of flight was gone. Still the walls seemed to be closing on him;
they appeared to be in concert with his enemies. At last he heard the
voice of La Ramee. La Ramee took his hand and laughed aloud. He was
captured again, and conducted to the low and vaulted chamber, in which
Ornano, Puylaurens, and his uncle had died. Their three graves were
there, rising above the ground, and a fourth was also there, yawning
for its ghastly tenant.

The duke was obliged to make as many efforts to awake as he had done to
go to sleep; and La Ramee found him so pale and fatigued that he
inquired whether he was ill.

“In fact,” said one of the guards who had remained in the chamber and
had been kept awake by a toothache, brought on by the dampness of the
atmosphere, “my lord has had a very restless night and two or three
times, while dreaming, he called for help.”

“What is the matter with your highness?” asked La Ramee.

“’Tis your fault, you simpleton,” answered the duke. “With your idle
nonsense yesterday about escaping, you worried me so that I dreamed
that I was trying to escape and broke my neck in doing so.”

La Ramee laughed.

“Come,” he said, “’tis a warning from Heaven. Never commit such an
imprudence as to try to escape, except in your dreams.”

“And you are right, my dear La Ramee,” said the duke, wiping away the
sweat that stood on his brow, wide awake though he was; “after this I
will think of nothing but eating and drinking.”

“Hush!” said La Ramee; and one by one he sent away the guards, on
various pretexts.

“Well?” asked the duke when they were alone.

“Well!” replied La Ramee, “your supper is ordered.”

“Ah! and what is it to be? Monsieur, my majordomo, will there be a
pie?”

“I should think so, indeed—almost as high as a tower.”

“You told him it was for me?”

“Yes, and he said he would do his best to please your highness.”

“Good!” exclaimed the duke, rubbing his hands.

“Devil take it, my lord! what a gourmand you are growing; I haven’t
seen you with so cheerful a face these five years.”

The duke saw that he had not controlled himself as he ought, but at
that moment, as if he had listened at the door and comprehended the
urgent need of diverting La Ramee’s ideas, Grimaud entered and made a
sign to La Ramee that he had something to say to him.

La Ramee drew near to Grimaud, who spoke to him in a low voice.

The duke meanwhile recovered his self-control.

“I have already forbidden that man,” he said, “to come in here without
my permission.”

“You must pardon him, my lord,” said La Ramee, “for I directed him to
come.”

“And why did you so direct when you know that he displeases me?”

“My lord will remember that it was agreed between us that he should
wait upon us at that famous supper. My lord has forgotten the supper.”

“No, but I have forgotten Monsieur Grimaud.”

“My lord understands that there can be no supper unless he is allowed
to be present.”

“Go on, then; have it your own way.”

“Come here, my lad,” said La Ramee, “and hear what I have to say.”

Grimaud approached, with a very sullen expression on his face.

La Ramee continued: “My lord has done me the honor to invite me to a
supper to-morrow en tete-a-tete.”

Grimaud made a sign which meant that he didn’t see what that had to do
with him.

“Yes, yes,” said La Ramee, “the matter concerns you, for you will have
the honor to serve us; and besides, however good an appetite we may
have and however great our thirst, there will be something left on the
plates and in the bottles, and that something will be yours.”

Grimaud bowed in thanks.

“And now,” said La Ramee, “I must ask your highness’s pardon, but it
seems that Monsieur de Chavigny is to be away for a few days and he has
sent me word that he has certain directions to give me before his
departure.”

The duke tried to exchange a glance with Grimaud, but there was no
glance in Grimaud’s eyes.

“Go, then,” said the duke, “and return as soon as possible.”

“Does your highness wish to take revenge for the game of tennis
yesterday?”

Grimaud intimated by a scarcely perceptible nod that he should consent.

“Yes,” said the duke, “but take care, my dear La Ramee, for I propose
to beat you badly.”

La Ramee went out. Grimaud looked after him, and when the door was
closed he drew out of his pocket a pencil and a sheet of paper.

“Write, my lord,” he said.

“And what?”

Grimaud dictated.

“All is ready for to-morrow evening. Keep watch from seven to nine.
Have two riding horses ready. We shall descend by the first window in
the gallery.”

“What next?”

“Sign your name, my lord.”

The duke signed.

“Now, my lord, give me, if you have not lost it, the ball—that which
contained the letter.”

The duke took it from under his pillow and gave it to Grimaud. Grimaud
gave a grim smile.

“Well?” asked the duke.

“Well, my lord, I sew up the paper in the ball and you, in your game of
tennis, will send the ball into the ditch.”

“But will it not be lost?”

“Oh no; there will be some one at hand to pick it up.”

“A gardener?”

Grimaud nodded.

“The same as yesterday?”

Another nod on the part of Grimaud.

“The Count de Rochefort?”

Grimaud nodded the third time.

“Come, now,” said the duke, “give some particulars of the plan for our
escape.”

“That is forbidden me,” said Grimaud, “until the last moment.”

“Who will be waiting for me beyond the ditch?”

“I know nothing about it, my lord.”

“But at least, if you don’t want to see me turn crazy, tell what that
famous pate will contain.”

“Two poniards, a knotted rope and a poire d’angoisse.” *

* This poire d’angoisse was a famous gag, in the form of a pear, which,
being thrust into the mouth, by the aid of a spring, dilated, so as to
distend the jaws to their greatest width.


“Yes, I understand.”

“My lord observes that there will be enough to go around.”

“We shall take to ourselves the poniards and the rope,” replied the
duke.

“And make La Ramee eat the pear,” answered Grimaud.

“My dear Grimaud, thou speakest seldom, but when thou dost, one must do
thee justice—thy words are words of gold.”




Chapter XX.
One of Marie Michon’s Adventures.


Whilst these projects were being formed by the Duc de Beaufort and
Grimaud, the Comte de la Fere and the Vicomte de Bragelonne were
entering Paris by the Rue du Faubourg Saint Marcel.

They stopped at the sign of the Fox, in the Rue du Vieux Colombier, a
tavern known for many years by Athos, and asked for two bedrooms.

“You must dress yourself, Raoul,” said Athos, “I am going to present
you to some one.”

“To-day, monsieur?” asked the young man.

“In half an hour.”

The young man bowed. Perhaps, not being endowed with the endurance of
Athos, who seemed to be made of iron, he would have preferred a bath in
the river Seine of which he had heard so much, and afterward his bed;
but the Comte de la Fere had spoken and he had no thought but to obey.

“By the way,” said Athos, “take some pains with your toilet, Raoul; I
want you to be approved.”

“I hope, sir,” replied the youth, smiling, “that there’s no idea of a
marriage for me; you know of my engagement to Louise?”

Athos, in his turn, smiled also.

“No, don’t be alarmed, although it is to a lady that I am going to
present you, and I am anxious that you should love her——”

The young man looked at the count with a certain uneasiness, but at a
smile from Athos he was quickly reassured.

“How old is she?” inquired the Vicomte de Bragelonne.

“My dear Raoul, learn, once for all, that that is a question which is
never asked. When you can find out a woman’s age by her face, it is
useless to ask it; when you cannot do so, it is indiscreet.”

“Is she beautiful?”

“Sixteen years ago she was deemed not only the prettiest, but the most
graceful woman in France.”

This reply reassured the vicomte. A woman who had been a reigning
beauty a year before he was born could not be the subject of any scheme
for him. He retired to his toilet. When he reappeared, Athos received
him with the same paternal smile as that which he had often bestowed on
D’Artagnan, but a more profound tenderness for Raoul was now visibly
impressed upon his face.

Athos cast a glance at his feet, hands and hair—those three marks of
race. The youth’s dark hair was neatly parted and hung in curls,
forming a sort of dark frame around his face; such was the fashion of
the day. Gloves of gray kid, matching the hat, well displayed the form
of a slender and elegant hand; whilst his boots, similar in color to
the hat and gloves, confined feet small as those of a boy twelve years
old.

“Come,” murmured Athos, “if she is not proud of him, she must be hard
to please.”

It was three o’clock in the afternoon. The two travelers proceeded to
the Rue Saint Dominique and stopped at the door of a magnificent hotel,
surmounted with the arms of De Luynes.

“’Tis here,” said Athos.

He entered the hotel and ascended the front steps, and addressing a
footman who waited there in a grand livery, asked if the Duchess de
Chevreuse was visible and if she could receive the Comte de la Fere?

The servant returned with a message to say, that, though the duchess
had not the honor of knowing Monsieur de la Fere, she would receive
him.

Athos followed the footman, who led him through a long succession of
apartments and paused at length before a closed door. Athos made a sign
to the Vicomte de Bragelonne to remain where he was.

The footman opened the door and announced Monsieur le Comte de la Fere.

Madame de Chevreuse, whose name appears so often in our story “The
Three Musketeers,” without her actually having appeared in any scene,
was still a beautiful woman. Although about forty-four or forty-five
years old, she might have passed for thirty-five. She still had her
rich fair hair; her large, animated, intelligent eyes, so often opened
by intrigue, so often closed by the blindness of love. She had still
her nymph-like form, so that when her back was turned she still was not
unlike the girl who had jumped, with Anne of Austria, over the moat of
the Tuileries in 1563. In all other respects she was the same mad
creature who threw over her amours such an air of originality as to
make them proverbial for eccentricity in her family.

She was in a little boudoir, hung with blue damask, adorned by red
flowers, with a foliage of gold, looking upon a garden; and reclined
upon a sofa, her head supported on the rich tapestry which covered it.
She held a book in her hand and her arm was supported by a cushion.

At the footman’s announcement she raised herself a little and peeped
out, with some curiosity.

Athos appeared.

He was dressed in violet-tinted velvet, trimmed with silk of the same
color. His shoulder-knots were of burnished silver, his mantle had no
gold nor embroidery on it; a simple plume of violet feathers adorned
his hat; his boots were of black leather, and at his girdle hung that
sword with a magnificent hilt that Porthos had so often admired in the
Rue Feron. Splendid lace adorned the falling collar of his shirt, and
lace fell also over the top of his boots.

In his whole person he bore such an impress of high degree, that Madame
de Chevreuse half rose from her seat when she saw him and made him a
sign to sit down near her.

Athos bowed and obeyed. The footman was withdrawing, but Athos stopped
him by a sign.

“Madame,” he said to the duchess, “I have had the boldness to present
myself at your hotel without being known to you; it has succeeded,
since you deign to receive me. I have now the boldness to ask you for
an interview of half an hour.”

“I grant it, monsieur,” replied Madame de Chevreuse with her most
gracious smile.

“But that is not all, madame. Oh, I am very presuming, I am aware. The
interview for which I ask is of us two alone, and I very earnestly wish
that it may not be interrupted.”

“I am not at home to any one,” said the Duchess de Chevreuse to the
footman. “You may go.”

The footman went out.

There ensued a brief silence, during which these two persons, who at
first sight recognized each other so clearly as of noble race, examined
each other without embarrassment on either side.

The duchess was the first to speak.

“Well, sir, I am waiting with impatience to hear what you wish to say
to me.”

“And I, madame,” replied Athos, “am looking with admiration.”

“Sir,” said Madame de Chevreuse, “you must excuse me, but I long to
know to whom I am talking. You belong to the court, doubtless, yet I
have never seen you at court. Have you, by any chance, been in the
Bastile?”

“No, madame, I have not; but very likely I am on the road to it.”

“Ah! then tell me who you are, and get along with you upon your
journey,” replied the duchess, with the gayety which made her so
charming, “for I am sufficiently in bad odor already, without
compromising myself still more.”

“Who I am, madame? My name has been mentioned to you—the Comte de la
Fere; you do not know that name. I once bore another, which you knew,
but you have certainly forgotten it.”

“Tell it me, sir.”

“Formerly,” said the count, “I was Athos.”

Madame de Chevreuse looked astonished. The name was not wholly
forgotten, but mixed up and confused with ancient recollections.

“Athos?” said she; “wait a moment.”

And she placed her hands on her brow, as if to force the fugitive ideas
it contained to concentration in a moment.

“Shall I help you, madame?” asked Athos.

“Yes, do,” said the duchess.

“This Athos was connected with three young musketeers, named Porthos,
D’Artagnan, and——”

He stopped short.

“And Aramis,” said the duchess, quickly.

“And Aramis; I see you have not forgotten the name.”

“No,” she said; “poor Aramis; a charming man, elegant, discreet, and a
writer of poetical verses. I am afraid he has turned out ill,” she
added.

“He has; he is an abbé.”

“Ah, what a misfortune!” exclaimed the duchess, playing carelessly with
her fan. “Indeed, sir, I thank you; you have recalled one of the most
agreeable recollections of my youth.”

“Will you permit me, then, to recall another to you?”

“Relating to him?”

“Yes and no.”

“Faith!” said Madame de Chevreuse, “say on. With a man like you I fear
nothing.”

Athos bowed. “Aramis,” he continued, “was intimate with a young
needlewoman from Tours, a cousin of his, named Marie Michon.”

“Ah, I knew her!” cried the duchess. “It was to her he wrote from the
siege of Rochelle, to warn her of a plot against the Duke of
Buckingham.”

“Exactly so; will you allow me to speak to you of her?”

“If,” replied the duchess, with a meaning look, “you do not say too
much against her.”

“I should be ungrateful,” said Athos, “and I regard ingratitude, not as
a fault or a crime, but as a vice, which is much worse.”

“You ungrateful to Marie Michon, monsieur?” said Madame de Chevreuse,
trying to read in Athos’s eyes. “But how can that be? You never knew
her.”

“Eh, madame, who knows?” said Athos. “There is a popular proverb to the
effect that it is only mountains that never meet; and popular proverbs
contain sometimes a wonderful amount of truth.”

“Oh, go on, monsieur, go on!” said Madame de Chevreuse eagerly; “you
can’t imagine how much this conversation interests me.”

“You encourage me,” said Athos, “I will continue, then. That cousin of
Aramis, that Marie Michon, that needlewoman, notwithstanding her low
condition, had acquaintances in the highest rank; she called the
grandest ladies of the court her friend, and the queen—proud as she is,
in her double character as Austrian and as Spaniard—called her her
sister.”

“Alas!” said Madame de Chevreuse, with a slight sigh and a little
movement of her eyebrows that was peculiarly her own, “since that time
everything has changed.”

“And the queen had reason for her affection, for Marie was devoted to
her—devoted to that degree that she served her as medium of intercourse
with her brother, the king of Spain.”

“Which,” interrupted the duchess, “is now brought up against her as a
great crime.”

“And therefore,” continued Athos, “the cardinal—the true cardinal, the
other one—determined one fine morning to arrest poor Marie Michon and
send her to the Chateau de Loches. Fortunately the affair was not
managed so secretly but that it became known to the queen. The case had
been provided for: if Marie Michon should be threatened with any danger
the queen was to send her a prayer-book bound in green velvet.”

“That is true, monsieur, you are well informed.”

“One morning the green book was brought to her by the Prince de
Marsillac. There was no time to lose. Happily Marie and a follower of
hers named Kitty could disguise themselves admirably in men’s clothes.
The prince procured for Marie Michon the dress of a cavalier and for
Kitty that of a lackey; he sent them two excellent horses, and the
fugitives went out hastily from Tours, shaping their course toward
Spain, trembling at the least noise, following unfrequented roads, and
asking for hospitality when they found themselves where there was no
inn.”

“Why, really, it was all exactly as you say!” cried Madame de
Chevreuse, clapping her hands. “It would indeed be strange if——” she
checked herself.

“If I should follow the two fugitives to the end of their journey?”
said Athos. “No, madame, I will not thus waste your time. We will
accompany them only to a little village in Limousin, lying between
Tulle and Angouleme—a little village called Roche-l’Abeille.”

Madame de Chevreuse uttered a cry of surprise, and looked at Athos with
an expression of astonishment that made the old musketeer smile.

“Wait, madame,” continued Athos, “what remains for me to tell you is
even more strange than what I have narrated.”

“Monsieur,” said Madame de Chevreuse, “I believe you are a sorcerer; I
am prepared for anything. But really—No matter, go on.”

“The journey of that day had been long and wearing; it was a cold day,
the eleventh of October, there was no inn or chateau in the village and
the homes of the peasants were poor and unattractive. Marie Michon was
a very aristocratic person; like her sister the queen, she had been
accustomed to pleasing perfumes and fine linen; she resolved,
therefore, to seek hospitality of the priest.”

Athos paused.

“Oh, continue!” said the duchess. “I have told you that I am prepared
for anything.”

“The two travelers knocked at the door. It was late; the priest, who
had gone to bed, cried out to them to come in. They entered, for the
door was not locked—there is much confidence among villagers. A lamp
burned in the chamber occupied by the priest. Marie Michon, who made
the most charming cavalier in the world, pushed open the door, put her
head in and asked for hospitality. ‘Willingly, my young cavalier,’ said
the priest, ‘if you will be content with the remains of my supper and
with half my chamber.’

“The two travelers consulted for a moment. The priest heard a burst of
laughter and then the master, or rather, the mistress, replied: ‘Thank
you, monsieur le curé, I accept.’ ‘Sup, then, and make as little noise
as possible,’ said the priest, ‘for I, too, have been on the go all day
and shall not be sorry to sleep to-night.’”

Madame de Chevreuse evidently went from surprise to astonishment, and
from astonishment to stupefaction. Her face, as she looked at Athos,
had taken on an expression that cannot be described. It could be seen
that she had wished to speak, but she had remained silent through fear
of losing one of her companion’s words.

“What happened then?” she asked.

“Then?” said Athos. “Ah, I have come now to what is most difficult.”

“Speak, speak! One can say anything to me. Besides, it doesn’t concern
me; it relates to Mademoiselle Marie Michon.”

“Ah, that is true,” said Athos. “Well, then, Marie Michon had supper
with her follower, and then, in accordance with the permission given
her, she entered the chamber of her host, Kitty meanwhile taking
possession of an armchair in the room first entered, where they had
taken their supper.”

“Really, monsieur,” said Madame de Chevreuse, “unless you are the devil
in person I don’t know how you could become acquainted with all these
details.”

“A charming woman was that Marie Michon,” resumed Athos, “one of those
wild creatures who are constantly conceiving the strangest ideas. Now,
thinking that her host was a priest, that coquette took it into her
head that it would be a happy souvenir for her old age, among the many
happy souvenirs she already possessed, if she could win that of having
damned an abbé.”

“Count,” said the duchess, “upon my word, you frighten me.”

“Alas!” continued Athos, “the poor abbé was not a St. Ambroise, and I
repeat, Marie Michon was an adorable creature.”

“Monsieur!” cried the duchess, seizing Athos’s hands, “tell me this
moment how you know all these details, or I will send to the convent of
the Vieux Augustins for a monk to come and exorcise you.”

Athos laughed. “Nothing is easier, madame. A cavalier, charged with an
important mission, had come an hour before your arrival, seeking
hospitality, at the very moment that the curé, summoned to the bedside
of a dying person, left not only his house but the village, for the
entire night. The priest having all confidence in his guest, who,
besides, was a nobleman, had left to him his house, his supper and his
chamber. And therefore Marie came seeking hospitality from the guest of
the good abbé and not from the good abbé himself.”

“And that cavalier, that guest, that nobleman who arrived before she
came?”

“It was I, the Comte de la Fere,” said Athos, rising and bowing
respectfully to the Duchess de Chevreuse.

The duchess remained a moment stupefied; then, suddenly bursting into
laughter:

“Ah! upon my word,” said she, “it is very droll, and that mad Marie
Michon fared better than she expected. Sit down, dear count, and go on
with your story.”

“At this point I have to accuse myself of a fault, madame. I have told
you that I was traveling on an important mission. At daybreak I left
the chamber without noise, leaving my charming companion asleep. In the
front room the follower was also still asleep, her head leaning back on
the chair, in all respects worthy of her mistress. Her pretty face
arrested my attention; I approached and recognized that little Kitty
whom our friend Aramis had placed with her. In that way I discovered
that the charming traveler was——”

“Marie Michon!” said Madame de Chevreuse, hastily.

“Marie Michon,” continued Athos. “Then I went out of the house; I
proceeded to the stable and found my horse saddled and my lackey ready.
We set forth on our journey.”

“And have you never revisited that village?” eagerly asked Madame de
Chevreuse.

“A year after, madame.”

“Well?”

“I wanted to see the good curé again. I found him much preoccupied with
an event that he could not at all comprehend. A week before he had
received, in a cradle, a beautiful little boy three months old, with a
purse filled with gold and a note containing these simple words: ‘11
October, 1633.’”

“It was the date of that strange adventure,” interrupted Madame de
Chevreuse.

“Yes, but he couldn’t understand what it meant, for he had spent that
night with a dying person and Marie Michon had left his house before
his return.”

“You must know, monsieur, that Marie Michon, when she returned to
France in 1643, immediately sought for information about that child; as
a fugitive she could not take care of it, but on her return she wished
to have it near her.”

“And what said the abbé?” asked Athos.

“That a nobleman whom he did not know had wished to take charge of it,
had answered for its future, and had taken it away.”

“That was true.”

“Ah! I see! That nobleman was you; it was his father!”

“Hush! do not speak so loud, madame; he is there.”

“He is there! my son! the son of Marie Michon! But I must see him
instantly.”

“Take care, madame,” said Athos, “for he knows neither his father nor
his mother.”

“You have kept the secret! you have brought him to see me, thinking to
make me happy. Oh, thanks! sir, thanks!” cried Madame de Chevreuse,
seizing his hand and trying to put it to her lips; “you have a noble
heart.”

“I bring him to you, madame,” said Athos, withdrawing his hand, “hoping
that in your turn you will do something for him; till now I have
watched over his education and I have made him, I hope, an accomplished
gentleman; but I am now obliged to return to the dangerous and
wandering life of party faction. To-morrow I plunge into an adventurous
affair in which I may be killed. Then it will devolve on you to push
him on in that world where he is called on to occupy a place.”

“Rest assured,” cried the duchess, “I shall do what I can. I have but
little influence now, but all that I have shall most assuredly be his.
As to his title and fortune——”

“As to that, madame, I have made over to him the estate of Bragelonne,
my inheritance, which will give him ten thousand francs a year and the
title of vicomte.”

“Upon my soul, monsieur,” said the duchess, “you are a true nobleman!
But I am eager to see our young vicomte. Where is he?”

“There, in the salon. I will have him come in, if you really wish it.”

Athos moved toward the door; the duchess held him back.

“Is he handsome?” she asked.

Athos smiled.

“He resembles his mother.”

So he opened the door and beckoned the young man in.

The duchess could not restrain a cry of joy on seeing so handsome a
young cavalier, so far surpassing all that her maternal pride had been
able to conceive.

“Vicomte, come here,” said Athos; “the duchess permits you to kiss her
hand.”

The youth approached with his charming smile and his head bare, and
kneeling down, kissed the hand of the Duchess de Chevreuse.

“Sir,” he said, turning to Athos, “was it not in compassion to my
timidity that you told me that this lady was the Duchess de Chevreuse,
and is she not the queen?”

“No, vicomte,” said Madame de Chevreuse, taking his hand and making him
sit near her, while she looked at him with eyes sparkling with
pleasure; “no, unhappily, I am not the queen. If I were I should do for
you at once the most that you deserve. But let us see; whatever I may
be,” she added, hardly restraining herself from kissing that pure brow,
“let us see what profession you wish to follow.”

Athos, standing, looked at them both with indescribable pleasure.

“Madame,” answered the youth in his sweet voice, “it seems to me that
there is only one career for a gentleman—that of the army. I have been
brought up by monsieur le comte with the intention, I believe, of
making me a soldier; and he gave me reason to hope that at Paris he
would present me to some one who would recommend me to the favor of the
prince.”

“Yes, I understand it well. Personally, I am on bad terms with him, on
account of the quarrels between Madame de Montbazon, my mother-in-law,
and Madame de Longueville. But the Prince de Marsillac! Yes, indeed,
that’s the right thing. The Prince de Marsillac—my old friend—will
recommend our young friend to Madame de Longueville, who will give him
a letter to her brother, the prince, who loves her too tenderly not to
do what she wishes immediately.”

“Well, that will do charmingly,” said the count; “but may I beg that
the greatest haste may be made, for I have reasons for wishing the
vicomte not to sleep longer than to-morrow night in Paris!”

“Do you wish it known that you are interested about him, monsieur le
comte?”

“Better for him in future that he should be supposed never to have seen
me.”

“Oh, sir!” cried Raoul.

“You know, Bragelonne,” said Athos, “I never speak without reflection.”

“Well, comte, I am going instantly,” interrupted the duchess, “to send
for the Prince de Marsillac, who is happily, in Paris just now. What
are you going to do this evening?”

“We intend to visit the Abbé Scarron, for whom I have a letter of
introduction and at whose house I expect to meet some of my friends.”

“’Tis well; I will go there also, for a few minutes,” said the duchess;
“do not quit his salon until you have seen me.”

Athos bowed and prepared to leave.

“Well, monsieur le comte,” said the duchess, smiling, “does one leave
so solemnly his old friends?”

“Ah,” murmured Athos, kissing her hand, “had I only sooner known that
Marie Michon was so charming a creature!” And he withdrew, sighing.




Chapter XXI.
The Abbé Scarron.


There was once in the Rue des Tournelles a house known by all the sedan
chairmen and footmen of Paris, and yet, nevertheless, this house was
neither that of a great lord nor of a rich man. There was neither
dining, nor playing at cards, nor dancing in that house. Nevertheless,
it was the rendezvous of the great world and all Paris went there. It
was the abode of the little Abbé Scarron.

In the home of the witty abbé dwelt incessant laughter; there all the
items of the day had their source and were so quickly transformed,
misrepresented, metamorphosed, some into epigrams, some into
falsehoods, that every one was anxious to pass an hour with little
Scarron, listening to what he said, reporting it to others.

The diminutive Abbé Scarron, who, however, was an abbé only because he
owned an abbey, and not because he was in orders, had formerly been one
of the gayest prebendaries in the town of Mans, which he inhabited. On
a day of the carnival he had taken a notion to provide an unusual
entertainment for that good town, of which he was the life and soul. He
had made his valet cover him with honey; then, opening a feather bed,
he had rolled in it and had thus become the most grotesque fowl it is
possible to imagine. He then began to visit his friends of both sexes,
in that strange costume. At first he had been followed through
astonishment, then with derisive shouts, then the porters had insulted
him, then children had thrown stones at him, and finally he was obliged
to run, to escape the missiles. As soon as he took to flight every one
pursued him, until, pressed on all sides, Scarron found no way of
escaping his escort, except by throwing himself into the river; but the
water was icy cold. Scarron was heated, the cold seized on him, and
when he reached the farther bank he found himself crippled.

Every means had been employed in vain to restore the use of his limbs.
He had been subjected to a severe disciplinary course of medicine, at
length he sent away all his doctors, declaring that he preferred the
disease to the treatment, and came to Paris, where the fame of his wit
had preceded him. There he had a chair made on his own plan, and one
day, visiting Anne of Austria in this chair, she asked him, charmed as
she was with his wit, if he did not wish for a title.

“Yes, your majesty, there is a title which I covet much,” replied
Scarron.

“And what is that?”

“That of being your invalid,” answered Scarron.

So he was called the queen’s invalid, with a pension of fifteen hundred
francs.

From that lucky moment Scarron led a happy life, spending both income
and principal. One day, however, an emissary of the cardinal’s gave him
to understand that he was wrong in receiving the coadjutor so often.

“And why?” asked Scarron; “is he not a man of good birth?”

“Certainly.”

“Agreeable?”

“Undeniably.”

“Witty?”

“He has, unfortunately, too much wit.”

“Well, then, why do you wish me to give up seeing such a man?”

“Because he is an enemy.”

“Of whom?”

“Of the cardinal.”

“What?” answered Scarron, “I continue to receive Monsieur Gilles
Despreaux, who thinks ill of me, and you wish me to give up seeing the
coadjutor, because he thinks ill of another man. Impossible!”

The conversation had rested there and Scarron, through sheer obstinacy,
had seen Monsieur de Gondy only the more frequently.

Now, the very morning of which we speak was that of his quarter-day
payment, and Scarron, as usual, had sent his servant to get his money
at the pension-office, but the man had returned and said that the
government had no more money to give Monsieur Scarron.

It was on Thursday, the abbé’s reception day; people went there in
crowds. The cardinal’s refusal to pay the pension was known about the
town in half an hour and he was abused with wit and vehemence.

In the Rue Saint Honore Athos fell in with two gentlemen whom he did
not know, on horseback like himself, followed by a lackey like himself,
and going in the same direction that he was. One of them, hat in hand,
said to him:

“Would you believe it, monsieur? that contemptible Mazarin has stopped
poor Scarron’s pension.”

“That is unreasonable,” said Athos, saluting in his turn the two
cavaliers. And they separated with courteous gestures.

“It happens well that we are going there this evening,” said Athos to
the vicomte; “we will pay our compliments to that poor man.”

“What, then, is this Monsieur Scarron, who thus puts all Paris in
commotion? Is he some minister out of office?”

“Oh, no, not at all, vicomte,” Athos replied; “he is simply a gentleman
of great genius who has fallen into disgrace with the cardinal through
having written certain verses against him.”

“Do gentlemen, then, make verses?” asked Raoul, naively, “I thought it
was derogatory.”

“So it is, my dear vicomte,” said Athos, laughing, “to make bad ones;
but to make good ones increases fame—witness Monsieur de Rotrou.
Nevertheless,” he continued, in the tone of one who gives wholesome
advice, “I think it is better not to make them.”

“Then,” said Raoul, “this Monsieur Scarron is a poet?”

“Yes; you are warned, vicomte. Consider well what you do in that house.
Talk only by gestures, or rather always listen.”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied Raoul.

“You will see me talking with one of my friends, the Abbé d’Herblay, of
whom you have often heard me speak.”

“I remember him, monsieur.”

“Come near to us from time to time, as if to speak; but do not speak,
and do not listen. That little stratagem may serve to keep off
interlopers.”

“Very well, monsieur; I will obey you at all points.”

Athos made two visits in Paris; at seven o’clock he and Raoul directed
their steps to the Rue des Tournelles; it was stopped by porters,
horses and footmen. Athos forced his way through and entered, followed
by the young man. The first person that struck him on his entrance was
Aramis, planted near a great chair on castors, very large, covered with
a canopy of tapestry, under which there moved, enveloped in a quilt of
brocade, a little face, youngish, very merry, somewhat pallid, whilst
its eyes never ceased to express a sentiment at once lively,
intellectual, and amiable. This was the Abbé Scarron, always laughing,
joking, complimenting—yet suffering—and toying nervously with a small
switch.

Around this kind of rolling tent pressed a crowd of gentlemen and
ladies. The room was neatly, comfortably furnished. Large valances of
silk, embroidered with flowers of gay colors, which were rather faded,
fell from the wide windows; the fittings of the room were simple, but
in excellent taste. Two well trained servingmen were in attendance on
the company. On perceiving Athos, Aramis advanced toward him, took him
by the hand and presented him to Scarron. Raoul remained silent, for he
was not prepared for the dignity of the bel esprit.

After some minutes the door opened and a footman announced Mademoiselle
Paulet.

Athos touched the shoulder of the vicomte.

“Look at this lady, Raoul, she is an historic personage; it was to
visit her King Henry IV. was going when he was assassinated.”

Every one thronged around Mademoiselle Paulet, for she was always very
much the fashion. She was a tall woman, with a slender figure and a
forest of golden curls, such as Raphael was fond of and Titian has
painted all his Magdalens with. This fawn-colored hair, or, perhaps the
sort of ascendancy which she had over other women, gave her the name of
“La Lionne.” Mademoiselle Paulet took her accustomed seat, but before
sitting down, she cast, in all her queen-like grandeur, a look around
the room, and her eyes rested on Raoul.

Athos smiled.

“Mademoiselle Paulet has observed you, vicomte; go and bow to her;
don’t try to appear anything but what you are, a true country youth; on
no account speak to her of Henry IV.”

“When shall we two walk together?” Athos then said to Aramis.

“Presently—there are not a sufficient number of people here yet; we
shall be remarked.”

At this moment the door opened and in walked the coadjutor.

At this name every one looked around, for his was already a very
celebrated name. Athos did the same. He knew the Abbé de Gondy only by
report.

He saw a little dark man, ill made and awkward with his hands in
everything—except drawing a sword and firing a pistol—with something
haughty and contemptuous in his face.

Scarron turned around toward him and came to meet him in his chair.

“Well,” said the coadjutor, on seeing him, “you are in disgrace, then,
abbé?”

This was the orthodox phrase. It had been said that evening a hundred
times—and Scarron was at his hundredth bon mot on the subject; he was
very nearly at the end of his humoristic tether, but one despairing
effort saved him.

“Monsieur, the Cardinal Mazarin has been so kind as to think of me,” he
said.

“But how can you continue to receive us?” asked the coadjutor; “if your
income is lessened I shall be obliged to make you a canon of Notre
Dame.”

“Oh, no!” cried Scarron, “I should compromise you too much.”

“Perhaps you have resources of which we are ignorant?”

“I shall borrow from the queen.”

“But her majesty has no property,” interposed Aramis.

At this moment the door opened and Madame de Chevreuse was announced.
Every one arose. Scarron turned his chair toward the door, Raoul
blushed, Athos made a sign to Aramis, who went and hid himself in the
enclosure of a window.

In the midst of all the compliments that awaited her on her entrance,
the duchess seemed to be looking for some one; at last she found out
Raoul and her eyes sparkled; she perceived Athos and became thoughtful;
she saw Aramis in the seclusion of the window and gave a start of
surprise behind her fan.

“Apropos,” she said, as if to drive away thoughts that pursued her in
spite of herself, “how is poor Voiture, do you know, Scarron?”

“What, is Monsieur Voiture ill?” inquired a gentleman who had spoken to
Athos in the Rue Saint Honore; “what is the matter with him?”

“He was acting, but forgot to take the precaution to have a change of
linen ready after the performance,” said the coadjutor, “so he took
cold and is about to die.”

“Is he then so ill, dear Voiture?” asked Aramis, half hidden by the
window curtain.

“Die!” cried Mademoiselle Paulet, bitterly, “he! Why, he is surrounded
by sultanas, like a Turk. Madame de Saintot has hastened to him with
broth; La Renaudot warms his sheets; the Marquise de Rambouillet sends
him his tisanes.”

“You don’t like him, my dear Parthenie,” said Scarron.

“What an injustice, my dear invalid! I hate him so little that I should
be delighted to order masses for the repose of his soul.”

“You are not called ‘Lionne’ for nothing,” observed Madame de
Chevreuse, “your teeth are terrible.”

“You are unjust to a great poet, it seems to me,” Raoul ventured to
say.

“A great poet! come, one may easily see, vicomte, that you are lately
from the provinces and have never so much as seen him. A great poet! he
is scarcely five feet high.”

“Bravo bravo!” cried a tall man with an enormous mustache and a long
rapier, “bravo, fair Paulet, it is high time to put little Voiture in
his right place. For my part, I always thought his poetry detestable,
and I think I know something about poetry.”

“Who is this officer,” inquired Raoul of Athos, “who is speaking?”

“Monsieur de Scudery, the author of ‘Clelie,’ and of ‘Le Grand Cyrus,’
which were composed partly by him and partly by his sister, who is now
talking to that pretty person yonder, near Monsieur Scarron.”

Raoul turned and saw two faces just arrived. One was perfectly
charming, delicate, pensive, shaded by beautiful dark hair, and eyes
soft as velvet, like those lovely flowers, the heartsease, in which
shine out the golden petals. The other, of mature age, seemed to have
the former one under her charge, and was cold, dry and yellow—the true
type of a duenna or a devotee.

Raoul resolved not to quit the room without having spoken to the
beautiful girl with the soft eyes, who by a strange fancy, although she
bore no resemblance, reminded him of his poor little Louise, whom he
had left in the Chateau de la Valliere and whom, in the midst of all
the party, he had never for one moment quite forgotten. Meantime Aramis
had drawn near to the coadjutor, who, smiling all the while, contrived
to drop some words into his ear. Aramis, notwithstanding his
self-control, could not refrain from a slight movement of surprise.

“Laugh, then,” said Monsieur de Retz; “they are looking at us.” And
leaving Aramis he went to talk with Madame de Chevreuse, who was in the
midst of a large group.

Aramis affected a laugh, to divert the attention of certain curious
listeners, and perceiving that Athos had betaken himself to the
embrasure of a window and remained there, he proceeded to join him,
throwing out a few words carelessly as he moved through the room.

As soon as the two friends met they began a conversation which was
emphasized by frequent gesticulation.

Raoul then approached them as Athos had directed him to do.

“’Tis a rondeau by Monsieur Voiture that monsieur l’abbé is repeating
to me.” said Athos in a loud voice, “and I confess I think it
incomparable.”

Raoul stayed only a few minutes near them and then mingled with the
group round Madame de Chevreuse.

“Well, then?” asked Athos, in a low tone.

“It is to be to-morrow,” said Aramis hastily.

“At what time?”

“Six o’clock.”

“Where?”

“At Saint Mande.”

“Who told you?”

“The Count de Rochefort.”

Some one drew near.

“And then philosophic ideas are wholly wanting in Voiture’s works, but
I am of the same opinion as the coadjutor—he is a poet, a true poet.”
Aramis spoke so as to be heard by everybody.

“And I, too,” murmured the young lady with the velvet eyes. “I have the
misfortune also to admire his poetry exceedingly.”

“Monsieur Scarron, do me the honor,” said Raoul, blushing, “to tell me
the name of that young lady whose opinion seems so different from that
of others of the company.”

“Ah! my young vicomte,” replied Scarron, “I suppose you wish to propose
to her an alliance offensive and defensive.”

Raoul blushed again.

“You asked the name of that young lady. She is called the fair Indian.”

“Excuse me, sir,” returned Raoul, blushing still more deeply, “I know
no more than I did before. Alas! I am from the country.”

“Which means that you know very little about the nonsense which here
flows down our streets. So much the better, young man! so much the
better! Don’t try to understand it—you will only lose your time.”

“You forgive me, then, sir,” said Raoul, “and you will deign to tell me
who is the person that you call the young Indian?”

“Certainly; one of the most charming persons that lives—Mademoiselle
Frances d’Aubigne.”

“Does she belong to the family of the celebrated Agrippa, the friend of
Henry IV.?”

“His granddaughter. She comes from Martinique, so I call her the
beautiful Indian.”

Raoul looked surprised and his eyes met those of the young lady, who
smiled.

The company went on speaking of the poet Voiture.

“Monsieur,” said Mademoiselle d’Aubigne to Scarron, as if she wished to
join in the conversation he was engaged in with Raoul, “do you not
admire Monsieur Voiture’s friends? Listen how they pull him to pieces
even whilst they praise him; one takes away from him all claim to good
sense, another robs him of his poetry, a third of his originality,
another of his humor, another of his independence of character, a
sixth—but, good heavens! what will they leave him? as Mademoiselle de
Scudery remarks.”

Scarron and Raoul laughed. The fair Indian, astonished at the sensation
her observation produced, looked down and resumed her air of naivete.

Athos, still within the inclosure of the window, watched this scene
with a smile of disdain on his lips.

“Tell the Comte de la Fere to come to me,” said Madame de Chevreuse, “I
want to speak to him.”

“And I,” said the coadjutor, “want it to be thought that I do not speak
to him. I admire, I love him—for I know his former adventures—but I
shall not speak to him until the day after to-morrow.”

“And why day after to-morrow?” asked Madame de Chevreuse.

“You will know that to-morrow evening,” said the coadjutor, smiling.

“Really, my dear Gondy,” said the duchess, “you remind one of the
Apocalypse. Monsieur d’Herblay,” she added, turning toward Aramis,
“will you be my servant once more this evening?”

“How can you doubt it?” replied Aramis; “this evening, to-morrow,
always; command me.”

“I will, then. Go and look for the Comte de la Fere; I wish to speak
with him.”

Aramis found Athos and brought him.

“Monsieur le comte,” said the duchess, giving him a letter, “here is
what I promised you; our young friend will be extremely well received.”

“Madame, he is very happy in owing any obligation to you.”

“You have no reason to envy him on that score, for I owe to you the
pleasure of knowing him,” replied the witty woman, with a smile which
recalled Marie Michon to Aramis and to Athos.

As she uttered that bon mot, she arose and asked for her carriage.
Mademoiselle Paulet had already gone; Mademoiselle de Scudery was
going.

“Vicomte,” said Athos to Raoul, “follow the duchess; beg her to do you
the favor to take your arm in going downstairs, and thank her as you
descend.”

The fair Indian approached Scarron.

“You are going already?” he said.

“One of the last, as you see; if you hear anything of Monsieur Voiture,
be so kind as to send me word to-morrow.”

“Oh!” said Scarron, “he may die now.”

“Why?” asked the young girl with the velvet eyes.

“Certainly; his panegyric has been uttered.”

They parted, laughing, she turning back to gaze at the poor paralytic
man with interest, he looking after her with eyes of love.

One by one the several groups broke up. Scarron seemed not to observe
that certain of his guests had talked mysteriously, that letters had
passed from hand to hand and that the assembly had seemed to have a
secret purpose quite apart from the literary discussion carried on with
so much ostentation. What was all that to Scarron? At his house
rebellion could be planned with impunity, for, as we have said, since
that morning he had ceased to be “the queen’s invalid.”

As to Raoul, he had attended the duchess to her carriage, where, as she
took her seat, she gave him her hand to kiss; then, by one of those
wild caprices which made her so adorable and at the same time so
dangerous, she had suddenly put her arm around his neck and kissed his
forehead, saying:

“Vicomte, may my good wishes and this kiss bring you good fortune!”

Then she had pushed him away and directed the coachman to stop at the
Hotel de Luynes. The carriage had started, Madame de Chevreuse had made
a parting gesture to the young man, and Raoul had returned in a state
of stupefaction.

Athos surmised what had taken place and smiled. “Come, vicomte,” he
said, “it is time for you to go to bed; you will start in the morning
for the army of monsieur le prince. Sleep well your last night as
citizen.”

“I am to be a soldier then?” said the young man. “Oh, monsieur, I thank
you with all my heart.”

“Adieu, count,” said the Abbé d’Herblay; “I return to my convent.”

“Adieu, abbé,” said the coadjutor, “I am to preach to-morrow and have
twenty texts to examine this evening.”

“Adieu, gentlemen,” said the count; “I am going to sleep twenty-four
hours; I am just falling down with fatigue.”

The three men saluted one another, whilst exchanging a last look.

Scarron followed their movements with a glance from the corner of his
eye.

“Not one of them will do as he says,” he murmured, with his little
monkey smile; “but they may do as they please, the brave gentlemen! Who
knows if they will not manage to restore to me my pension? They can
move their arms, they can, and that is much. Alas, I have only my
tongue, but I will try to show that it is good for something. Ho,
there, Champenois! here, it is eleven o’clock. Come and roll me to bed.
Really, that Demoiselle d’Aubigne is very charming!”

So the invalid disappeared soon afterward and went into his
sleeping-room; and one by one the lights in the salon of the Rue des
Tournelles were extinguished.




Chapter XXII.
Saint Denis.


The day had begun to break when Athos arose and dressed himself. It was
plain, by a paleness still greater than usual, and by those traces
which loss of sleep leaves on the face, that he must have passed almost
the whole of the night without sleeping. Contrary to the custom of a
man so firm and decided, there was this morning in his personal
appearance something tardy and irresolute.

He was occupied with the preparations for Raoul’s departure and was
seeking to gain time. In the first place he himself furbished a sword,
which he drew from its perfumed leather sheath; he examined it to see
if its hilt was well guarded and if the blade was firmly attached to
the hilt. Then he placed at the bottom of the valise belonging to the
young man a small bag of louis, called Olivain, the lackey who had
followed him from Blois, and made him pack the valise under his own
eyes, watchful to see that everything should be put in which might be
useful to a young man entering on his first campaign.

At length, after occupying about an hour in these preparations, he
opened the door of the room in which the vicomte slept, and entered.

The sun, already high, penetrated into the room through the window, the
curtains of which Raoul had neglected to close on the previous evening.
He was still sleeping, his head gracefully reposing on his arm.

Athos approached and hung over the youth in an attitude full of tender
melancholy; he looked long on this young man, whose smiling mouth and
half closed eyes bespoke soft dreams and lightest slumber, as if his
guardian angel watched over him with solicitude and affection. By
degrees Athos gave himself up to the charms of his reverie in the
proximity of youth, so pure, so fresh. His own youth seemed to
reappear, bringing with it all those savoury remembrances, which are
like perfumes more than thoughts. Between the past and the present was
an ineffable abyss. But imagination has the wings of an angel of light
and travels safely through or over the seas where we have been almost
shipwrecked, the darkness in which our illusions are lost, the
precipice whence our happiness has been hurled and swallowed up. He
remembered that all the first part of his life had been embittered by a
woman and he thought with alarm of the influence love might assume over
so fine, and at the same time so vigorous an organization as that of
Raoul.

In recalling all he had been through, he foresaw all that Raoul might
suffer; and the expression of the deep and tender compassion which
throbbed in his heart was pictured in the moist eye with which he gazed
on the young man.

At this moment Raoul awoke, without a cloud on his face without
weariness or lassitude; his eyes were fixed on those of Athos and
perhaps he comprehended all that passed in the heart of the man who was
awaiting his awakening as a lover awaits the awakening of his mistress,
for his glance, in return, had all the tenderness of love.

“You are there, sir?” he said, respectfully.

“Yes, Raoul,” replied the count.

“And you did not awaken me?”

“I wished to leave you still to enjoy some moments of sleep, my child;
you must be fatigued from yesterday.”

“Oh, sir, how good you are!”

Athos smiled.

“How do you feel this morning?” he inquired.

“Perfectly well; quite rested, sir.”

“You are still growing,” Athos continued, with that charming and
paternal interest felt by a grown man for a youth.

“Oh, sir, I beg your pardon!” exclaimed Raoul, ashamed of so much
attention; “in an instant I shall be dressed.”

Athos then called Olivain.

“Everything,” said Olivain to Athos, “has been done according to your
directions; the horses are waiting.”

“And I was asleep,” cried Raoul, “whilst you, sir, you had the kindness
to attend to all these details. Truly, sir, you overwhelm me with
benefits!”

“Therefore you love me a little, I hope,” replied Athos, in a tone of
emotion.

“Oh, sir! God knows how much I love, revere you.”

“See that you forget nothing,” said Athos, appearing to look about him,
that he might hide his emotion.

“No, indeed, sir,” answered Raoul.

The servant then approached Athos and said, hesitatingly:

“Monsieur le vicomte has no sword.”

“’Tis well,” said Athos, “I will take care of that.”

They went downstairs, Raoul looking every now and then at the count to
see if the moment of farewell was at hand, but Athos was silent. When
they reached the steps Raoul saw three horses.

“Oh, sir! then you are going with me?”

“I will accompany you a portion of the way,” said Athos.

Joy shone in Raoul’s eyes and he leaped lightly to his saddle.

Athos mounted more slowly, after speaking in a low voice to the lackey,
who, instead of following them immediately, returned to their rooms.
Raoul, delighted at the count’s companionship, perceived, or affected
to perceive nothing of this byplay.

They set out, passing over the Pont Neuf; they pursued their way along
the quay then called L’Abreuvoir Pepin, and went along by the walls of
the Grand Chatelet. They proceeded to the Rue Saint Denis.

After passing through the Porte Saint Denis, Athos looked at Raoul’s
way of riding and observed:

“Take care, Raoul! I have already often told you of this; you must not
forget it, for it is a great defect in a rider. See! your horse is
tired already, he froths at the mouth, whilst mine looks as if he had
only just left the stable. You hold the bit too tight and so make his
mouth hard, so that you will not be able to make him manoeuvre quickly.
The safety of a cavalier often depends on the prompt obedience of his
horse. In a week, remember, you will no longer be performing your
manoeuvres for practice, but on a field of battle.”

Then suddenly, in order not to give too uncomfortable an importance to
this observation:

“See, Raoul!” he resumed; “what a fine plain for partridge shooting.”

The young man stored in his mind the admonition whilst he admired the
delicate tenderness with which it was bestowed.

“I have remarked also another thing,” said Athos, “which is, that in
firing off your pistol you hold your arm too far outstretched. This
tension lessens the accuracy of the aim. So in twelve times you thrice
missed the mark.”

“Which you, sir, struck twelve times,” answered Raoul, smiling.

“Because I bent my arm and rested my hand on my elbow—so; do you
understand what I mean?”

“Yes, sir. I have fired since in that manner and have been quite
successful.”

“What a cold wind!” resumed Athos; “a wintry blast. Apropos, if you
fire—and you will do so, for you are recommended to a young general who
is very fond of powder—remember that in single combat, which often
takes place in the cavalry, never to fire the first shot. He who fires
the first shot rarely hits his man, for he fires with the apprehension
of being disarmed, before an armed foe; then, whilst he fires, make
your horse rear; that manoeuvre has saved my life several times.”

“I shall do so, if only in gratitude——”

“Eh!” cried Athos, “are not those fellows poachers they have arrested
yonder? They are. Then another important thing, Raoul: should you be
wounded in a battle, and fall from your horse, if you have any strength
left, disentangle yourself from the line that your regiment has formed;
otherwise, it may be driven back and you will be trampled to death by
the horses. At all events, should you be wounded, write to me that very
instant, or get some one at once to write to me. We are judges of
wounds, we old soldiers,” Athos added, smiling.

“Thank you, sir,” answered the young man, much moved.

They arrived that very moment at the gate of the town, guarded by two
sentinels.

“Here comes a young gentleman,” said one of them, “who seems as if he
were going to join the army.”

“How do you make that out?” inquired Athos.

“By his manner, sir, and his age; he’s the second to-day.”

“Has a young man, such as I am, gone through this morning, then?” asked
Raoul.

“Faith, yes, with a haughty presence, a fine equipage; such as the son
of a noble house would have.”

“He will be my companion on the journey, sir,” cried Raoul. “Alas! he
cannot make me forget what I shall have lost!”

Thus talking, they traversed the streets, full of people on account of
the fete, and arrived opposite the old cathedral, where first mass was
going on.

“Let us alight; Raoul,” said Athos. “Olivain, take care of our horses
and give me my sword.”

The two gentlemen then went into the church. Athos gave Raoul some of
the holy water. A love as tender as that of a lover for his mistress
dwells, undoubtedly, in some paternal hearts toward a son.

Athos said a word to one of the vergers, who bowed and proceeded toward
the basement.

“Come, Raoul,” he said, “let us follow this man.”

The verger opened the iron grating that guarded the royal tombs and
stood on the topmost step, whilst Athos and Raoul descended. The
sepulchral depths of the descent were dimly lighted by a silver lamp on
the lowest step; and just below this lamp there was laid, wrapped in a
flowing mantle of violet velvet, worked with fleurs-de-lis of gold, a
catafalque resting on trestles of oak. The young man, prepared for this
scene by the state of his own feelings, which were mournful, and by the
majesty of the cathedral which he had passed through, descended in a
slow and solemn manner and stood with head uncovered before these
mortal spoils of the last king, who was not to be placed by the side of
his forefathers until his successor should take his place there; and
who appeared to abide on that spot, that he might thus address human
pride, so sure to be exalted by the glories of a throne: “Dust of the
earth! Here I await thee!”

There was profound silence.

Then Athos raised his hand and pointing to the coffin:

“This temporary sepulture is,” he said, “that of a man who was of
feeble mind, yet one whose reign was full of great events; because over
this king watched the spirit of another man, even as this lamp keeps
vigil over this coffin and illumines it. He whose intellect was thus
supreme, Raoul, was the actual sovereign; the other, nothing but a
phantom to whom he lent a soul; and yet, so powerful is majesty amongst
us, this man has not even the honor of a tomb at the feet of him in
whose service his life was worn away. Remember, Raoul, this! If
Richelieu made the king, by comparison, seem small, he made royalty
great. The Palace of the Louvre contains two things—the king, who must
die, and royalty, which never dies. The minister, so feared, so hated
by his master, has descended into the tomb, drawing after him the king,
whom he would not leave alone on earth, lest his work should be
destroyed. So blind were his contemporaries that they regarded the
cardinal’s death as a deliverance; and I, even I, opposed the designs
of the great man who held the destinies of France within the hollow of
his hand. Raoul, learn how to distinguish the king from royalty; the
king is but a man; royalty is the gift of God. Whenever you hesitate as
to whom you ought to serve, abandon the exterior, the material
appearance for the invisible principle, for the invisible principle is
everything. Raoul, I seem to read your future destiny as through a
cloud. It will be happier, I think, than ours has been. Different in
your fate from us, you will have a king without a minister, whom you
may serve, love, respect. Should the king prove a tyrant, for power
begets tyranny, serve, love, respect royalty, that Divine right, that
celestial spark which makes this dust still powerful and holy, so that
we—gentlemen, nevertheless, of rank and condition—are as nothing in
comparison with the cold corpse there extended.”

“I shall adore God, sir,” said Raoul, “respect royalty and ever serve
the king. And if death be my lot, I hope to die for the king, for
royalty and for God. Have I, sir, comprehended your instructions?”

Athos smiled.

“Yours is a noble nature.” he said; “here is your sword.”

Raoul bent his knee to the ground.

“It was worn by my father, a loyal gentleman. I have worn it in my turn
and it has sometimes not been disgraced when the hilt was in my hand
and the sheath at my side. Should your hand still be too weak to use
this sword, Raoul, so much the better. You will have the more time to
learn to draw it only when it ought to be used.”

“Sir,” replied Raoul, putting the sword to his lips as he received it
from the count, “I owe you everything and yet this sword is the most
precious gift you have yet made me. I will wear it, I swear to you, as
a grateful man should do.”

“’Tis well; arise, vicomte, embrace me.”

Raoul arose and threw himself with emotion into the count’s arms.

“Adieu,” faltered the count, who felt his heart die away within him;
“adieu, and think of me.”

“Oh! for ever and ever!” cried the youth; “oh! I swear to you, sir,
should any harm befall me, your name will be the last name that I shall
utter, the remembrance of you my last thought.”

Athos hastened upstairs to conceal his emotion, and regained with
hurried steps the porch where Olivain was waiting with the horses.

“Olivain,” said Athos, showing the servant Raoul’s shoulder-belt,
“tighten the buckle of the sword, it falls too low. You will accompany
monsieur le vicomte till Grimaud rejoins you. You know, Raoul, Grimaud
is an old and zealous servant; he will follow you.”

“Yes, sir,” answered Raoul.

“Now to horse, that I may see you depart!”

Raoul obeyed.

“Adieu, Raoul,” said the count; “adieu, my dearest boy!”

“Adieu, sir, adieu, my beloved protector.”

Athos waved his hand—he dared not trust himself to speak: and Raoul
went away, his head uncovered. Athos remained motionless, looking after
him until he turned the corner of the street.

Then the count threw the bridle of his horse into the hands of a
peasant, remounted the steps, went into the cathedral, there to kneel
down in the darkest corner and pray.




Chapter XXIII.
One of the Forty Methods of Escape of the Duc de Beaufort.


Meanwhile time was passing on for the prisoner, as well as for those
who were preparing his escape; only for him it passed more slowly.
Unlike other men, who enter with ardor upon a perilous resolution and
grow cold as the moment of execution approaches, the Duc de Beaufort,
whose buoyant courage had become a proverb, seemed to push time before
him and sought most eagerly to hasten the hour of action. In his escape
alone, apart from his plans for the future, which, it must be admitted,
were for the present sufficiently vague and uncertain, there was a
beginning of vengeance which filled his heart. In the first place his
escape would be a serious misfortune to Monsieur de Chavigny, whom he
hated for the petty persecutions he owed to him. It would be a still
worse affair for Mazarin, whom he execrated for the greater offences he
had committed. It may be observed that there was a proper proportion in
his sentiments toward the governor of the prison and the
minister—toward the subordinate and the master.

Then Monsieur de Beaufort, who was so familiar with the interior of the
Palais Royal, though he did not know the relations existing between the
queen and the cardinal, pictured to himself, in his prison, all that
dramatic excitement which would ensue when the rumor should run from
the minister’s cabinet to the chamber of Anne of Austria: “Monsieur de
Beaufort has escaped!” Whilst saying that to himself, Monsieur de
Beaufort smiled pleasantly and imagined himself already outside,
breathing the air of the plains and the forests, pressing a strong
horse between his knees and crying out in a loud voice, “I am free!”

It is true that on coming to himself he found that he was still within
four walls; he saw La Ramee twirling his thumbs ten feet from him, and
his guards laughing and drinking in the ante-chamber. The only thing
that was pleasant to him in that odious tableau—such is the instability
of the human mind—was the sullen face of Grimaud, for whom he had at
first conceived such a hatred and who now was all his hope. Grimaud
seemed to him an Antinous. It is needless to say that this
transformation was visible only to the prisoner’s feverish imagination.
Grimaud was still the same, and therefore he retained the entire
confidence of his superior, La Ramee, who now relied upon him more than
he did upon himself, for, as we have said, La Ramee felt at the bottom
of his heart a certain weakness for Monsieur de Beaufort.

And so the good La Ramee made a festivity of the little supper with his
prisoner. He had but one fault—he was a gourmand; he had found the
pates good, the wine excellent. Now the successor of Pere Marteau had
promised him a pate of pheasant instead of a pate of fowl, and
Chambertin wine instead of Macon. All this, set off by the presence of
that excellent prince, who was so good-natured, who invented so droll
tricks against Monsieur de Chavigny and so fine jokes against Mazarin,
made for La Ramee the approaching Pentecost one of the four great
feasts of the year. He therefore looked forward to six o’clock with as
much impatience as the duke himself.

Since daybreak La Ramee had been occupied with the preparations, and
trusting no one but himself, he had visited personally the successor of
Pere Marteau. The latter had surpassed himself; he showed La Ramee a
monstrous pate, ornamented with Monsieur de Beaufort’s coat-of-arms. It
was empty as yet, but a pheasant and two partridges were lying near it.
La Ramee’s mouth watered and he returned to the duke’s chamber rubbing
his hands. To crown his happiness, Monsieur de Chavigny had started on
a journey that morning and in his absence La Ramee was deputy-governor
of the chateau.

As for Grimaud, he seemed more sullen than ever.

In the course of the forenoon Monsieur de Beaufort had a game of tennis
with La Ramee; a sign from Grimaud put him on the alert. Grimaud, going
in advance, followed the course which they were to take in the evening.
The game was played in an inclosure called the little court of the
chateau, a place quite deserted except when Monsieur de Beaufort was
playing; and even then the precaution seemed superfluous, the wall was
so high.

There were three gates to open before reaching the inclosure, each by a
different key. When they arrived Grimaud went carelessly and sat down
by a loophole in the wall, letting his legs dangle outside. It was
evident that there the rope ladder was to be attached.

This manoeuvre, transparent to the Duc de Beaufort, was quite
unintelligible to La Ramee.

The game at tennis, which, upon a sign from Grimaud, Monsieur de
Beaufort had consented to play, began in the afternoon. The duke was in
full strength and beat La Ramee completely.

Four of the guards, who were constantly near the prisoner, assisted in
picking up the tennis balls. When the game was over, the duke, laughing
at La Ramee for his bad play, offered these men two louis d’or to go
and drink his health, with their four other comrades.

The guards asked permission of La Ramee, who gave it to them, but not
till the evening, however; until then he had business and the prisoner
was not to be left alone.

Six o’clock came and, although they were not to sit down to table until
seven o’clock, dinner was ready and served up. Upon a sideboard
appeared the colossal pie with the duke’s arms on it, and seemingly
cooked to a turn, as far as one could judge by the golden color which
illuminated the crust.

The rest of the dinner was to come.

Every one was impatient, La Ramee to sit down to table, the guards to
go and drink, the duke to escape.

Grimaud alone was calm as ever. One might have fancied that Athos had
educated him with the express forethought of such a great event.

There were moments when, looking at Grimaud, the duke asked himself if
he was not dreaming and if that marble figure was really at his service
and would grow animated when the moment came for action.

La Ramee sent away the guards, desiring them to drink to the duke’s
health, and as soon as they were gone shut all the doors, put the keys
in his pocket and showed the table to the prince with an air that
signified:

“Whenever my lord pleases.”

The prince looked at Grimaud, Grimaud looked at the clock; it was
hardly a quarter-past six. The escape was fixed to take place at seven
o’clock; there was therefore three-quarters of an hour to wait.

The duke, in order to pass away another quarter of an hour, pretended
to be reading something that interested him and muttered that he wished
they would allow him to finish his chapter. La Ramee went up to him and
looked over his shoulder to see what sort of a book it was that had so
singular an influence over the prisoner as to make him put off taking
his dinner.

It was “Caesar’s Commentaries,” which La Ramee had lent him, contrary
to the orders of the governor; and La Ramee resolved never again to
disobey these injunctions.

Meantime he uncorked the bottles and went to smell if the pie was good.

At half-past six the duke arose and said very gravely:

“Certainly, Caesar was the greatest man of ancient times.”

“You think so, my lord?” answered La Ramee.

“Yes.”

“Well, as for me, I prefer Hannibal.”

“And why, pray, Master La Ramee?” asked the duke.

“Because he left no Commentaries,” replied La Ramee, with his coarse
laugh.

The duke vouchsafed no reply, but sitting down at the table made a sign
that La Ramee should seat himself opposite. There is nothing so
expressive as the face of an epicure who finds himself before a well
spread table, so La Ramee, when receiving his plate of soup from
Grimaud, presented a type of perfect bliss.

The duke smiled.

“Zounds!” he said; “I don’t suppose there is a more contented man at
this moment in all the kingdom than yourself!”

“You are right, my lord duke,” answered the officer; “I don’t know any
pleasanter sight on earth than a well covered table; and when, added to
that, he who does the honors is the grandson of Henry IV., you will, my
lord duke, easily comprehend that the honor fairly doubles the pleasure
one enjoys.”

The duke, in his turn, bowed, and an imperceptible smile appeared on
the face of Grimaud, who kept behind La Ramee.

“My dear La Ramee,” said the duke, “you are the only man to turn such
faultless compliments.”

“No, my lord duke,” replied La Ramee, in the fullness of his heart; “I
say what I think; there is no compliment in what I say to you——”

“Then you are attached to me?” asked the duke.

“To own the truth, I should be inconsolable if you were to leave
Vincennes.”

“A droll way of showing your affliction.” The duke meant to say
“affection.”

“But, my lord,” returned La Ramee, “what would you do if you got out?
Every folly you committed would embroil you with the court and they
would put you into the Bastile, instead of Vincennes. Now, Monsieur de
Chavigny is not amiable, I allow, but Monsieur du Tremblay is
considerably worse.”

“Indeed!” exclaimed the duke, who from time to time looked at the
clock, the fingers of which seemed to move with sickening slowness.

“But what can you expect from the brother of a capuchin monk, brought
up in the school of Cardinal Richelieu? Ah, my lord, it is a great
happiness that the queen, who always wished you well, had a fancy to
send you here, where there’s a promenade and a tennis court, good air,
and a good table.”

“In short,” answered the duke, “if I comprehend you aright, La Ramee, I
am ungrateful for having ever thought of leaving this place?”

“Oh! my lord duke, ’tis the height of ingratitude; but your highness
has never seriously thought of it?”

“Yes,” returned the duke, “I must confess I sometimes think of it.”

“Still by one of your forty methods, your highness?”

“Yes, yes, indeed.”

“My lord,” said La Ramee, “now we are quite at our ease and enjoying
ourselves, pray tell me one of those forty ways invented by your
highness.”

“Willingly,” answered the duke, “give me the pie!”

“I am listening,” said La Ramee, leaning back in his armchair and
raising his glass of Madeira to his lips, and winking his eye that he
might see the sun through the rich liquid that he was about to taste.

The duke glanced at the clock. In ten minutes it would strike seven.

Grimaud placed the pie before the duke, who took a knife with a silver
blade to raise the upper crust; but La Ramee, who was afraid of any
harm happening to this fine work of art, passed his knife, which had an
iron blade, to the duke.

“Thank you, La Ramee,” said the prisoner.

“Well, my lord! this famous invention of yours?”

“Must I tell you,” replied the duke, “on what I most reckon and what I
determine to try first?”

“Yes, that’s the thing, my lord!” cried his custodian, gaily.

“Well, I should hope, in the first instance, to have for keeper an
honest fellow like you.”

“And you have me, my lord. Well?”

“Having, then, a keeper like La Ramee, I should try also to have
introduced to him by some friend or other a man who would be devoted to
me, who would assist me in my flight.”

“Come, come,” said La Ramee, “that’s not a bad idea.”

“Capital, isn’t it? for instance, the former servingman of some brave
gentleman, an enemy himself to Mazarin, as every gentleman ought to
be.”

“Hush! don’t let us talk politics, my lord.”

“Then my keeper would begin to trust this man and to depend upon him,
and I should have news from those without the prison walls.”

“Ah, yes! but how can the news be brought to you?”

“Nothing easier; in a game of tennis, for example.”

“In a game of tennis?” asked La Ramee, giving more serious attention to
the duke’s words.

“Yes; see, I send a ball into the moat; a man is there who picks it up;
the ball contains a letter. Instead of returning the ball to me when I
call for it from the top of the wall, he throws me another; that other
ball contains a letter. Thus we have exchanged ideas and no one has
seen us do it.”

“The devil it does! The devil it does!” said La Ramee, scratching his
head; “you are in the wrong to tell me that, my lord. I shall have to
watch the men who pick up balls.”

The duke smiled.

“But,” resumed La Ramee, “that is only a way of corresponding.”

“And that is a great deal, it seems to me.”

“But not enough.”

“Pardon me; for instance, I say to my friends, Be on a certain day, on
a certain hour, at the other side of the moat with two horses.”

“Well, what then?” La Ramee began to be uneasy; “unless the horses have
wings to mount the ramparts and come and fetch you.”

“That’s not needed. I have,” replied the duke, “a way of descending
from the ramparts.”

“What?”

“A rope ladder.”

“Yes, but,” answered La Ramee, trying to laugh, “a ladder of ropes
can’t be sent around a ball, like a letter.”

“No, but it may be sent in something else.”

“In something else—in something else? In what?”

“In a pate, for example.”

“In a pate?” said La Ramee.

“Yes. Let us suppose one thing,” replied the duke “let us suppose, for
instance, that my maitre d’hotel, Noirmont, has purchased the shop of
Pere Marteau——”

“Well?” said La Ramee, shuddering.

“Well, La Ramee, who is a gourmand, sees his pates, thinks them more
attractive than those of Pere Marteau and proposes to me that I shall
try them. I consent on condition that La Ramee tries them with me. That
we may be more at our ease, La Ramee removes the guards, keeping only
Grimaud to wait on us. Grimaud is the man whom a friend has sent to
second me in everything. The moment for my escape is fixed—seven
o’clock. Well, at a few minutes to seven——”

“At a few minutes to seven?” cried La Ramee, cold sweat upon his brow.

“At a few minutes to seven,” returned the duke (suiting the action to
the words), “I raise the crust of the pie; I find in it two poniards, a
ladder of rope, and a gag. I point one of the poniards at La Ramee’s
breast and I say to him, ‘My friend, I am sorry for it, but if thou
stirrest, if thou utterest one cry, thou art a dead man!’”

The duke, in pronouncing these words, suited, as we have said, the
action to the words. He was standing near the officer and he directed
the point of the poniard in such a manner, close to La Ramee’s heart,
that there could be no doubt in the mind of that individual as to his
determination. Meanwhile, Grimaud, still mute as ever, drew from the
pie the other poniard, the rope ladder and the gag.

La Ramee followed all these objects with his eyes, his alarm every
moment increasing.

“Oh, my lord,” he cried, with an expression of stupefaction in his
face; “you haven’t the heart to kill me!”

“No; not if thou dost not oppose my flight.”

“But, my lord, if I allow you to escape I am a ruined man.”

“I will compensate thee for the loss of thy place.”

“You are determined to leave the chateau?”

“By Heaven and earth! This night I am determined to be free.”

“And if I defend myself, or call, or cry out?”

“I will kill thee, on the honor of a gentleman.”

At this moment the clock struck.

“Seven o’clock!” said Grimaud, who had not spoken a word.

La Ramee made one movement, in order to satisfy his conscience. The
duke frowned, the officer felt the point of the poniard, which, having
penetrated through his clothes, was close to his heart.

“Let us dispatch,” said the duke.

“My lord, one last favor.”

“What? speak, make haste.”

“Bind my arms, my lord, fast.”

“Why bind thee?”

“That I may not be considered as your accomplice.”

“Your hands?” asked Grimaud.

“Not before me, behind me.”

“But with what?” asked the duke.

“With your belt, my lord!” replied La Ramee.

The duke undid his belt and gave it to Grimaud, who tied La Ramee in
such a way as to satisfy him.

“Your feet, too,” said Grimaud.

La Ramee stretched out his legs, Grimaud took a table-cloth, tore it
into strips and tied La Ramee’s feet together.

“Now, my lord,” said the poor man, “let me have the poire d’angoisse. I
ask for it; without it I should be tried in a court of justice because
I did not raise the alarm. Thrust it into my mouth, my lord, thrust it
in.”

Grimaud prepared to comply with this request, when the officer made a
sign as if he had something to say.

“Speak,” said the duke.

“Now, my lord, do not forget, if any harm happens to me on your
account, that I have a wife and four children.”

“Rest assured; put the gag in, Grimaud.”

In a second La Ramee was gagged and laid prostrate. Two or three chairs
were thrown down as if there had been a struggle. Grimaud then took
from the pocket of the officer all the keys it contained and first
opened the door of the room in which they were, then shut it and
double-locked it, and both he and the duke proceeded rapidly down the
gallery which led to the little inclosure. At last they reached the
tennis court. It was completely deserted. No sentinels, no one at any
of the windows. The duke ran to the rampart and perceived on the other
side of the ditch, three cavaliers with two riding horses. The duke
exchanged a signal with them. It was indeed for him that they were
there.

Grimaud, meantime, undid the means of escape.

This was not, however, a rope ladder, but a ball of silk cord, with a
narrow board which was to pass between the legs, the ball to unwind
itself by the weight of the person who sat astride upon the board.

“Go!” said the duke.

“First, my lord?” inquired Grimaud.

“Certainly. If I am caught, I risk nothing but being taken back again
to prison. If they catch thee, thou wilt be hung.”

“True,” replied Grimaud.

And instantly, Grimaud, sitting upon the board as if on horseback,
commenced his perilous descent.

The duke followed him with his eyes, with involuntary terror. He had
gone down about three-quarters of the length of the wall when the cord
broke. Grimaud fell—precipitated into the moat.

The duke uttered a cry, but Grimaud did not give a single moan. He must
have been dreadfully hurt, for he did not stir from the place where he
fell.

Immediately one of the men who were waiting slipped down into the moat,
tied under Grimaud’s shoulders the end of a cord, and the remaining
two, who held the other end, drew Grimaud to them.

“Descend, my lord,” said the man in the moat. “There are only fifteen
feet more from the top down here, and the grass is soft.”

The duke had already begun to descend. His task was the more difficult,
as there was no board to support him. He was obliged to let himself
down by his hands and from a height of fifty feet. But as we have said
he was active, strong, and full of presence of mind. In less than five
minutes he arrived at the end of the cord. He was then only fifteen
feet from the ground, as the gentlemen below had told him. He let go
the rope and fell upon his feet, without receiving any injury.

He instantly began to climb up the slope of the moat, on the top of
which he met De Rochefort. The other two gentlemen were unknown to him.
Grimaud, in a swoon, was tied securely to a horse.

“Gentlemen,” said the duke, “I will thank you later; now we have not a
moment to lose. On, then! on! those who love me, follow me!”

And he jumped on his horse and set off at full gallop, snuffing the
fresh air in his triumph and shouting out, with an expression of face
which it would be impossible to describe:

“Free! free! free!”




Chapter XXIV.
The timely Arrival of D’Artagnan in Paris.


At Blois, D’Artagnan received the money paid to him by Mazarin for any
future service he might render the cardinal.

From Blois to Paris was a journey of four days for ordinary travelers,
but D’Artagnan arrived on the third day at the Barriere Saint Denis. In
turning the corner of the Rue Montmartre, in order to reach the Rue
Tiquetonne and the Hotel de la Chevrette, where he had appointed
Porthos to meet him, he saw at one of the windows of the hotel, that
friend himself dressed in a sky-blue waistcoat, embroidered with
silver, and gaping, till he showed every one of his white teeth; whilst
the people passing by admiringly gazed at this gentleman, so handsome
and so rich, who seemed to weary of his riches and his greatness.

D’Artagnan and Planchet had hardly turned the corner when Porthos
recognized them.

“Eh! D’Artagnan!” he cried. “Thank God you have come!”

“Eh! good-day, dear friend!” replied D’Artagnan.

Porthos came down at once to the threshold of the hotel.

“Ah, my dear friend!” he cried, “what bad stabling for my horses here.”

“Indeed!” said D’Artagnan; “I am most unhappy to hear it, on account of
those fine animals.”

“And I, also—I was also wretchedly off,” he answered, moving backward
and forward as he spoke; “and had it not been for the hostess,” he
added, with his air of vulgar self-complacency, “who is very agreeable
and understands a joke, I should have got a lodging elsewhere.”

The pretty Madeleine, who had approached during this colloquy, stepped
back and turned pale as death on hearing Porthos’s words, for she
thought the scene with the Swiss was about to be repeated. But to her
great surprise D’Artagnan remained perfectly calm, and instead of being
angry he laughed, and said to Porthos:

“Yes, I understand, the air of La Rue Tiquetonne is not like that of
Pierrefonds; but console yourself, I will soon conduct you to one much
better.”

“When will you do that?”

“Immediately, I hope.”

“Ah! so much the better!”

To that exclamation of Porthos’s succeeded a groaning, low and
profound, which seemed to come from behind a door. D’Artagnan, who had
just dismounted, then saw, outlined against the wall, the enormous
stomach of Mousqueton, whose down-drawn mouth emitted sounds of
distress.

“And you, too, my poor Monsieur Mouston, are out of place in this poor
hotel, are you not?” asked D’Artagnan, in that rallying tone which may
indicate either compassion or mockery.

“He finds the cooking detestable,” replied Porthos.

“Why, then, doesn’t he attend to it himself, as at Chantilly?”

“Ah, monsieur, I have not here, as I had there, the ponds of monsieur
le prince, where I could catch those beautiful carp, nor the forests of
his highness to provide me with partridges. As for the cellar, I have
searched every part and poor stuff I found.”

“Monsieur Mouston,” said D’Artagnan, “I should indeed condole with you
had I not at this moment something very pressing to attend to.”

Then taking Porthos aside:

“My dear Du Vallon,” he said, “here you are in full dress most
fortunately, for I am going to take you to the cardinal’s.”

“Gracious me! really!” exclaimed Porthos, opening his great wondering
eyes.

“Yes, my friend.”

“A presentation? indeed!”

“Does that alarm you?”

“No, but it agitates me.”

“Oh! don’t be distressed; you have to deal with a cardinal of another
kind. This one will not oppress you by his dignity.”

“’Tis the same thing—you understand me, D’Artagnan—a court.”

“There’s no court now. Alas!”

“The queen!”

“I was going to say, there’s no longer a queen. The queen! Rest
assured, we shall not see her.”

“And you say that we are going from here to the Palais Royal?”

“Immediately. Only, that there may be no delay, I shall borrow one of
your horses.”

“Certainly; all the four are at your service.”

“Oh, I need only one of them for the time being.”

“Shall we take our valets?”

“Yes, you may as well take Mousqueton. As to Planchet, he has certain
reasons for not going to court.”

“And what are they?”

“Oh, he doesn’t stand well with his eminence.”

“Mouston,” said Porthos, “saddle Vulcan and Bayard.”

“And for myself, monsieur, shall I saddle Rustaud?”

“No, take a more stylish horse, Phoebus or Superbe; we are going with
some ceremony.”

“Ah,” said Mousqueton, breathing more freely, “you are only going,
then, to make a visit?”

“Oh! yes, of course, Mouston; nothing else. But to avoid risk, put the
pistols in the holsters. You will find mine on my saddle, already
loaded.”

Mouston breathed a sigh; he couldn’t understand visits of ceremony made
under arms.

“Indeed,” said Porthos, looking complacently at his old lackey as he
went away, “you are right, D’Artagnan; Mouston will do; Mouston has a
very fine appearance.”

D’Artagnan smiled.

“But you, my friend—are you not going to change your dress?”

“No, I shall go as I am. This traveling dress will serve to show the
cardinal my haste to obey his commands.”

They set out on Vulcan and Bayard, followed by Mousqueton on Phoebus,
and arrived at the Palais Royal at about a quarter to seven. The
streets were crowded, for it was the day of Pentecost, and the crowd
looked in wonder at these two cavaliers; one as fresh as if he had come
out of a bandbox, the other so covered with dust that he looked as if
he had but just come off a field of battle.

Mousqueton also attracted attention; and as the romance of Don Quixote
was then the fashion, they said that he was Sancho, who, after having
lost one master, had found two.

On reaching the palace, D’Artagnan sent to his eminence the letter in
which he had been ordered to return without delay. He was soon ordered
to the presence of the cardinal.

“Courage!” he whispered to Porthos, as they proceeded. “Do not be
intimidated. Believe me, the eye of the eagle is closed forever. We
have only the vulture to deal with. Hold yourself as bolt upright as on
the day of the bastion of St. Gervais, and do not bow too low to this
Italian; that might give him a poor idea of you.”

“Good!” answered Porthos. “Good!”

Mazarin was in his study, working at a list of pensions and benefices,
of which he was trying to reduce the number. He saw D’Artagnan and
Porthos enter with internal pleasure, yet showed no joy in his
countenance.

“Ah! you, is it? Monsieur le lieutenant, you have been very prompt.
’Tis well. Welcome to ye.”

“Thanks, my lord. Here I am at your eminence’s service, as well as
Monsieur du Vallon, one of my old friends, who used to conceal his
nobility under the name of Porthos.”

Porthos bowed to the cardinal.

“A magnificent cavalier,” remarked Mazarin.

Porthos turned his head to the right and to the left, and drew himself
up with a movement full of dignity.

“The best swordsman in the kingdom, my lord,” said D’Artagnan.

Porthos bowed to his friend.

Mazarin was as fond of fine soldiers as, in later times, Frederick of
Prussia used to be. He admired the strong hands, the broad shoulders
and the steady eye of Porthos. He seemed to see before him the
salvation of his administration and of the kingdom, sculptured in flesh
and bone. He remembered that the old association of musketeers was
composed of four persons.

“And your two other friends?” he asked.

Porthos opened his mouth, thinking it a good opportunity to put in a
word in his turn; D’Artagnan checked him by a glance from the corner of
his eye.

“They are prevented at this moment, but will join us later.”

Mazarin coughed a little.

“And this gentleman, being disengaged, takes to the service willingly?”
he asked.

“Yes, my lord, and from pure devotion to the cause, for Monsieur de
Bracieux is rich.”

“Rich!” said Mazarin, whom that single word always inspired with a
great respect.

“Fifty thousand francs a year,” said Porthos.

These were the first words he had spoken.

“From pure zeal?” resumed Mazarin, with his artful smile; “from pure
zeal and devotion then?”

“My lord has, perhaps, no faith in those words?” said D’Artagnan.

“Have you, Monsieur le Gascon?” asked Mazarin, supporting his elbows on
his desk and his chin on his hands.

“I,” replied the Gascon, “I believe in devotion as a word at one’s
baptism, for instance, which naturally comes before one’s proper name;
every one is naturally more or less devout, certainly; but there should
be at the end of one’s devotion something to gain.”

“And your friend, for instance; what does he expect to have at the end
of his devotion?”

“Well, my lord, my friend has three magnificent estates: that of
Vallon, at Corbeil; that of Bracieux, in the Soissonais; and that of
Pierrefonds, in the Valois. Now, my lord, he would like to have one of
his three estates erected into a barony.”

“Only that?” said Mazarin, his eyes twinkling with joy on seeing that
he could pay for Porthos’s devotion without opening his purse; “only
that? That can be managed.”

“I shall be baron!” explained Porthos, stepping forward.

“I told you so,” said D’Artagnan, checking him with his hand; “and now
his eminence confirms it.”

“And you, Monsieur D’Artagnan, what do you want?”

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “it is twenty years since Cardinal de
Richelieu made me lieutenant.”

“Yes, and you would be gratified if Cardinal Mazarin should make you
captain.”

D’Artagnan bowed.

“Well, that is not impossible. We will see, gentlemen, we will see.
Now, Monsieur de Vallon,” said Mazarin, “what service do you prefer, in
the town or in the country?”

Porthos opened his mouth to reply.

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “Monsieur de Vallon is like me, he prefers
service extraordinary—that is to say, enterprises that are considered
mad and impossible.”

That boastfulness was not displeasing to Mazarin; he fell into
meditation.

“And yet,” he said, “I must admit that I sent for you to appoint you to
quiet service; I have certain apprehensions—well, what is the meaning
of that?”

In fact, a great noise was heard in the ante-chamber; at the same time
the door of the study was burst open and a man, covered with dust,
rushed into it, exclaiming:

“My lord the cardinal! my lord the cardinal!”

Mazarin thought that some one was going to assassinate him and he drew
back, pushing his chair on the castors. D’Artagnan and Porthos moved so
as to plant themselves between the person entering and the cardinal.

“Well, sir,” exclaimed Mazarin, “what’s the matter? and why do you rush
in here, as if you were about to penetrate a crowded market-place?”

“My lord,” replied the messenger, “I wish to speak to your eminence in
secret. I am Monsieur du Poins, an officer in the guards, on duty at
the donjon of Vincennes.”

Mazarin, perceiving by the paleness and agitation of the messenger that
he had something of importance to say, made a sign that D’Artagnan and
Porthos should give place.

D’Artagnan and Porthos withdrew to a corner of the cabinet.

“Speak, monsieur, speak at once!” said Mazarin “What is the matter?”

“The matter is, my lord, that the Duc de Beaufort has contrived to
escape from the Chateau of Vincennes.”

Mazarin uttered a cry and became paler than the man who had brought the
news. He fell back, almost fainting, in his chair.

“Escaped? Monsieur de Beaufort escaped?”

“My lord, I saw him run off from the top of the terrace.”

“And you did not fire on him?”

“He was out of range.”

“Monsieur de Chavigny—where was he?”

“Absent.”

“And La Ramee?”

“Was found locked up in the prisoner’s room, a gag in his mouth and a
poniard near him.”

“But the man who was under him?”

“Was an accomplice of the duke’s and escaped along with him.”

Mazarin groaned.

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, advancing toward the cardinal, “it seems to
me that your eminence is losing precious time. It may still be possible
to overtake the prisoner. France is large; the nearest frontier is
sixty leagues distant.”

“And who is to pursue him?” cried Mazarin.

“I, pardieu!”

“And you would arrest him?”

“Why not?”

“You would arrest the Duc de Beaufort, armed, in the field?”

“If your eminence should order me to arrest the devil, I would seize
him by the horns and would bring him in.”

“So would I,” said Porthos.

“So would you!” said Mazarin, looking with astonishment at those two
men. “But the duke will not yield himself without a furious battle.”

“Very well,” said D’Artagnan, his eyes aflame, “battle! It is a long
time since we have had a battle, eh, Porthos?”

“Battle!” cried Porthos.

“And you think you can catch him?”

“Yes, if we are better mounted than he.”

“Go then, take what guards you find here, and pursue him.”

“You command us, my lord, to do so?”

“And I sign my orders,” said Mazarin, taking a piece of paper and
writing some lines; “Monsieur du Vallon, your barony is on the back of
the Duc de Beaufort’s horse; you have nothing to do but to overtake it.
As for you, my dear lieutenant, I promise you nothing; but if you bring
him back to me, dead or alive, you may ask all you wish.”

“To horse, Porthos!” said D’Artagnan, taking his friend by the hand.

“Here I am,” smiled Porthos, with his sublime composure.

They descended the great staircase, taking with them all the guards
they found on their road, and crying out, “To arms! To arms!” and
immediately put spur to horse, which set off along the Rue Saint Honore
with the speed of the whirlwind.

“Well, baron, I promise you some good exercise!” said the Gascon.

“Yes, my captain.”

As they went, the citizens, awakened, left their doors and the street
dogs followed the cavaliers, barking. At the corner of the Cimetiere
Saint Jean, D’Artagnan upset a man; it was too insignificant an
occurrence to delay people so eager to get on. The troop continued its
course as though their steeds had wings.

Alas! there are no unimportant events in this world and we shall see
that this apparently slight incident came near endangering the
monarchy.




Chapter XXV.
An Adventure on the High Road.


The musketeers rode the whole length of the Faubourg Saint Antoine and
of the road to Vincennes, and soon found themselves out of the town,
then in a forest and then within sight of a village.

The horses seemed to become more lively with each successive step;
their nostrils reddened like glowing furnaces. D’Artagnan, freely
applying his spurs, was in advance of Porthos two feet at the most;
Mousqueton followed two lengths behind; the guards were scattered
according to the varying excellence of their respective mounts.

From the top of an eminence D’Artagnan perceived a group of people
collected on the other side of the moat, in front of that part of the
donjon which looks toward Saint Maur. He rode on, convinced that in
this direction he would gain intelligence of the fugitive. In five
minutes he had arrived at the place, where the guards joined him,
coming up one by one.

The several members of that group were much excited. They looked at the
cord, still hanging from the loophole and broken at about twenty feet
from the ground. Their eyes measured the height and they exchanged
conjectures. On the top of the wall sentinels went and came with a
frightened air.

A few soldiers, commanded by a sergeant, drove away idlers from the
place where the duke had mounted his horse. D’Artagnan went straight to
the sergeant.

“My officer,” said the sergeant, “it is not permitted to stop here.”

“That prohibition is not for me,” said D’Artagnan. “Have the fugitives
been pursued?”

“Yes, my officer; unfortunately, they are well mounted.”

“How many are there?”

“Four, and a fifth whom they carried away wounded.”

“Four!” said D’Artagnan, looking at Porthos. “Do you hear, baron? They
are only four!”

A joyous smile lighted Porthos’s face.

“How long a start have they?”

“Two hours and a quarter, my officer.”

“Two hours and a quarter—that is nothing; we are well mounted, are we
not, Porthos?”

Porthos breathed a sigh; he thought of what was in store for his poor
horses.

“Very good,” said D’Artagnan; “and now in what direction did they set
out?”

“That I am forbidden to tell.”

D’Artagnan drew from his pocket a paper. “Order of the king,” he said.

“Speak to the governor, then.”

“And where is the governor?”

“In the country.”

Anger mounted to D’Artagnan’s face; he frowned and his cheeks were
colored.

“Ah, you scoundrel!” he said to the sergeant, “I believe you are
impudent to me! Wait!”

He unfolded the paper, presented it to the sergeant with one hand and
with the other took a pistol from his holsters and cocked it.

“Order of the king, I tell you. Read and answer, or I will blow out
your brains!”

The sergeant saw that D’Artagnan was in earnest. “The Vendomois road,”
he replied.

“And by what gate did they go out?”

“By the Saint Maur gate.”

“If you are deceiving me, rascal, you will be hanged to-morrow.”

“And if you catch up with them you won’t come back to hang me,”
murmured the sergeant.

D’Artagnan shrugged his shoulders, made a sign to his escort and
started.

“This way, gentlemen, this way!” he cried, directing his course toward
the gate that had been pointed out.

But, now that the duke had escaped, the concierge had seen fit to
fasten the gate with a double lock. It was necessary to compel him to
open it, as the sergeant had been compelled to speak, and this took
another ten minutes. This last obstacle having been overcome, the troop
pursued their course with their accustomed ardor; but some of the
horses could no longer sustain this pace; three of them stopped after
an hour’s gallop, and one fell down.

D’Artagnan, who never turned his head, did not perceive it. Porthos
told him of it in his calm manner.

“If only we two arrive,” said D’Artagnan, “it will be enough, since the
duke’s troop are only four in number.”

“That is true,” said Porthos

And he spurred his courser on.

At the end of another two hours the horses had gone twelve leagues
without stopping; their legs began to tremble, and the foam they shed
whitened the doublets of their masters.

“Let us rest here an instant to give these poor creatures breathing
time,” said Porthos.

“Let us rather kill them! yes, kill them!” cried D’Artagnan; “I see
fresh tracks; ’tis not a quarter of an hour since they passed this
place.”

In fact, the road was trodden by horses’ feet, visible even in the
approaching gloom of evening.

They set out; after a run of two leagues, Mousqueton’s horse sank.

“Gracious me!” said Porthos, “there’s Phoebus ruined.”

“The cardinal will pay you a hundred pistoles.”

“I’m above that.”

“Let us set out again, at full gallop.”

“Yes, if we can.”

But at last the lieutenant’s horse refused to go on; he could not
breathe; one last spur, instead of making him advance, made him fall.

“The devil!” exclaimed Porthos; “there’s Vulcan foundered.”

“Zounds!” cried D’Artagnan, “then we must stop! Give me your horse,
Porthos. What the devil are you doing?”

“By Jove, I am falling, or rather, Bayard is falling,” answered
Porthos.

All three then cried: “All’s over.”

“Hush!” said D’Artagnan.

“What is it?”

“I hear a horse.”

“It belongs to one of our companions, who is overtaking us.”

“No,” said D’Artagnan, “it is in advance.”

“That is another thing,” said Porthos; and he listened toward the
quarter indicated by D’Artagnan.

“Monsieur,” said Mousqueton, who, abandoning his horse on the high
road, had come on foot to rejoin his master, “Phoebus could no longer
hold out and——”

“Silence!” said Porthos.

In fact, at that moment a second neighing was borne to them on the
night wind.

“It is five hundred feet from here, in advance,” said D’Artagnan.

“True, monsieur,” said Mousqueton; “and five hundred feet from here is
a small hunting-house.”

“Mousqueton, thy pistols,” said D’Artagnan.

“I have them at hand, monsieur.”

“Porthos, take yours from your holsters.”

“I have them.”

“Good!” said D’Artagnan, seizing his own; “now you understand,
Porthos?”

“Not too well.”

“We are out on the king’s service.”

“Well?”

“For the king’s service we need horses.”

“That is true,” said Porthos.

“Then not a word, but set to work!”

They went on through the darkness, silent as phantoms; they saw a light
glimmering in the midst of some trees.

“Yonder is the house, Porthos,” said the Gascon; “let me do what I
please and do you what I do.”

They glided from tree to tree till they arrived at twenty steps from
the house unperceived and saw by means of a lantern suspended under a
hut, four fine horses. A groom was rubbing them down; near them were
saddles and bridles.

D’Artagnan approached quickly, making a sign to his two companions to
remain a few steps behind.

“I buy those horses,” he said to the groom.

The groom turned toward him with a look of surprise, but made no reply.

“Didn’t you hear, fellow?”

“Yes, I heard.”

“Why, then, didn’t you reply?”

“Because these horses are not to be sold,” was the reply.

“I take them, then,” said the lieutenant.

And he took hold of one within his reach; his two companions did the
same thing.

“Sir,” cried the groom, “they have traversed six leagues and have only
been unsaddled half an hour.”

“Half an hour’s rest is enough,” replied the Gascon.

The groom cried aloud for help. A kind of steward appeared, just as
D’Artagnan and his companions were prepared to mount. The steward
attempted to expostulate.

“My dear friend,” cried the lieutenant, “if you say a word I will blow
out your brains.”

“But, sir,” answered the steward, “do you know that these horses belong
to Monsieur de Montbazon?”

“So much the better; they must be good animals, then.”

“Sir, I shall call my people.”

“And I, mine; I’ve ten guards behind me, don’t you hear them gallop?
and I’m one of the king’s musketeers. Come, Porthos; come, Mousqueton.”

They all mounted the horses as quickly as possible.

“Halloo! hi! hi!” cried the steward; “the house servants, with the
carbines!”

“On! on!” cried D’Artagnan; “there’ll be firing! on!”

They all set off, swift as the wind.

“Here!” cried the steward, “here!” whilst the groom ran to a
neighboring building.

“Take care of your horses!” cried D’Artagnan to him.

“Fire!” replied the steward.

A gleam, like a flash of lightning, illumined the road, and with the
flash was heard the whistling of balls, which were fired wildly in the
air.

“They fire like grooms,” said Porthos. “In the time of the cardinal
people fired better than that, do you remember the road to Crevecoeur,
Mousqueton?”

“Ah, sir! my left side still pains me!”

“Are you sure we are on the right track, lieutenant?”

“Egad, didn’t you hear? these horses belong to Monsieur de Montbazon;
well, Monsieur de Montbazon is the husband of Madame de Montbazon——”

“And——”

“And Madame de Montbazon is the mistress of the Duc de Beaufort.”

“Ah! I understand,” replied Porthos; “she has ordered relays of
horses.”

“Exactly so.”

“And we are pursuing the duke with the very horses he has just left?”

“My dear Porthos, you are really a man of most superior understanding,”
said D’Artagnan, with a look as if he spoke against his conviction.

“Pooh!” replied Porthos, “I am what I am.”

They rode on for an hour, till the horses were covered with foam and
dust.

“Zounds! what is yonder?” cried D’Artagnan.

“You are very lucky if you see anything such a night as this,” said
Porthos.

“Something bright.”

“I, too,” cried Mousqueton, “saw them also.”

“Ah! ah! have we overtaken them?”

“Good! a dead horse!” said D’Artagnan, pulling up his horse, which
shied; “it seems their horses, too, are breaking down, as well as
ours.”

“I seem to hear the noise of a troop of horsemen,” exclaimed Porthos,
leaning over his horse’s mane.

“Impossible.”

“They appear to be numerous.”

“Then ’tis something else.”

“Another horse!” said Porthos.

“Dead?”

“No, dying.”

“Saddled?”

“Yes, saddled and bridled.”

“Then we are upon the fugitives.”

“Courage, we have them!”

“But if they are numerous,” observed Mousqueton, “’tis not we who have
them, but they who have us.”

“Nonsense!” cried D’Artagnan, “they’ll suppose us to be stronger than
themselves, as we’re in pursuit; they’ll be afraid and will disperse.”

“Certainly,” remarked Porthos.

“Ah! do you see?” cried the lieutenant.

“The lights again! this time I, too, saw them,” said Porthos.

“On! on! forward! forward!” cried D’Artagnan, in his stentorian voice;
“we shall laugh over all this in five minutes.”

And they darted on anew. The horses, excited by pain and emulation,
raced over the dark road, in the midst of which was now seen a moving
mass, denser and more obscure than the rest of the horizon.




Chapter XXVI.
The Rencontre.


They rode on in this way for ten minutes. Suddenly two dark forms
seemed to separate from the mass, advanced, grew in size, and as they
loomed up larger and larger, assumed the appearance of two horsemen.

“Aha!” cried D’Artagnan, “they’re coming toward us.”

“So much the worse for them,” said Porthos.

“Who goes there?” cried a hoarse voice.

The three horsemen made no reply, stopped not, and all that was heard
was the noise of swords drawn from the scabbards and the cocking of the
pistols with which the two phantoms were armed.

“Bridle in mouth!” said D’Artagnan.

Porthos understood him and he and the lieutenant each drew with the
left hand a pistol from their bolsters and cocked it in their turn.

“Who goes there?” was asked a second time. “Not a step forward, or
you’re dead men.”

“Stuff!” cried Porthos, almost choked with dust and chewing his bridle
as a horse chews his bit. “Stuff and nonsense; we have seen plenty of
dead men in our time.”

Hearing these words, the two shadows blockaded the road and by the
light of the stars might be seen the shining of their arms.

“Back!” shouted D’Artagnan, “or you are dead!”

Two shots were the reply to this threat; but the assailants attacked
their foes with such velocity that in a moment they were upon them; a
third pistol-shot was heard, aimed by D’Artagnan, and one of his
adversaries fell. As for Porthos, he assaulted the foe with such
violence that, although his sword was thrust aside, the enemy was
thrown off his horse and fell about ten steps from it.

“Finish, Mouston, finish the work!” cried Porthos. And he darted on
beside his friend, who had already begun a fresh pursuit.

“Well?” said Porthos.

“I’ve broken my man’s skull,” cried D’Artagnan. “And you——”

“I’ve only thrown the fellow down, but hark!”

Another shot of a carbine was heard. It was Mousqueton, who was obeying
his master’s command.

“On! on!” cried D’Artagnan; “all goes well! we have the first throw.”

“Ha! ha!” answered Porthos, “behold, other players appear.”

And in fact, two other cavaliers made their appearance, detached, as it
seemed, from the principal group; they again disputed the road.

This time the lieutenant did not wait for the opposite party to speak.

“Stand aside!” he cried; “stand off the road!”

“What do you want?” asked a voice.

“The duke!” Porthos and D’Artagnan roared out both at once.

A burst of laughter was the answer, but finished with a groan.
D’Artagnan had, with his sword, cut in two the poor wretch who had
laughed.

At the same time Porthos and his adversary fired on each other and
D’Artagnan turned to him.

“Bravo! you’ve killed him, I think.”

“No, wounded his horse only.”

“What would you have, my dear fellow? One doesn’t hit the bull’s-eye
every time; it is something to hit inside the ring. Ho! parbleau! what
is the matter with my horse?”

“Your horse is falling,” said Porthos, reining in his own.

In truth, the lieutenant’s horse stumbled and fell on his knees; then a
rattling in his throat was heard and he lay down to die. He had
received in the chest the bullet of D’Artagnan’s first adversary.
D’Artagnan swore loud enough to be heard in the skies.

“Does your honor want a horse?” asked Mousqueton.

“Zounds! want one!” cried the Gascon.

“Here’s one, your honor——”

“How the devil hast thou two horses?” asked D’Artagnan, jumping on one
of them.

“Their masters are dead! I thought they might be useful, so I took
them.”

Meantime Porthos had reloaded his pistols.

“Be on the qui vive!” cried D’Artagnan. “Here are two other cavaliers.”

As he spoke, two horsemen advanced at full speed.

“Ho! your honor!” cried Mousqueton, “the man you upset is getting up.”

“Why didn’t thou do as thou didst to the first man?” said Porthos.

“I held the horses, my hands were full, your honor.”

A shot was fired that moment; Mousqueton shrieked with pain.

“Ah, sir! I’m hit in the other side! exactly opposite the other! This
hurt is just the fellow of the one I had on the road to Amiens.”

Porthos turned around like a lion, plunged on the dismounted cavalier,
who tried to draw his sword; but before it was out of the scabbard,
Porthos, with the hilt of his had struck him such a terrible blow on
the head that he fell like an ox beneath the butcher’s knife.

Mousqueton, groaning, slipped from his horse, his wound not allowing
him to keep the saddle.

On perceiving the cavaliers, D’Artagnan had stopped and charged his
pistol afresh; besides, his horse, he found, had a carbine on the bow
of the saddle.

“Here I am!” exclaimed Porthos. “Shall we wait, or shall we charge?”

“Let us charge them,” answered the Gascon.

“Charge!” cried Porthos.

They spurred on their horses; the other cavaliers were only twenty
steps from them.

“For the king!” cried D’Artagnan.

“The king has no authority here!” answered a deep voice, which seemed
to proceed from a cloud, so enveloped was the cavalier in a whirlwind
of dust.

“’Tis well, we will see if the king’s name is not a passport
everywhere,” replied the Gascon.

“See!” answered the voice.

Two shots were fired at once, one by D’Artagnan, the other by the
adversary of Porthos. D’Artagnan’s ball took off his enemy’s hat. The
ball fired by Porthos’s foe went through the throat of his horse, which
fell, groaning.

“For the last time, where are you going?”

“To the devil!” answered D’Artagnan.

“Good! you may be easy, then—you’ll get there.”

D’Artagnan then saw a musket-barrel leveled at him; he had no time to
draw from his holsters. He recalled a bit of advice which Athos had
once given him, and made his horse rear.

The ball struck the animal full in front. D’Artagnan felt his horse
giving way under him and with his wonderful agility threw himself to
one side.

“Ah! this,” cried the voice, the tone of which was at once polished and
jeering, “this is nothing but a butchery of horses and not a combat
between men. To the sword, sir! the sword!”

And he jumped off his horse.

“To the swords! be it so!” replied D’Artagnan; “that is exactly what I
want.”

D’Artagnan, in two steps, was engaged with the foe, whom, according to
custom, he attacked impetuously, but he met this time with a skill and
a strength of arm that gave him pause. Twice he was obliged to step
back; his opponent stirred not one inch. D’Artagnan returned and again
attacked him.

Twice or thrice thrusts were attempted on both sides, without effect;
sparks were emitted from the swords like water spouting forth.

At last D’Artagnan thought it was time to try one of his favorite
feints in fencing. He brought it to bear, skillfully executed it with
the rapidity of lightning, and struck the blow with a force which he
fancied would prove irresistible.

The blow was parried.

“‘Sdeath!” he cried, with his Gascon accent.

At this exclamation his adversary bounded back and, bending his bare
head, tried to distinguish in the gloom the features of the lieutenant.

As to D’Artagnan, afraid of some feint, he still stood on the
defensive.

“Have a care,” cried Porthos to his opponent; “I’ve still two pistols
charged.”

“The more reason you should fire the first!” cried his foe.

Porthos fired; the flash threw a gleam of light over the field of
battle.

As the light shone on them a cry was heard from the other two
combatants.

“Athos!” exclaimed D’Artagnan.

“D’Artagnan!” ejaculated Athos.

Athos raised his sword; D’Artagnan lowered his.

“Aramis!” cried Athos, “don’t fire!”

“Ah! ha! is it you, Aramis?” said Porthos.

And he threw away his pistol.

Aramis pushed his back into his saddle-bags and sheathed his sword.

“My son!” exclaimed Athos, extending his hand to D’Artagnan.

This was the name which he gave him in former days, in their moments of
tender intimacy.

“Athos!” cried D’Artagnan, wringing his hands. “So you defend him! And
I, who have sworn to take him dead or alive, I am dishonored—and by
you!”

“Kill me!” replied Athos, uncovering his breast, “if your honor
requires my death.”

“Oh! woe is me! woe is me!” cried the lieutenant; “there’s only one man
in the world who could stay my hand; by a fatality that very man bars
my way. What shall I say to the cardinal?”

“You can tell him, sir,” answered a voice which was the voice of high
command in the battle-field, “that he sent against me the only two men
capable of getting the better of four men; of fighting man to man,
without discomfiture, against the Comte de la Fere and the Chevalier
d’Herblay, and of surrendering only to fifty men!

“The prince!” exclaimed at the same moment Athos and Aramis, unmasking
as they addressed the Duc de Beaufort, whilst D’Artagnan and Porthos
stepped backward.

“Fifty cavaliers!” cried the Gascon and Porthos.

“Look around you, gentlemen, if you doubt the fact,” said the duke.

The two friends looked to the right, to the left; they were encompassed
by a troop of horsemen.

“Hearing the noise of the fight,” resumed the duke, “I fancied you had
about twenty men with you, so I came back with those around me, tired
of always running away, and wishing to draw my sword in my own cause;
but you are only two.”

“Yes, my lord; but, as you have said, two that are a match for twenty,”
said Athos.

“Come, gentlemen, your swords,” said the duke.

“Our swords!” cried D’Artagnan, raising his head and regaining his
self-possession. “Never!”

“Never!” added Porthos.

Some of the men moved toward them.

“One moment, my lord,” whispered Athos, and he said something in a low
voice.

“As you will,” replied the duke. “I am too much indebted to you to
refuse your first request. Gentlemen,” he said to his escort,
“withdraw. Monsieur d’Artagnan, Monsieur du Vallon, you are free.”

The order was obeyed; D’Artagnan and Porthos then found themselves in
the centre of a large circle.

“Now, D’Herblay,” said Athos, “dismount and come here.”

Aramis dismounted and went to Porthos, whilst Athos approached
D’Artagnan.

All four once more together.

“Friends!” said Athos, “do you regret you have not shed our blood?”

“No,” replied D’Artagnan; “I regret to see that we, hitherto united,
are opposed to each other. Ah! nothing will ever go well with us
hereafter!”

“Oh, Heaven! No, all is over!” said Porthos.

“Well, be on our side now,” resumed Aramis.

“Silence, D’Herblay!” cried Athos; “such proposals are not to be made
to gentlemen such as these. ’Tis a matter of conscience with them, as
with us.”

“Meantime, here we are, enemies!” said Porthos. “Gramercy! who would
ever have thought it?”

D’Artagnan only sighed.

Athos looked at them both and took their hands in his.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “this is a serious business and my heart bleeds
as if you had pierced it through and through. Yes, we are severed;
there is the great, the distressing truth! But we have not as yet
declared war; perhaps we shall have to make certain conditions,
therefore a solemn conference is indispensable.”

“For my own part, I demand it,” said Aramis.

“I accept it,” interposed D’Artagnan, proudly.

Porthos bowed, as if in assent.

“Let us choose a place of rendezvous,” continued Athos, “and in a last
interview arrange our mutual position and the conduct we are to
maintain toward each other.”

“Good!” the other three exclaimed.

“Well, then, the place?”

“Will the Place Royale suit you?” asked D’Artagnan.

“In Paris?”

“Yes.”

Athos and Aramis looked at each other.

“The Place Royale—be it so!” replied Athos.

“When?”

“To-morrow evening, if you like!”

“At what hour?”

“At ten in the evening, if that suits you; by that time we shall have
returned.”

“Good.”

“There,” continued Athos, “either peace or war will be decided; honor,
at all events, will be maintained!”

“Alas!” murmured D’Artagnan, “our honor as soldiers is lost to us
forever!”

“D’Artagnan,” said Athos, gravely, “I assure you that you do me wrong
in dwelling so upon that. What I think of is, that we have crossed
swords as enemies. Yes,” he continued, sadly shaking his head, “Yes, it
is as you said, misfortune, indeed, has overtaken us. Come, Aramis.”

“And we, Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “will return, carrying our shame to
the cardinal.”

“And tell him,” cried a voice, “that I am not too old yet for a man of
action.”

D’Artagnan recognized the voice of De Rochefort.

“Can I do anything for you, gentlemen?” asked the duke.

“Bear witness that we have done all that we could.”

“That shall be testified to, rest assured. Adieu! we shall meet soon, I
trust, in Paris, where you shall have your revenge.” The duke, as he
spoke, kissed his hand, spurred his horse into a gallop and
disappeared, followed by his troop, who were soon lost in distance and
darkness.

D’Artagnan and Porthos were now alone with a man who held by the
bridles two horses; they thought it was Mousqueton and went up to him.

“What do I see?” cried the lieutenant. “Grimaud, is it thou?”

Grimaud signified that he was not mistaken.

“And whose horses are these?” cried D’Artagnan.

“Who has given them to us?” said Porthos.

“The Comte de la Fere.”

“Athos! Athos!” muttered D’Artagnan; “you think of every one; you are
indeed a nobleman! Whither art thou going, Grimaud?”

“To join the Vicomte de Bragelonne in Flanders, your honor.”

They were taking the road toward Paris, when groans, which seemed to
proceed from a ditch, attracted their attention.

“What is that?” asked D’Artagnan.

“It is I—Mousqueton,” said a mournful voice, whilst a sort of shadow
arose out of the side of the road.

Porthos ran to him. “Art thou dangerously wounded, my dear Mousqueton?”
he said.

“No, sir, but I am severely.”

“What can we do?” said D’Artagnan; “we must return to Paris.”

“I will take care of Mousqueton,” said Grimaud; and he gave his arm to
his old comrade, whose eyes were full of tears, nor could Grimaud tell
whether the tears were caused by wounds or by the pleasure of seeing
him again.

D’Artagnan and Porthos went on, meantime, to Paris. They were passed by
a sort of courier, covered with dust, the bearer of a letter from the
duke to the cardinal, giving testimony to the valor of D’Artagnan and
Porthos.

Mazarin had passed a very bad night when this letter was brought to
him, announcing that the duke was free and that he would henceforth
raise up mortal strife against him.

“What consoles me,” said the cardinal after reading the letter, “is
that, at least, in this chase, D’Artagnan has done me one good turn—he
has destroyed Broussel. This Gascon is a precious fellow; even his
misadventures are of use.”

The cardinal referred to that man whom D’Artagnan upset at the corner
of the Cimetiere Saint Jean in Paris, and who was no other than the
Councillor Broussel.




Chapter XXVII.
The four old Friends prepare to meet again.


Well,” said Porthos, seated in the courtyard of the Hotel de la
Chevrette, to D’Artagnan, who, with a long and melancholy face, had
returned from the Palais Royal; “did he receive you ungraciously, my
dear friend?”

“I’faith, yes! a brute, that cardinal. What are you eating there,
Porthos?”

“I am dipping a biscuit in a glass of Spanish wine; do the same.”

“You are right. Gimblou, a glass of wine.”

“Well, how has all gone off?”

“Zounds! you know there’s only one way of saying things, so I went in
and said, ‘My lord, we were not the strongest party.’

“‘Yes, I know that,’ he said, ‘but give me the particulars.’

“You know, Porthos, I could not give him the particulars without naming
our friends; to name them would be to commit them to ruin, so I merely
said they were fifty and we were two.

“‘There was firing, nevertheless, I heard,’ he said; ‘and your
swords—they saw the light of day, I presume?’

“‘That is, the night, my lord,’ I answered.

“‘Ah!’ cried the cardinal, ‘I thought you were a Gascon, my friend?’

“‘I am a Gascon,’ said I, ‘only when I succeed.’ The answer pleased him
and he laughed.

“‘That will teach me,’ he said, ‘to have my guards provided with better
horses; for if they had been able to keep up with you and if each one
of them had done as much as you and your friend, you would have kept
your word and would have brought him back to me dead or alive.’”

“Well, there’s nothing bad in that, it seems to me,” said Porthos.

“Oh, mon Dieu! no, nothing at all. It was the way in which he spoke. It
is incredible how these biscuit soak up wine! They are veritable
sponges! Gimblou, another bottle.”

The bottle was brought with a promptness which showed the degree of
consideration D’Artagnan enjoyed in the establishment. He continued:

“So I was going away, but he called me back.

“‘You have had three horses foundered or killed?’ he asked me.

“‘Yes, my lord.’

“‘How much were they worth?’”

“Why,” said Porthos, “that was very good of him, it seems to me.”

“‘A thousand pistoles,’ I said.”

“A thousand pistoles!” Porthos exclaimed. “Oh! oh! that is a large sum.
If he knew anything about horses he would dispute the price.”

“Faith! he was very much inclined to do so, the contemptible fellow. He
made a great start and looked at me. I also looked at him; then he
understood, and putting his hand into a drawer, he took from it a
quantity of notes on a bank in Lyons.”

“For a thousand pistoles?”

“For a thousand pistoles—just that amount, the beggar; not one too
many.”

“And you have them?”

“They are here.”

“Upon my word, I think he acted very generously.”

“Generously! to men who had risked their lives for him, and besides had
done him a great service?”

“A great service—what was that?”

“Why, it seems that I crushed for him a parliament councillor.”

“What! that little man in black that you upset at the corner of Saint
Jean Cemetery?”

“That’s the man, my dear fellow; he was an annoyance to the cardinal.
Unfortunately, I didn’t crush him flat. It seems that he came to
himself and that he will continue to be an annoyance.”

“See that, now!” said Porthos; “and I turned my horse aside from going
plump on to him! That will be for another time.”

“He owed me for the councillor, the pettifogger!”

“But,” said Porthos, “if he was not crushed completely——”

“Ah! Monsieur de Richelieu would have said, ‘Five hundred crowns for
the councillor.’ Well, let’s say no more about it. How much were your
animals worth, Porthos?”

“Ah, if poor Mousqueton were here he could tell you to a fraction.”

“No matter; you can tell within ten crowns.”

“Why, Vulcan and Bayard cost me each about two hundred pistoles, and
putting Phoebus at a hundred and fifty, we should be pretty near the
amount.”

“There will remain, then, four hundred and fifty pistoles,” said
D’Artagnan, contentedly.

“Yes,” said Porthos, “but there are the equipments.”

“That is very true. Well, how much for the equipments?”

“If we say one hundred pistoles for the three——”

“Good for the hundred pistoles; there remains, then, three hundred and
fifty.”

Porthos made a sign of assent.

“We will give the fifty pistoles to the hostess for our expenses,” said
D’Artagnan, “and share the three hundred.”

“We will share,” said Porthos.

“A paltry piece of business!” murmured D’Artagnan crumpling his note.

“Pooh!” said Porthos, “it is always that. But tell me——”

“What?”

“Didn’t he speak of me in any way?”

“Ah! yes, indeed!” cried D’Artagnan, who was afraid of disheartening
his friend by telling him that the cardinal had not breathed a word
about him; “yes, surely, he said——”

“He said?” resumed Porthos.

“Stop, I want to remember his exact words. He said, ‘As to your friend,
tell him he may sleep in peace.’”

“Good, very good,” said Porthos; “that signified as clear as daylight
that he still intends to make me a baron.”

At this moment nine o’clock struck. D’Artagnan started.

“Ah, yes,” said Porthos, “there is nine o’clock. We have a rendezvous,
you remember, at the Place Royale.”

“Ah! stop! hold your peace, Porthos, don’t remind me of it; ’tis that
which has made me so cross since yesterday. I shall not go.”

“Why?” asked Porthos.

“Because it is a grievous thing for me to meet again those two men who
caused the failure of our enterprise.”

“And yet,” said Porthos, “neither of them had any advantage over us. I
still had a loaded pistol and you were in full fight, sword in hand.”

“Yes,” said D’Artagnan; “but what if this rendezvous had some hidden
purpose?”

“Oh!” said Porthos, “you can’t think that, D’Artagnan!”

D’Artagnan did not believe Athos to be capable of a deception, but he
sought an excuse for not going to the rendezvous.

“We must go,” said the superb lord of Bracieux, “lest they should say
we were afraid. We who have faced fifty foes on the high road can well
meet two in the Place Royale.”

“Yes, yes, but they took part with the princes without apprising us of
it. Athos and Aramis have played a game with me which alarms me. We
discovered yesterday the truth; what is the use of going to-day to
learn something else?”

“You really have some distrust, then?” said Porthos.

“Of Aramis, yes, since he has become an abbé. You can’t imagine, my
dear fellow, the sort of man he is. He sees us on the road which leads
him to a bishopric, and perhaps will not be sorry to get us out of his
way.”

“Ah, as regards Aramis, that is another thing,” said Porthos, “and it
wouldn’t surprise me at all.”

“Perhaps Monsieur de Beaufort will try, in his turn, to lay hands on
us.”

“Nonsense! He had us in his power and he let us go. Besides we can be
on our guard; let us take arms, let Planchet post himself behind us
with his carbine.”

“Planchet is a Frondeur,” answered D’Artagnan.

“Devil take these civil wars! one can no more now reckon on one’s
friends than on one’s footmen,” said Porthos. “Ah! if Mousqueton were
here! there’s a fellow who will never desert me!”

“So long as you are rich! Ah! my friend! ’tis not civil war that
disunites us. It is that we are each of us twenty years older; it is
that the honest emotions of youth have given place to suggestions of
interest, whispers of ambition, counsels of selfishness. Yes, you are
right; let us go, Porthos, but let us go well armed; were we not to
keep the rendezvous, they would declare we were afraid. Halloo!
Planchet! here! saddle our horses, take your carbine.”

“Whom are we going to attack, sir?”

“No one; a mere matter of precaution,” answered the Gascon.

“You know, sir, that they wished to murder that good councillor,
Broussel, the father of the people?”

“Really, did they?” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes, but he has been avenged. He was carried home in the arms of the
people. His house has been full ever since. He has received visits from
the coadjutor, from Madame de Longueville, and the Prince de Conti;
Madame de Chevreuse and Madame de Vendome have left their names at his
door. And now, whenever he wishes——”

“Well, whenever he wishes?”

Planchet began to sing:

“Un vent de fronde S’est leve ce matin; Je crois qu’il gronde Contre le
Mazarin. Un vent de fronde S’est leve ce matin.”

“It doesn’t surprise me,” said D’Artagnan, in a low tone to Porthos,
“that Mazarin would have been much better satisfied had I crushed the
life out of his councillor.”

“You understand, then, monsieur,” resumed Planchet, “that if it were
for some enterprise like that undertaken against Monsieur Broussel that
you should ask me to take my carbine——”

“No, don’t be alarmed; but where did you get all these details?”

“From a good source, sir; I heard it from Friquet.”

“From Friquet? I know that name——”

“A son of Monsieur de Broussel’s servant, and a lad that, I promise
you, in a revolt will not give away his share to the dogs.”

“Is he not a singing boy at Notre Dame?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Yes, that is the very boy; he’s patronized by Bazin.”

“Ah, yes, I know.”

“Of what importance is this little reptile to you?” asked Porthos.

“Gad!” replied D’Artagnan; “he has already given me good information
and he may do the same again.”

Whilst all this was going on, Athos and Aramis were entering Paris by
the Faubourg St. Antoine. They had taken some refreshment on the road
and hastened on, that they might not fail at the appointed place. Bazin
was their only attendant, for Grimaud had stayed behind to take care of
Mousqueton. As they were passing onward, Athos proposed that they
should lay aside their arms and military costume, and assume a dress
more suited to the city.

“Oh, no, dear count!” cried Aramis, “is it not a warlike encounter that
we are going to?”

“What do you mean, Aramis?”

“That the Place Royale is the termination to the main road to
Vendomois, and nothing else.”

“What! our friends?”

“Are become our most dangerous enemies, Athos. Let us be on our guard.”

“Oh! my dear D’Herblay!”

“Who can say whether D’Artagnan may not have betrayed us to the
cardinal? who can tell whether Mazarin may not take advantage of this
rendezvous to seize us?”

“What! Aramis, you think that D’Artagnan, that Porthos, would lend
their hands to such an infamy?”

“Among friends, my dear Athos, no, you are right; but among enemies it
would be only a stratagem.”

Athos crossed his arms and bowed his noble head.

“What can you expect, Athos? Men are so made; and we are not always
twenty years old. We have cruelly wounded, as you know, that personal
pride by which D’Artagnan is blindly governed. He has been beaten. Did
you not observe his despair on the journey? As to Porthos, his barony
was perhaps dependent on that affair. Well, he found us on his road and
will not be baron this time. Perhaps that famous barony will have
something to do with our interview this evening. Let us take our
precautions, Athos.”

“But suppose they come unarmed? What a disgrace to us.”

“Oh, never fear! besides, if they do, we can easily make an excuse; we
came straight off a journey and are insurgents, too.”

“An excuse for us! to meet D’Artagnan with a false excuse! to have to
make a false excuse to Porthos! Oh, Aramis!” continued Athos, shaking
his head mournfully, “upon my soul, you make me the most miserable of
men; you disenchant a heart not wholly dead to friendship. Go in
whatever guise you choose; for my part, I shall go unarmed.”

“No, for I will not allow you to do so. ’Tis not one man, not Athos
only, not the Comte de la Fere whom you will ruin by this amiable
weakness, but a whole party to whom you belong and who depend upon
you.”

“Be it so then,” replied Athos, sorrowfully.

And they pursued their road in mournful silence.

Scarcely had they reached by the Rue de la Mule the iron gate of the
Place Royale, when they perceived three cavaliers, D’Artagnan, Porthos,
and Planchet, the two former wrapped up in their military cloaks under
which their swords were hidden, and Planchet, his musket by his side.
They were waiting at the entrance of the Rue Sainte Catharine, and
their horses were fastened to the rings of the arcade. Athos,
therefore, commanded Bazin to fasten up his horse and that of Aramis in
the same manner.

They then advanced two and two, and saluted each other politely.

“Now where will it be agreeable to you that we hold our conference?”
inquired Aramis, perceiving that people were stopping to look at them,
supposing that they were going to engage in one of those far-famed
duels still extant in the memory of the Parisians, and especially the
inhabitants of the Place Royale.

“The gate is shut,” said Aramis, “but if these gentlemen like a cool
retreat under the trees, and perfect seclusion, I will get the key from
the Hotel de Rohan and we shall be well suited.”

D’Artagnan darted a look into the obscurity of the Place. Porthos
ventured to put his head between the railings, to try if his glance
could penetrate the gloom.

“If you prefer any other place,” said Athos, in his persuasive voice,
“choose for yourselves.”

“This place, if Monsieur d’Herblay can procure the key, is the best
that we can have,” was the answer.

Aramis went off at once, begging Athos not to remain alone within reach
of D’Artagnan and Porthos; a piece of advice which was received with a
contemptuous smile.

Aramis returned soon with a man from the Hotel de Rohan, who was saying
to him:

“You swear, sir, that it is not so?”

“Stop,” and Aramis gave him a louis d’or.

“Ah! you will not swear, my master,” said the concierge, shaking his
head.

“Well, one can never say what may happen; at present we and these
gentlemen are excellent friends.”

“Yes, certainly,” added Athos and the other two.

D’Artagnan had heard the conversation and had understood it.

“You see?” he said to Porthos.

“What do I see?”

“That he wouldn’t swear.”

“Swear what?”

“That man wanted Aramis to swear that we are not going to the Place
Royale to fight.”

“And Aramis wouldn’t swear?”

“No.”

“Attention, then!”

Athos did not lose sight of the two speakers. Aramis opened the gate
and faced around in order that D’Artagnan and Porthos might enter. In
passing through the gate, the hilt of the lieutenant’s sword was caught
in the grating and he was obliged to pull off his cloak; in doing so he
showed the butt end of his pistols and a ray of the moon was reflected
on the shining metal.

“Do you see?” whispered Aramis to Athos, touching his shoulder with one
hand and pointing with the other to the arms which the Gascon wore
under his belt.

“Alas! I do!” replied Athos, with a deep sigh.

He entered third, and Aramis, who shut the gate after him, last. The
two serving-men waited without; but as if they likewise mistrusted each
other, they kept their respective distances.




Chapter XXVIII.
The Place Royale.


They proceeded silently to the centre of the Place, but as at this very
moment the moon had just emerged from behind a cloud, they thought they
might be observed if they remained on that spot and therefore regained
the shade of the lime-trees.

There were benches here and there; the four gentlemen stopped near
them; at a sign from Athos, Porthos and D’Artagnan sat down, the two
others stood in front of them.

After a few minutes of silent embarrassment, Athos spoke.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “our presence here is the best proof of former
friendship; not one of us has failed the others at this rendezvous; not
one has, therefore, to reproach himself.”

“Hear me, count,” replied D’Artagnan; “instead of making compliments to
each other, let us explain our conduct to each other, like men of right
and honest hearts.”

“I wish for nothing more; have you any cause of complaint against me or
Monsieur d’Herblay? If so, speak out,” answered Athos.

“I have,” replied D’Artagnan. “When I saw you at your chateau at
Bragelonne, I made certain proposals to you which you perfectly
understood; instead of answering me as a friend, you played with me as
a child; the friendship, therefore, that you boast of was not broken
yesterday by the shock of swords, but by your dissimulation at your
castle.”

“D’Artagnan!” said Athos, reproachfully.

“You asked for candor and you have it. You ask what I have against you;
I tell you. And I have the same sincerity to show you, if you wish,
Monsieur d’Herblay; I acted in a similar way to you and you also
deceived me.”

“Really, monsieur, you say strange things,” said Aramis. “You came
seeking me to make to me certain proposals, but did you make them? No,
you sounded me, nothing more. Very well what did I say to you? that
Mazarin was contemptible and that I wouldn’t serve Mazarin. But that is
all. Did I tell you that I wouldn’t serve any other? On the contrary, I
gave you to understand, I think, that I adhered to the princes. We even
joked very pleasantly, if I remember rightly, on the very probable
contingency of your being charged by the cardinal with my arrest. Were
you a party man? There is no doubt of that. Well, why should not we,
too, belong to a party? You had your secret and we had ours; we didn’t
exchange them. So much the better; it proves that we know how to keep
our secrets.”

“I do not reproach you, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan; “’tis only because
Monsieur de la Fere has spoken of friendship that I question your
conduct.”

“And what do you find in it that is worthy of blame?” asked Aramis,
haughtily.

The blood mounted instantly to the temples of D’Artagnan, who arose,
and replied:

“I consider it worthy conduct of a pupil of Jesuits.”

On seeing D’Artagnan rise, Porthos rose also; these four men were
therefore all standing at the same time, with a menacing aspect,
opposite to each other.

Upon hearing D’Artagnan’s reply, Aramis seemed about to draw his sword,
when Athos prevented him.

“D’Artagnan,” he said, “you are here to-night, still infuriated by
yesterday’s adventure. I believed your heart noble enough to enable a
friendship of twenty years to overcome an affront of a quarter of an
hour. Come, do you really think you have anything to say against me?
Say it then; if I am in fault I will avow the error.”

The grave and harmonious tones of that beloved voice seemed to have
still its ancient influence, whilst that of Aramis, which had become
harsh and tuneless in his moments of ill-humor, irritated him. He
answered therefore:

“I think, monsieur le comte, that you had something to communicate to
me at your chateau of Bragelonne, and that gentleman”—he pointed to
Aramis—“had also something to tell me when I was in his convent. At
that time I was not concerned in the adventure, in the course of which
you have so successfully estopped me! However, because I was prudent
you must not take me for a fool. If I had wished to widen the breach
between those whom Monsieur d’Herblay chooses to receive with a rope
ladder and those whom he receives with a wooden ladder, I could have
spoken out.”

“What are you meddling with?” cried Aramis, pale with anger, suspecting
that D’Artagnan had acted as a spy on him and had seen him with Madame
de Longueville.

“I never meddle save with what concerns me, and I know how to make
believe that I haven’t seen what does not concern me; but I hate
hypocrites, and among that number I place musketeers who are abbés and
abbés who are musketeers; and,” he added, turning to Porthos “here’s a
gentleman who’s of the same opinion as myself.”

Porthos, who had not spoken one word, answered merely by a word and a
gesture.

He said “yes” and he put his hand on his sword.

Aramis started back and drew his. D’Artagnan bent forward, ready either
to attack or to stand on his defense.

Athos at that moment extended his hand with the air of supreme command
which characterized him alone, drew out his sword and the scabbard at
the same time, broke the blade in the sheath on his knee and threw the
pieces to his right. Then turning to Aramis:

“Aramis,” he said, “break your sword.”

Aramis hesitated.

“It must be done,” said Athos; then in a lower and more gentle voice,
he added. “I wish it.”

Then Aramis, paler than before, but subdued by these words, snapped the
serpent blade between his hands, and then folding his arms, stood
trembling with rage.

These proceedings made D’Artagnan and Porthos draw back. D’Artagnan did
not draw his sword; Porthos put his back into the sheath.

“Never!” exclaimed Athos, raising his right hand to Heaven, “never! I
swear before God, who seeth us, and who, in the darkness of this night
heareth us, never shall my sword cross yours, never my eye express a
glance of anger, nor my heart a throb of hatred, at you. We lived
together, we loved, we hated together; we shed, we mingled our blood
together, and too probably, I may still add, that there may be yet a
bond between us closer even than that of friendship; perhaps there may
be the bond of crime; for we four, we once did condemn, judge and slay
a human being whom we had not any right to cut off from this world,
although apparently fitter for hell than for this life. D’Artagnan, I
have always loved you as my son; Porthos, we slept six years side by
side; Aramis is your brother as well as mine, and Aramis has once loved
you, as I love you now and as I have ever loved you. What can Cardinal
Mazarin be to us, to four men who compelled such a man as Richelieu to
act as we pleased? What is such or such a prince to us, who fixed the
diadem upon a great queen’s head? D’Artagnan, I ask your pardon for
having yesterday crossed swords with you; Aramis does the same to
Porthos; now hate me if you can; but for my own part, I shall ever,
even if you do hate me, retain esteem and friendship for you. I repeat
my words, Aramis, and then, if you desire it, and if they desire it,
let us separate forever from our old friends.”

There was a solemn, though momentary silence, which was broken by
Aramis.

“I swear,” he said, with a calm brow and kindly glance, but in a voice
still trembling with recent emotion, “I swear that I no longer bear
animosity to those who were once my friends. I regret that I ever
crossed swords with you, Porthos; I swear not only that it shall never
again be pointed at your breast, but that in the bottom of my heart
there will never in future be the slightest hostile sentiment; now,
Athos, come.”

Athos was about to retire.

“Oh! no! no! do not go away!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, impelled by one of
those irresistible impulses which showed the nobility of his nature,
the native brightness of his character; “I swear that I would give the
last drop of my blood and the last fragment of my limbs to preserve the
friendship of such a friend as you, Athos—of such a man as you,
Aramis.” And he threw himself into the arms of Athos.

“My son!” exclaimed Athos, pressing him in his arms.

“And as for me,” said Porthos, “I swear nothing, but I’m choked.
Forsooth! If I were obliged to fight against you, I think I should
allow myself to be pierced through and through, for I never loved any
one but you in the wide world;” and honest Porthos burst into tears as
he embraced Athos.

“My friends,” said Athos, “this is what I expected from such hearts as
yours. Yes, I have said it and I now repeat it: our destinies are
irrevocably united, although we now pursue divergent roads. I respect
your convictions, and whilst we fight for opposite sides, let us remain
friends. Ministers, princes, kings, will pass away like mountain
torrents; civil war, like a forest flame; but we—we shall remain; I
have a presentiment that we shall.”

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “let us still be musketeers, and let us
retain as our battle-standard that famous napkin of the bastion St.
Gervais, on which the great cardinal had three fleurs-de-lis
embroidered.”

“Be it so,” cried Aramis. “Cardinalists or Frondeurs, what matters it?
Let us meet again as capital seconds in a duel, devoted friends in
business, merry companions in our ancient pleasures.”

“And whenever,” added Athos, “we meet in battle, at this word, ‘Place
Royale!’ let us put our swords into our left hands and shake hands with
the right, even in the very lust and music of the hottest carnage.”

“You speak charmingly,” said Porthos.

“And are the first of men!” added D’Artagnan. “You excel us all.”

Athos smiled with ineffable pleasure.

“’Tis then all settled. Gentlemen, your hands; are we not pretty good
Christians?”

“Egad!” said D’Artagnan, “by Heaven! yes.”

“We should be so on this occasion, if only to be faithful to our oath,”
said Aramis.

“Ah, I’m ready to do what you will,” cried Porthos; “even to swear by
Mahomet. Devil take me if I’ve ever been so happy as at this moment.”

And he wiped his eyes, still moist.

“Has not one of you a cross?” asked Athos.

Aramis smiled and drew from his vest a cross of diamonds, which was
hung around his neck by a chain of pearls. “Here is one,” he said.

“Well,” resumed Athos, “swear on this cross, which, in spite of its
magnificent material, is still a cross; swear to be united in spite of
everything, and forever, and may this oath bind us to each other, and
even, also, our descendants! Does this oath satisfy you?”

“Yes,” said they all, with one accord.

“Ah, traitor!” muttered D’Artagnan, leaning toward Aramis and
whispering in his ear, “you have made us swear on the crucifix of a
Frondeuse.”




Chapter XXIX.
The Ferry across the Oise.


We hope that the reader has not quite forgotten the young traveler whom
we left on the road to Flanders.

In losing sight of his guardian, whom he had quitted, gazing after him
in front of the royal basilican, Raoul spurred on his horse, in order
not only to escape from his own melancholy reflections, but also to
hide from Olivain the emotion his face might betray.

One hour’s rapid progress, however, sufficed to disperse the gloomy
fancies that had clouded the young man’s bright anticipations; and the
hitherto unfelt pleasure of freedom—a pleasure which is sweet even to
those who have never known dependence—seemed to Raoul to gild not only
Heaven and earth, but especially that blue but dim horizon of life we
call the future.

Nevertheless, after several attempts at conversation with Olivain he
foresaw that many days passed thus would prove exceedingly dull; and
the count’s agreeable voice, his gentle and persuasive eloquence,
recurred to his mind at the various towns through which they journeyed
and about which he had no longer any one to give him those interesting
details which he would have drawn from Athos, the most amusing and the
best informed of guides. Another recollection contributed also to
sadden Raoul: on their arrival at Sonores he had perceived, hidden
behind a screen of poplars, a little chateau which so vividly recalled
that of La Valliere to his mind that he halted for nearly ten minutes
to gaze at it, and resumed his journey with a sigh too abstracted even
to reply to Olivain’s respectful inquiry about the cause of so much
fixed attention. The aspect of external objects is often a mysterious
guide communicating with the fibres of memory, which in spite of us
will arouse them at times; this thread, like that of Ariadne, when once
unraveled will conduct one through a labyrinth of thought, in which one
loses one’s self in endeavoring to follow that phantom of the past
which is called recollection.

Now the sight of this chateau had taken Raoul back fifty leagues
westward and had caused him to review his life from the moment when he
had taken leave of little Louise to that in which he had seen her for
the first time; and every branch of oak, every gilded weathercock on
roof of slates, reminded him that, instead of returning to the friends
of his childhood, every instant estranged him further and that perhaps
he had even left them forever.

With a full heart and burning head he desired Olivain to lead on the
horses to a wayside inn, which he observed within gunshot range, a
little in advance of the place they had reached.

As for himself, he dismounted and remained under a beautiful group of
chestnuts in flower, amidst which were murmuring a multitude of happy
bees, and bade Olivain send the host to him with writing paper and ink,
to be placed on a table which he found there, conveniently ready.
Olivain obeyed and continued on his way, whilst Raoul remained sitting,
with his elbow leaning on the table, from time to time gently shaking
the flowers from his head, which fell upon him like snow, and gazing
vaguely on the charming landscape spread out before him, dotted over
with green fields and groups of trees. Raoul had been there about ten
minutes, during five of which he was lost in reverie, when there
appeared within the circle comprised in his rolling gaze a man with a
rubicund face, who, with a napkin around his body, another under his
arm, and a white cap upon his head, approached him, holding paper, pen
and ink in hand.

“Ha! ha!” laughed the apparition, “every gentleman seems to have the
same fancy, for not a quarter of an hour ago a young lad, well mounted
like you, as tall as you and of about your age, halted before this
clump of trees and had this table and this chair brought here, and
dined here, with an old gentleman who seemed to be his tutor, upon a
pie, of which they haven’t left a mouthful, and two bottles of Macon
wine, of which they haven’t left a drop, but fortunately we have still
some of the same wine and some of the same pies left, and if your
worship will but give your orders——”

“No, friend,” replied Raoul, smiling, “I am obliged to you, but at this
moment I want nothing but the things for which I have asked—only I
shall be very glad if the ink prove black and the pen good; upon these
conditions I will pay for the pen the price of the bottle, and for the
ink the price of the pie.”

“Very well, sir,” said the host, “I’ll give the pie and the bottle of
wine to your servant, and in this way you will have the pen and ink
into the bargain.”

“Do as you like,” said Raoul, who was beginning his apprenticeship with
that particular class of society, who, when there were robbers on the
highroads, were connected with them, and who, since highwaymen no
longer exist, have advantageously and aptly filled their vacant place.

The host, his mind at ease about his bill, placed pen, ink and paper
upon the table. By a lucky chance the pen was tolerably good and Raoul
began to write. The host remained standing in front of him, looking
with a kind of involuntary admiration at his handsome face, combining
both gravity and sweetness of expression. Beauty has always been and
always will be all-powerful.

“He’s not a guest like the other one here just now,” observed mine host
to Olivain, who had rejoined his master to see if he wanted anything,
“and your young master has no appetite.”

“My master had appetite enough three days ago, but what can one do? he
lost it the day before yesterday.”

And Olivain and the host took their way together toward the inn,
Olivain, according to the custom of serving-men well pleased with their
place, relating to the tavern-keeper all that he could say in favor of
the young gentleman; whilst Raoul wrote on thus:

“Sir,—After a four hours’ march I stop to write to you, for I miss you
every moment, and I am always on the point of turning my head as if to
reply when you speak to me. I was so bewildered by your departure and
so overcome with grief at our separation, that I am sure I was able to
but very feebly express all the affection and gratitude I feel toward
you. You will forgive me, sir, for your heart is of such a generous
nature that you can well understand all that has passed in mine. I
entreat you to write to me, for you form a part of my existence, and,
if I may venture to tell you so, I also feel anxious. It seemed to me
as if you were yourself preparing for some dangerous undertaking, about
which I did not dare to question you, since you told me nothing. I
have, therefore, as you see, great need of hearing from you. Now that
you are no longer beside me I am afraid every moment of erring. You
sustained me powerfully, sir, and I protest to you that to-day I feel
very lonely. Will you have the goodness, sir, should you receive news
from Blois, to send me a few lines about my little friend Mademoiselle
de la Valliere, about whose health, when we left, so much anxiety was
felt? You can understand, honored and dear guardian, how precious and
indispensable to me is the remembrance of the years that I have passed
with you. I hope that you will sometimes, too, think of me, and if at
certain hours you should miss me, if you should feel any slight regret
at my absence, I shall be overwhelmed with joy at the thought that you
appreciate my affection for and my devotion to yourself, and that I
have been able to prove them to you whilst I had the happiness of
living with you.”

After finishing this letter Raoul felt more composed; he looked well
around him to see if Olivain and the host might not be watching him,
whilst he impressed a kiss upon the paper, a mute and touching caress,
which the heart of Athos might well divine on opening the letter.

During this time Olivain had finished his bottle and eaten his pie; the
horses were also refreshed. Raoul motioned to the host to approach,
threw a crown upon the table, mounted his horse, and posted his letter
at Senlis. The rest that had been thus afforded to men and horses
enabled them to continue their journey at a good round pace. At
Verberie, Raoul desired Olivain to make some inquiry about the young
man who was preceding them; he had been observed to pass only
three-quarters of an hour previously, but he was well mounted, as the
tavern-keeper had already said, and rode at a rapid pace.

“Let us try and overtake this gentleman,” said Raoul to Olivain; “like
ourselves he is on his way to join the army and may prove agreeable
company.”

It was about four o’clock in the afternoon when Raoul arrived at
Compiegne; there he dined heartily and again inquired about the young
gentleman who was in advance of them. He had stopped, like Raoul, at
the Hotel of the Bell and Bottle, the best at Compiegne; and had
started again on his journey, saying that he should sleep at Noyon.

“Well, let us sleep at Noyon,” said Raoul.

“Sir,” replied Olivain, respectfully, “allow me to remark that we have
already much fatigued the horses this morning. I think it would be well
to sleep here and to start again very early to-morrow. Eighteen leagues
is enough for the first stage.”

“The Comte de la Fere wished me to hasten on,” replied Raoul, “that I
might rejoin the prince on the morning of the fourth day; let us push
on, then, to Noyon; it will be a stage similar to those we traveled
from Blois to Paris. We shall arrive at eight o’clock. The horses will
have a long night’s rest, and at five o’clock to-morrow morning we can
be again on the road.”

Olivain dared offer no opposition to this determination but he followed
his master, grumbling.

“Go on, go on,” said he, between his teeth, “expend your ardor the
first day; to-morrow, instead of journeying twenty leagues, you will
travel ten, the day after to-morrow, five, and in three days you will
be in bed. There you must rest; young people are such braggarts.”

It was easy to see that Olivain had not been taught in the school of
the Planchets and the Grimauds. Raoul really felt tired, but he was
desirous of testing his strength, and, brought up in the principles of
Athos and certain of having heard him speak a thousand times of stages
of twenty-five leagues, he did not wish to fall far short of his model.
D’Artagnan, that man of iron, who seemed to be made of nerve and muscle
only, had struck him with admiration. Therefore, in spite of Olivain’s
remarks, he continued to urge his steed more and more, and following a
pleasant little path, leading to a ferry, and which he had been assured
shortened the journey by the distance of one league, he arrived at the
summit of a hill and perceived the river flowing before him. A little
troop of men on horseback were waiting on the edge of the stream, ready
to embark. Raoul did not doubt this was the gentleman and his escort;
he called out to him, but they were too distant to be heard; then, in
spite of the weariness of his beast, he made it gallop but the rising
ground soon deprived him of all sight of the travelers, and when he had
again attained a new height, the ferryboat had left the shore and was
making for the opposite bank. Raoul, seeing that he could not arrive in
time to cross the ferry with the travelers, halted to wait for Olivain.
At this moment a shriek was heard that seemed to come from the river.
Raoul turned toward the side whence the cry had sounded, and shaded his
eyes from the glare of the setting sun with his hand.

“Olivain!” he exclaimed, “what do I see below there?”

A second scream, more piercing than the first, now sounded.

“Oh, sir!” cried Olivain, “the rope which holds the ferryboat has
broken and the boat is drifting. But what do I see in the
water—something struggling?”

“Oh, yes,” exclaimed Raoul, fixing his glance on one point in the
stream, splendidly illumined by the setting sun, “a horse, a rider!”

“They are sinking!” cried Olivain in his turn.

It was true, and Raoul was convinced that some accident had happened
and that a man was drowning; he gave his horse its head, struck his
spurs into its sides, and the animal, urged by pain and feeling that he
had space open before him, bounded over a kind of paling which inclosed
the landing place, and fell into the river, scattering to a distance
waves of white froth.

“Ah, sir!” cried Olivain, “what are you doing? Good God!”

Raoul was directing his horse toward the unhappy man in danger. This
was, in fact, a custom familiar to him. Having been brought up on the
banks of the Loire, he might have been said to have been cradled on its
waves; a hundred times he had crossed it on horseback, a thousand times
had swum across. Athos, foreseeing the period when he should make a
soldier of the viscount, had inured him to all kinds of arduous
undertakings.

“Oh, heavens!” continued Olivain, in despair, “what would the count say
if he only saw you now!”

“The count would do as I do,” replied Raoul, urging his horse
vigorously forward.

“But I—but I,” cried Olivain, pale and disconsolate rushing about on
the shore, “how shall I cross?”

“Leap, coward!” cried Raoul, swimming on; then addressing the traveler,
who was struggling twenty yards in front of him: “Courage, sir!” said
he, “courage! we are coming to your aid.”

Olivain advanced, retired, then made his horse rear—turned it and then,
struck to the core by shame, leaped, as Raoul had done, only repeating:

“I am a dead man! we are lost!”

In the meantime, the ferryboat had floated away, carried down by the
stream, and the shrieks of those whom it contained resounded more and
more. A man with gray hair had thrown himself from the boat into the
river and was swimming vigorously toward the person who was drowning;
but being obliged to go against the current he advanced but slowly.
Raoul continued his way and was visibly gaining ground; but the horse
and its rider, of whom he did not lose sight, were evidently sinking.
The nostrils of the horse were no longer above water, and the rider,
who had lost the reins in struggling, fell with his head back and his
arms extended. One moment longer and all would disappear.

“Courage!” cried Raoul, “courage!”

“Too late!” murmured the young man, “too late!”

The water closed above his head and stifled his voice.

Raoul sprang from his horse, to which he left the charge of its own
preservation, and in three or four strokes was at the gentleman’s side;
he seized the horse at once by the curb and raised its head above
water; the animal began to breathe again and, as if he comprehended
that they had come to his aid, redoubled his efforts. Raoul at the same
time seized one of the young man’s hands and placed it on the mane,
which it grasped with the tenacity of a drowning man. Thus, sure that
the rider would not release his hold, Raoul now only directed his
attention to the horse, which he guided to the opposite bank, helping
it to cut through the water and encouraging it with words.

All at once the horse stumbled against a ridge and then placed its foot
on the sand.

“Saved!” exclaimed the man with gray hair, who also touched bottom.

“Saved!” mechanically repeated the young gentleman, releasing the mane
and sliding from the saddle into Raoul’s arms; Raoul was but ten yards
from the shore; there he bore the fainting man, and laying him down
upon the grass, unfastened the buttons of his collar and unhooked his
doublet. A moment later the gray-headed man was beside him. Olivain
managed in his turn to land, after crossing himself repeatedly; and the
people in the ferryboat guided themselves as well as they were able
toward the bank, with the aid of a pole which chanced to be in the
boat.

Thanks to the attentions of Raoul and the man who accompanied the young
gentleman, the color gradually returned to the pale cheeks of the dying
man, who opened his eyes, at first entirely bewildered, but who soon
fixed his gaze upon the person who had saved him.

“Ah, sir,” he exclaimed, “it was you! Without you I was a dead
man—thrice dead.”

“But one recovers, sir, as you perceive,” replied Raoul, “and we have
but had a little bath.”

“Oh! sir, what gratitude I feel!” exclaimed the man with gray hair.

“Ah, there you are, my good D’Arminges; I have given you a great
fright, have I not? but it is your own fault. You were my tutor, why
did you not teach me to swim?”

“Oh, monsieur le comte,” replied the old man, “had any misfortune
happened to you, I should never have dared to show myself to the
marshal again.”

“But how did the accident happen?” asked Raoul.

“Oh, sir, in the most natural way possible,” replied he to whom they
had given the title of count. “We were about a third of the way across
the river when the cord of the ferryboat broke. Alarmed by the cries
and gestures of the boatmen, my horse sprang into the water. I cannot
swim, and dared not throw myself into the river. Instead of aiding the
movements of my horse, I paralyzed them; and I was just going to drown
myself with the best grace in the world, when you arrived just in time
to pull me out of the water; therefore, sir, if you will agree,
henceforward we are friends until death.”

“Sir,” replied Raoul, bowing, “I am entirely at your service, I assure
you.”

“I am called the Count de Guiche,” continued the young man; “my father
is the Marechal de Grammont; and now that you know who I am, do me the
honor to inform me who you are.”

“I am the Viscount de Bragelonne,” answered Raoul, blushing at being
unable to name his father, as the Count de Guiche had done.

“Viscount, your countenance, your goodness and your courage incline me
toward you; my gratitude is already due. Shake hands—I crave your
friendship.”

“Sir,” said Raoul, returning the count’s pressure of the hand, “I like
you already, from my heart; pray regard me as a devoted friend, I
beseech you.”

“And now, where are you going, viscount?” inquired De Guiche.

“To join the army, under the prince, count.”

“And I, too!” exclaimed the young man, in a transport of joy. “Oh, so
much the better, we will fire the first shot together.”

“It is well; be friends,” said the tutor; “young as you both are, you
were perhaps born under the same star and were destined to meet. And
now,” continued he, “you must change your clothes; your servants, to
whom I gave directions the moment they had left the ferryboat, ought to
be already at the inn. Linen and wine are both being warmed; come.”

The young men had no objection to this proposition; on the contrary,
they thought it very timely.

They mounted again at once, whilst looks of admiration passed between
them. They were indeed two elegant horsemen, with figures slight and
upright, noble faces, bright and proud looks, loyal and intelligent
smiles.

De Guiche might have been about eighteen years of age, but he was
scarcely taller than Raoul, who was only fifteen.




Chapter XXX.
Skirmishing.


The halt at Noyon was but brief, every one there being wrapped in
profound sleep. Raoul had desired to be awakened should Grimaud arrive,
but Grimaud did not arrive. Doubtless, too, the horses on their part
appreciated the eight hours of repose and the abundant stabling which
was granted them. The Count de Guiche was awakened at five o’clock in
the morning by Raoul, who came to wish him good-day. They breakfasted
in haste, and at six o’clock had already gone ten miles.

The young count’s conversation was most interesting to Raoul, therefore
he listened much, whilst the count talked well and long. Brought up in
Paris, where Raoul had been but once; at the court, which Raoul had
never seen; his follies as page; two duels, which he had already found
the means of fighting, in spite of the edicts against them and, more
especially, in spite of his tutor’s vigilance—these things excited the
greatest curiosity in Raoul. Raoul had only been at M. Scarron’s house;
he named to Guiche the people whom he had seen there. Guiche knew
everybody—Madame de Neuillan, Mademoiselle d’Aubigne, Mademoiselle de
Scudery, Mademoiselle Paulet, Madame de Chevreuse. He criticised
everybody humorously. Raoul trembled, lest he should laugh among the
rest at Madame de Chevreuse, for whom he entertained deep and genuine
sympathy, but either instinctively, or from affection for the duchess,
he said everything in her favor. His praises increased Raoul’s
friendship twofold. Then came the question of gallantry and love
affairs. Under this head, also, Bragelonne had much more to hear than
to tell. He listened attentively and fancied that he discovered through
three or four rather frivolous adventures, that the count, like
himself, had a secret to hide in the depths of his heart.

De Guiche, as we have said before, had been educated at the court, and
the intrigues of this court were not unknown to him. It was the same
court of which Raoul had so often heard the Comte de la Fere speak,
except that its aspect had much changed since the period when Athos had
himself been part of it; therefore everything which the Count de Guiche
related was new to his traveling companion. The young count, witty and
caustic, passed all the world in review; the queen herself was not
spared, and Cardinal Mazarin came in for his share of ridicule.

The day passed away as rapidly as an hour. The count’s tutor, a man of
the world and a bon vivant, up to his eyes in learning, as his pupil
described him, often recalled the profound erudition, the witty and
caustic satire of Athos to Raoul; but as regarded grace, delicacy, and
nobility of external appearance, no one in these points was to be
compared to the Comte de la Fere.

The horses, which were more kindly used than on the previous day,
stopped at Arras at four o’clock in the evening. They were approaching
the scene of war; and as bands of Spaniards sometimes took advantage of
the night to make expeditions even as far as the neighborhood of Arras,
they determined to remain in the town until the morrow. The French army
held all between Pont-a-Marc as far as Valenciennes, falling back upon
Douai. The prince was said to be in person at Bethune.

The enemy’s army extended from Cassel to Courtray; and as there was no
species of violence or pillage it did not commit, the poor people on
the frontier quitted their isolated dwellings and fled for refuge into
the strong cities which held out a shelter to them. Arras was
encumbered with fugitives. An approaching battle was much spoken of,
the prince having manoeuvred, until that movement, only in order to
await a reinforcement that had just reached him.

The young men congratulated themselves on having arrived so
opportunely. The evening was employed in discussing the war; the grooms
polished their arms; the young men loaded the pistols in case of a
skirmish, and they awoke in despair, having both dreamed that they had
arrived too late to participate in the battle. In the morning it was
rumored that Prince de Condé had evacuated Bethune and fallen back on
Carvin, leaving, however, a strong garrison in the former city.

But as there was nothing positively certain in this report, the young
warriors decided to continue their way toward Bethune, free on the road
to diverge to the right and march to Carvin if necessary.

The count’s tutor was well acquainted with the country; he consequently
proposed to take a crossroad, which lay between that of Lens and that
of Bethune. They obtained information at Ablain, and a statement of
their route was left for Grimaud. About seven o’clock in the morning
they set out. De Guiche, who was young and impulsive, said to Raoul,
“Here we are, three masters and three servants. Our valets are well
armed and yours seems to be tough enough.”

“I have never seen him put to the test,” replied Raoul, “but he is a
Breton, which promises something.”

“Yes, yes,” resumed De Guiche; “I am sure he can fire a musket when
required. On my side I have two sure men, who have been in action with
my father. We therefore represent six fighting men; if we should meet a
little troop of enemies, equal or even superior in number to our own,
shall we charge them, Raoul?”

“Certainly, sir,” replied the viscount.

“Holloa! young people—stop there!” said the tutor, joining in the
conversation. “Zounds! how you manoeuvre my instructions, count! You
seem to forget the orders I received to conduct you safe and sound to
his highness the prince! Once with the army you may be killed at your
good pleasure; but until that time, I warn you that in my capacity of
general of the army I shall order a retreat and turn my back on the
first red coat we come across.” De Guiche and Raoul glanced at each
other, smiling.

They arrived at Ablain without accident. There they inquired and
learned that the prince had in reality quitted Bethune and stationed
himself between Cambria and La Venthie. Therefore, leaving directions
at every place for Grimaud, they took a crossroad which conducted the
little troop by the bank of a small stream flowing into the Lys. The
country was beautiful, intersected by valleys as green as the emerald.
Here and there they passed little copses crossing the path which they
were following. In anticipation of some ambuscade in each of these
little woods the tutor placed his two servants at the head of the band,
thus forming the advance guard. Himself and the two young men
represented the body of the army, whilst Olivain, with his rifle upon
his knee and his eyes upon the watch, protected the rear.

They had observed for some time before them, on the horizon, a rather
thick wood; and when they had arrived at a distance of a hundred steps
from it, Monsieur d’Arminges took his usual precautions and sent on in
advance the count’s two grooms. The servants had just disappeared under
the trees, followed by the tutor, and the young men were laughing and
talking about a hundred yards off. Olivain was at the same distance in
the rear, when suddenly there resounded five or six musket-shots. The
tutor cried halt; the young men obeyed, pulling up their steeds, and at
the same moment the two valets were seen returning at a gallop.

The young men, impatient to learn the cause of the firing, spurred on
toward the servants. The tutor followed them.

“Were you stopped?” eagerly inquired the two youths.

“No,” replied the servants, “it is even probable that we have not been
seen; the shots were fired about a hundred paces in advance of us, in
the thickest part of the wood, and we returned to ask your advice.”

“My advice is this,” said Monsieur d’Arminges, “and if needs be, my
will, that we beat a retreat. There may be an ambuscade concealed in
this wood.”

“Did you see nothing there?” asked the count.

“I thought I saw,” said one of the servants, “horsemen dressed in
yellow, creeping along the bed of the stream.

“That’s it,” said the tutor. “We have fallen in with a party of
Spaniards. Come back, sirs, back.”

The two youths looked at each other, and at this moment a pistol-shot
and cries for help were heard. Another glance between the young men
convinced them both that neither had any wish to go back, and as the
tutor had already turned his horse’s head, they both spurred forward,
Raoul crying: “Follow me, Olivain!” and the Count de Guiche: “Follow,
Urban and Planchet!” And before the tutor could recover from his
surprise they had both disappeared into the forest. Whilst they spurred
their steeds they held their pistols ready also. In five minutes they
arrived at the spot whence the noise had proceeded, and then
restraining their horses, they advanced cautiously.

“Hush,” whispered De Guiche, “these are cavaliers.”

“Yes, three on horseback and three who have dismounted.”

“Can you see what they are doing?”

“Yes, they appear to be searching a wounded or dead man.”

“It is some cowardly assassination,” said De Guiche.

“They are soldiers, though,” resumed De Bragelonne.

“Yes, skirmishers; that is to say, highway robbers.”

“At them!” cried Raoul. “At them!” echoed De Guiche.

“Oh! gentlemen! gentlemen! in the name of Heaven!” cried the poor
tutor.

But he was not listened to, and his cries only served to arouse the
attention of the Spaniards.

The men on horseback at once rushed at the two youths, leaving the
three others to complete the plunder of the dead or wounded travelers;
for on approaching nearer, instead of one extended figure, the young
men discovered two. De Guiche fired the first shot at ten paces and
missed his man; and the Spaniard, who had advanced to meet Raoul, aimed
in his turn, and Raoul felt a pain in the left arm, similar to that of
a blow from a whip. He let off his fire at but four paces. Struck in
the breast and extending his arms, the Spaniard fell back on the
crupper, and the terrified horse, turning around, carried him off.

Raoul at this moment perceived the muzzle of a gun pointed at him, and
remembering the recommendation of Athos, he, with the rapidity of
lightning, made his horse rear as the shot was fired. His horse bounded
to one side, losing its footing, and fell, entangling Raoul’s leg under
its body. The Spaniard sprang forward and seized the gun by its muzzle,
in order to strike Raoul on the head with the butt. In the position in
which Raoul lay, unfortunately, he could neither draw his sword from
the scabbard, nor his pistols from their holsters. The butt end of the
musket hovered over his head, and he could scarcely restrain himself
from closing his eyes, when with one bound Guiche reached the Spaniard
and placed a pistol at his throat. “Yield!” he cried, “or you are a
dead man!” The musket fell from the soldier’s hands, who yielded on the
instant. Guiche summoned one of his grooms, and delivering the prisoner
into his charge, with orders to shoot him through the head if he
attempted to escape, he leaped from his horse and approached Raoul.

“Faith, sir,” said Raoul, smiling, although his pallor betrayed the
excitement consequent on a first affair, “you are in a great hurry to
pay your debts and have not been long under any obligation to me.
Without your aid,” continued he, repeating the count’s words “I should
have been a dead man—thrice dead.”

“My antagonist took flight,” replied De Guiche “and left me at liberty
to come to your assistance. But are you seriously wounded? I see you
are covered with blood!”

“I believe,” said Raoul, “that I have got something like a scratch on
the arm. If you will help me to drag myself from under my horse I hope
nothing need prevent us continuing our journey.”

Monsieur d’Arminges and Olivain had already dismounted and were
attempting to raise the struggling horse. At last Raoul succeeded in
drawing his foot from the stirrup and his leg from under the animal,
and in a second he was on his feet again.

“Nothing broken?” asked De Guiche.

“Faith, no, thank Heaven!” replied Raoul; “but what has become of the
poor wretches whom these scoundrels were murdering?”

“I fear we arrived too late. They have killed them, I think, and taken
flight, carrying off their booty. My servants are examining the
bodies.”

“Let us go and see whether they are quite dead, or if they can still be
helped,” suggested Raoul. “Olivain, we have come into possession of two
horses, but I have lost my own. Take for yourself the better of the two
and give me yours.”

They approached the spot where the unfortunate victims lay.




Chapter XXXI.
The Monk.


Two men lay prone upon the ground, one bathed in blood and motionless,
with his face toward the earth; this one was dead. The other leaned
against a tree, supported there by the two valets, and was praying
fervently, with clasped hands and eyes raised to Heaven. He had
received a ball in his thigh, which had broken the bone. The young men
first approached the dead man.

“He is a priest,” said Bragelonne, “he has worn the tonsure. Oh, the
scoundrels! to lift their hands against a minister of God.”

“Come here, sir,” said Urban, an old soldier who had served under the
cardinal duke in all his campaigns; “come here, there is nothing to be
done with him, whilst we may perhaps be able to save the other.”

The wounded man smiled sadly. “Save me! Oh, no!” said he, “but help me
to die, if you can.”

“Are you a priest?” asked Raoul.

“No sir.”

“I ask, as your unfortunate companion appeared to me to belong to the
church.”

“He is the curate of Bethune, sir, and was carrying the holy vessels
belonging to his church, and the treasure of the chapter, to a safe
place, the prince having abandoned our town yesterday; and as it was
known that bands of the enemy were prowling about the country, no one
dared to accompany the good man, so I offered to do so.

“And, sir,” continued the wounded man, “I suffer much and would like,
if possible, to be carried to some house.”

“Where you can be relieved?” asked De Guiche.

“No, where I can confess.”

“But perhaps you are not so dangerously wounded as you think,” said
Raoul.

“Sir,” replied the wounded man, “believe me, there is no time to lose;
the ball has broken the thigh bone and entered the intestines.”

“Are you a surgeon?” asked De Guiche.

“No, but I know a little about wounds, and mine, I know, is mortal.
Try, therefore, either to carry me to some place where I may see a
priest or take the trouble to send one to me here. It is my soul that
must be saved; as for my body, it is lost.”

“To die whilst doing a good deed! It is impossible. God will help you.”

“Gentlemen, in the name of Heaven!” said the wounded man, collecting
all his forces, as if to get up, “let us not lose time in useless
words. Either help me to gain the nearest village or swear to me on
your salvation that you will send me the first monk, the first curé,
the first priest you may meet. But,” he added in a despairing tone,
“perhaps no one will dare to come for it is known that the Spaniards
are ranging through the country, and I shall die without absolution. My
God! my God! Good God! good God!” added the wounded man, in an accent
of terror which made the young men shudder; “you will not allow that?
that would be too terrible!”

“Calm yourself, sir,” replied De Guiche. “I swear to you, you shall
receive the consolation that you ask. Only tell us where we shall find
a house at which we can demand aid and a village from which we can
fetch a priest.”

“Thank you, and God reward you! About half a mile from this, on the
same road, there is an inn, and about a mile further on, after leaving
the inn, you will reach the village of Greney. There you must find the
curate, or if he is not at home, go to the convent of the Augustines,
which is the last house on the right, and bring me one of the brothers.
Monk or priest, it matters not, provided only that he has received from
holy church the power of absolving in articulo mortis.”

“Monsieur d’Arminges,” said De Guiche, “remain beside this unfortunate
man and see that he is removed as gently as possible. The vicomte and
myself will go and find a priest.”

“Go, sir,” replied the tutor; “but in Heaven’s name do not expose
yourself to danger!”

“Do not fear. Besides, we are safe for to-day; you know the axiom, ‘Non
bis in idem.’”

“Courage, sir,” said Raoul to the wounded man. “We are going to execute
your wishes.”

“May Heaven prosper you!” replied the dying man, with an accent of
gratitude impossible to describe.

The two young men galloped off in the direction mentioned and in ten
minutes reached the inn. Raoul, without dismounting, called to the host
and announced that a wounded man was about to be brought to his house
and begged him in the meantime to prepare everything needful. He
desired him also, should he know in the neighborhood any doctor or
chirurgeon, to fetch him, taking on himself the payment of the
messenger.

The host, who saw two young noblemen, richly clad, promised everything
they required, and our two cavaliers, after seeing that preparations
for the reception were actually begun, started off again and proceeded
rapidly toward Greney.

They had gone rather more than a league and had begun to descry the
first houses of the village, the red-tiled roofs of which stood out
from the green trees which surrounded them, when, coming toward them
mounted on a mule, they perceived a poor monk, whose large hat and gray
worsted dress made them take him for an Augustine brother. Chance for
once seemed to favor them in sending what they were so assiduously
seeking. He was a man about twenty-two or twenty-three years old, but
who appeared much older from ascetic exercises. His complexion was
pale, not of that deadly pallor which is a kind of neutral beauty, but
of a bilious, yellow hue; his colorless hair was short and scarcely
extended beyond the circle formed by the hat around his head, and his
light blue eyes seemed destitute of any expression.

“Sir,” began Raoul, with his usual politeness, “are you an
ecclesiastic?”

“Why do you ask me that?” replied the stranger, with a coolness which
was barely civil.

“Because we want to know,” said De Guiche, haughtily.

The stranger touched his mule with his heel and continued his way.

In a second De Guiche had sprung before him and barred his passage.
“Answer, sir,” exclaimed he; “you have been asked politely, and every
question is worth an answer.”

“I suppose I am free to say or not to say who I am to two strangers who
take a fancy to ask me.”

It was with difficulty that De Guiche restrained the intense desire he
had of breaking the monk’s bones.

“In the first place,” he said, making an effort to control himself, “we
are not people who may be treated anyhow; my friend there is the
Viscount of Bragelonne and I am the Count de Guiche. Nor was it from
caprice we asked the question, for there is a wounded and dying man who
demands the succor of the church. If you be a priest, I conjure you in
the name of humanity to follow me to aid this man; if you be not, it is
a different matter, and I warn you in the name of courtesy, of which
you appear profoundly ignorant, that I shall chastise you for your
insolence.”

The pale face of the monk became so livid and his smile so strange,
that Raoul, whose eyes were still fixed upon him, felt as if this smile
had struck to his heart like an insult.

“He is some Spanish or Flemish spy,” said he, putting his hand to his
pistol. A glance, threatening and transient as lightning, replied to
Raoul.

“Well, sir,” said De Guiche, “are you going to reply?”

“I am a priest,” said the young man.

“Then, father,” said Raoul, forcing himself to convey a respect by
speech that did not come from his heart, “if you are a priest you have
an opportunity, as my friend has told you, of exercising your vocation.
At the next inn you will find a wounded man, now being attended by our
servants, who has asked the assistance of a minister of God.”

“I will go,” said the monk.

And he touched his mule.

“If you do not go, sir,” said De Guiche, “remember that we have two
steeds able to catch your mule and the power of having you seized
wherever you may be; and then I swear your trial will be summary; one
can always find a tree and a cord.”

The monk’s eye again flashed, but that was all; he merely repeated his
phrase, “I will go,”—and he went.

“Let us follow him,” said De Guiche; “it will be the surest plan.”

“I was about to propose so doing,” answered De Bragelonne.

In the space of five minutes the monk turned around to ascertain
whether he was followed or not.

“You see,” said Raoul, “we have done wisely.”

“What a horrible face that monk has,” said De Guiche.

“Horrible!” replied Raoul, “especially in expression.”

“Yes, yes,” said De Guiche, “a strange face; but these monks are
subject to such degrading practices; their fasts make them pale, the
blows of the discipline make them hypocrites, and their eyes become
inflamed through weeping for the good things of this life we common
folk enjoy, but they have lost.”

“Well,” said Raoul, “the poor man will get his priest, but, by Heaven,
the penitent appears to me to have a better conscience than the
confessor. I confess I am accustomed to priests of a very different
appearance.”

“Ah!” exclaimed De Guiche, “you must understand that this is one of
those wandering brothers, who go begging on the high road until some
day a benefice falls down from Heaven on them; they are mostly
foreigners—Scotch, Irish or Danish. I have seen them before.”

“As ugly?”

“No, but reasonably hideous.”

“What a misfortune for the wounded man to die under the hands of such a
friar!”

“Pshaw!” said De Guiche. “Absolution comes not from him who administers
it, but from God. However, for my part, I would rather die unshriven
than have anything to say to such a confessor. You are of my opinion,
are you not, viscount? and I see you playing with the pommel of your
sword, as if you had a great inclination to break the holy father’s
head.”

“Yes, count, it is a strange thing and one which might astonish you,
but I feel an indescribable horror at the sight of yonder man. Have you
ever seen a snake rise up on your path?”

“Never,” answered De Guiche.

“Well, it has happened to me to do so in our Blaisois forests, and I
remember that the first time I encountered one with its eyes fixed upon
me, curled up, swinging its head and pointing its tongue, I remained
fixed, pale and as though fascinated, until the moment when the Comte
de la Fere——”

“Your father?” asked De Guiche.

“No, my guardian,” replied Raoul, blushing.

“Very well——”

“Until the moment when the Comte de la Fere,” resumed Raoul, “said,
‘Come, Bragelonne, draw your sword;’ then only I rushed upon the
reptile and cut it in two, just at the moment when it was rising on its
tail and hissing, ere it sprang upon me. Well, I vow I felt exactly the
same sensation at sight of that man when he said, ‘Why do you ask me
that?’ and looked so strangely at me.”

“Then you regret that you did not cut your serpent in two morsels?”

“Faith, yes, almost,” said Raoul.

They had now arrived within sight of the little inn and could see on
the opposite side the procession bearing the wounded man and guided by
Monsieur d’Arminges. The youths spurred on.

“There is the wounded man,” said De Guiche, passing close to the
Augustine brother. “Be good enough to hurry yourself a little, monsieur
monk.”

As for Raoul, he avoided the monk by the whole width of the road and
passed him, turning his head away in repulsion.

The young men rode up to the wounded man to announce that they were
followed by the priest. He raised himself to glance in the direction
which they pointed out, saw the monk, and fell back upon the litter,
his face illumined by joy.

“And now,” said the youths, “we have done all we can for you; and as we
are in haste to rejoin the prince’s army we must continue our journey.
You will excuse us, sir, but we are told that a battle is expected and
we do not wish to arrive the day after it.”

“Go, my young sirs,” said the sick man, “and may you both be blessed
for your piety. You have done for me, as you promised, all that you
could do. As for me I can only repeat, may God protect you and all dear
to you!”

“Sir,” said De Guiche to his tutor, “we will precede you, and you can
rejoin us on the road to Cambrin.”

The host was at his door and everything was prepared—bed, bandages, and
lint; and a groom had gone to Lens, the nearest village, for a doctor.

“Everything,” said he to Raoul, “shall be done as you desire; but you
will not stop to have your wound dressed?”

“Oh, my wound—mine—’tis nothing,” replied the viscount; “it will be
time to think about it when we next halt; only have the goodness,
should you see a cavalier who makes inquiries about a young man on a
chestnut horse followed by a servant, to tell him, in fact, that you
have seen me, but that I have continued my journey and intend to dine
at Mazingarbe and to stop at Cambrin. This cavalier is my attendant.”

“Would it not be safer and more certain if I should ask him his name
and tell him yours?” demanded the host.

“There is no harm in over-precaution. I am the Viscount de Bragelonne
and he is called Grimaud.”

At this moment the wounded man arrived from one direction and the monk
from the other, the latter dismounting from his mule and desiring that
it should be taken to the stables without being unharnessed.

“Sir monk,” said De Guiche, “confess well that brave man; and be not
concerned for your expenses or for those of your mule; all is paid.”

“Thanks, monsieur,” said the monk, with one of those smiles that made
Bragelonne shudder.

“Come, count,” said Raoul, who seemed instinctively to dislike the
vicinity of the Augustine; “come, I feel ill here,” and the two young
men spurred on.

The litter, borne by two servants, now entered the house. The host and
his wife were standing on the steps, whilst the unhappy man seemed to
suffer dreadful pain and yet to be concerned only to know if he was
followed by the monk. At sight of this pale, bleeding man, the wife
grasped her husband’s arm.

“Well, what’s the matter?” asked the latter, “are you going to be ill
just now?”

“No, but look,” replied the hostess, pointing to the wounded man; “I
ask you if you recognize him?”

“That man—wait a bit.”

“Ah! I see you know him,” exclaimed the wife; “for you have become pale
in your turn.”

“Truly,” cried the host, “misfortune is coming on our house; it is the
former executioner of Bethune.”

“The former executioner of Bethune!” murmured the young monk, shrinking
back and showing on his countenance the feeling of repugnance which his
penitent inspired.

Monsieur d’Arminges, who was at the door, perceived his hesitation.

“Sir monk,” said he, “whether he is now or has been an executioner,
this unfortunate being is none the less a man. Render to him, then, the
last service he can by any possibility ask of you, and your work will
be all the more meritorious.”

The monk made no reply, but silently wended his way to the room where
the two valets had deposited the dying man on a bed. D’Arminges and
Olivain and the two grooms then mounted their horses, and all four
started off at a quick trot to rejoin Raoul and his companion. Just as
the tutor and his escort disappeared in their turn, a new traveler
stopped on the threshold of the inn.

“What does your worship want?” demanded the host, pale and trembling
from the discovery he had just made.

The traveler made a sign as if he wished to drink, and then pointed to
his horse and gesticulated like a man who is brushing something.

“Ah, diable!” said the host to himself; “this man seems dumb. And where
will your worship drink?”

“There,” answered the traveler, pointing to the table.

“I was mistaken,” said the host, “he’s not quite dumb. And what else
does your worship wish for?”

“To know if you have seen a young man pass, fifteen years of age,
mounted on a chestnut horse and followed by a groom?”

“The Viscount de Bragelonne?

“Just so.”

“Then you are called Monsieur Grimaud?”

The traveler made a sign of assent.

“Well, then,” said the host, “your young master was here a quarter of
an hour ago; he will dine at Mazingarbe and sleep at Cambrin.”

“How far is Mazingarbe?”

“Two miles and a half.”

“Thank you.”

Grimaud was drinking his wine silently and had just placed his glass on
the table to be filled a second time, when a terrific scream resounded
from the room occupied by the monk and the dying man. Grimaud sprang
up.

“What is that?” said he; “whence comes that cry?”

“From the wounded man’s room,” replied the host.

“What wounded man?”

“The former executioner of Bethune, who has just been brought in here,
assassinated by Spaniards, and who is now being confessed by an
Augustine friar.”

“The old executioner of Bethune,” muttered Grimaud; “a man between
fifty-five and sixty, tall, strong, swarthy, black hair and beard?”

“That is he, except that his beard has turned gray and his hair is
white; do you know him?” asked the host.

“I have seen him once,” replied Grimaud, a cloud darkening his
countenance at the picture so suddenly summoned to the bar of
recollection.

At this instant a second cry, less piercing than the first, but
followed by prolonged groaning, was heard.

The three listeners looked at one another in alarm.

“We must see what it is,” said Grimaud.

“It sounds like the cry of one who is being murdered,” murmured the
host.

“Mon Dieu!” said the woman, crossing herself.

If Grimaud was slow in speaking, we know that he was quick to act; he
sprang to the door and shook it violently, but it was bolted on the
other side.

“Open the door!” cried the host; “open it instantly, sir monk!”

No reply.

“Unfasten it, or I will break it in!” said Grimaud.

The same silence, and then, ere the host could oppose his design,
Grimaud seized a pair of pincers he perceived in a corner and forced
the bolt. The room was inundated with blood, dripping from the
mattresses upon which lay the wounded man, speechless; the monk had
disappeared.

“The monk!” cried the host; “where is the monk?”

Grimaud sprang toward an open window which looked into the courtyard.

“He has escaped by this means,” exclaimed he.

“Do you think so?” said the host, bewildered; “boy, see if the mule
belonging to the monk is still in the stable.”

“There is no mule,” cried he to whom this question was addressed.

The host clasped his hands and looked around him suspiciously, whilst
Grimaud knit his brows and approached the wounded man, whose worn, hard
features awoke in his mind such awful recollections of the past.

“There can be no longer any doubt but that it is himself,” said he.

“Does he still live?” inquired the innkeeper.

Making no reply, Grimaud opened the poor man’s jacket to feel if the
heart beat, whilst the host approached in his turn; but in a moment
they both fell back, the host uttering a cry of horror and Grimaud
becoming pallid. The blade of a dagger was buried up to the hilt in the
left side of the executioner.

“Run! run for help!” cried Grimaud, “and I will remain beside him
here.”

The host quitted the room in agitation, and as for his wife, she had
fled at the sound of her husband’s cries.




Chapter XXXII.
The Absolution.


This is what had taken place: We have seen that it was not of his own
free will, but, on the contrary, very reluctantly, that the monk
attended the wounded man who had been recommended to him in so strange
a manner. Perhaps he would have sought to escape by flight had he seen
any possibility of doing so. He was restrained by the threats of the
two gentlemen and by the presence of their attendants, who doubtless
had received their instructions. And besides, he considered it most
expedient, without exhibiting too much ill-will, to follow to the end
his role as confessor.

The monk entered the chamber and approached the bed of the wounded man.
The executioner searched his face with the quick glance peculiar to
those who are about to die and have no time to lose. He made a movement
of surprise and said:

“Father, you are very young.”

“Men who bear my robe have no age,” replied the monk, dryly.

“Alas, speak to me more gently, father; in my last moments I need a
friend.”

“Do you suffer much?” asked the monk.

“Yes, but in my soul much more than in my body.”

“We will save your soul,” said the young man; “but are you really the
executioner of Bethune, as these people say?”

“That is to say,” eagerly replied the wounded man, who doubtless feared
that the name of executioner would take from him the last help that he
could claim—“that is to say, I was, but am no longer; it is fifteen
years since I gave up the office. I still assist at executions, but no
longer strike the blow myself—no, indeed.”

“You have, then, a repugnance to your profession?”

“So long as I struck in the name of the law and of justice my
profession allowed me to sleep quietly, sheltered as I was by justice
and law; but since that terrible night when I became an instrument of
private vengeance and when with personal hatred I raised the sword over
one of God’s creatures—since that day——”

The executioner paused and shook his head with an expression of
despair.

“Tell me about it,” said the monk, who, sitting on the foot of the bed,
began to be interested in a story so strangely introduced.

“Ah!” cried the dying man, with all the effusiveness of a grief
declared after long suppression, “ah! I have sought to stifle remorse
by twenty years of good deeds; I have assuaged the natural ferocity of
those who shed blood; on every occasion I have exposed my life to save
those who were in danger, and I have preserved lives in exchange for
that I took away. That is not all; the money gained in the exercise of
my profession I have distributed to the poor; I have been assiduous in
attending church and those who formerly fled from me have become
accustomed to seeing me. All have forgiven me, some have even loved me;
but I think that God has not pardoned me, for the memory of that
execution pursues me constantly and every night I see that woman’s
ghost rising before me.”

“A woman! You have assassinated a woman, then?” cried the monk.

“You also!” exclaimed the executioner, “you use that word which sounds
ever in my ears—‘assassinated!’ I have assassinated, then, and not
executed! I am an assassin, then, and not an officer of justice!” and
he closed his eyes with a groan.

The monk doubtless feared that he would die without saying more, for he
exclaimed eagerly:

“Go on, I know nothing, as yet; when you have finished your story, God
and I will judge.”

“Oh, father,” continued the executioner, without opening his eyes, as
if he feared on opening them to see some frightful object, “it is
especially when night comes on and when I have to cross a river, that
this terror which I have been unable to conquer comes upon me; it then
seems as if my hand grew heavy, as if the cutlass was still in its
grasp, as if the water had the color of blood, and all the voices of
nature—the whispering of the trees, the murmur of the wind, the lapping
of the wave—united in a voice tearful, despairing, terrible, crying to
me, ‘Place for the justice of God!’”

“Delirium!” murmured the monk, shaking his head.

The executioner opened his eyes, turned toward the young man and
grasped his arm.

“‘Delirium,’” he repeated; “‘delirium,’ do you say? Oh, no! I remember
too well. It was evening; I had thrown the body into the river and
those words which my remorse repeats to me are those which I in my
pride pronounced. After being the instrument of human justice I aspired
to be that of the justice of God.”

“But let me see, how was it done? Speak,” said the monk.

“It was at night. A man came to me and showed me an order and I
followed him. Four other noblemen awaited me. They led me away masked.
I reserved the right of refusing if the office they required of me
should seem unjust. We traveled five or six leagues, serious, silent,
and almost without speaking. At length, through the window of a little
hut, they showed me a woman sitting, leaning on a table, and said,
‘there is the person to be executed.’”

“Horrible!” said the monk. “And you obeyed?”

“Father, that woman was a monster. It was said that she had poisoned
her second husband; she had tried to assassinate her brother-in-law;
she had just poisoned a young woman who was her rival, and before
leaving England she had, it was believed, caused the favorite of the
king to be murdered.”

“Buckingham?” cried the monk.

“Yes, Buckingham.”

“The woman was English, then?”

“No, she was French, but she had married in England.”

The monk turned pale, wiped his brow and went and bolted the door. The
executioner thought that he had abandoned him and fell back, groaning,
upon his bed.

“No, no; I am here,” said the monk, quickly coming back to him. “Go on;
who were those men?”

“One of them was a foreigner, English, I think. The four others were
French and wore the uniform of musketeers.”

“Their names?” asked the monk.

“I don’t know them, but the four other noblemen called the Englishman
‘my lord.’”

“Was the woman handsome?”

“Young and beautiful. Oh, yes, especially beautiful. I see her now, as
on her knees at my feet, with her head thrown back, she begged for
life. I have never understood how I could have laid low a head so
beautiful, with a face so pale.”

The monk seemed agitated by a strange emotion; he trembled all over; he
seemed eager to put a question which yet he dared not ask. At length,
with a violent effort at self-control:

“The name of that woman?” he said.

“I don’t know what it was. As I have said, she was twice married, once
in France, the second time in England.”

“She was young, you say?”

“Twenty-five years old.”

“Beautiful?”

“Ravishingly.”

“Blond?”

“Yes.”

“Abundance of hair—falling over her shoulders?”

“Yes.”

“Eyes of an admirable expression?”

“When she chose. Oh, yes, it is she!”

“A voice of strange sweetness?”

“How do you know it?”

The executioner raised himself on his elbow and gazed with a frightened
air at the monk, who became livid.

“And you killed her?” the monk exclaimed. “You were the tool of those
cowards who dared not kill her themselves? You had no pity for that
youthfulness, that beauty, that weakness? you killed that woman?”

“Alas! I have already told you, father, that woman, under that angelic
appearance, had an infernal soul, and when I saw her, when I recalled
all the evil she had done to me——”

“To you? What could she have done to you? Come, tell me!”

“She had seduced and ruined my brother, a priest. She had fled with him
from her convent.”

“With your brother?”

“Yes, my brother was her first lover, and she caused his death. Oh,
father, do not look in that way at me! Oh, I am guilty, then; you will
not pardon me?”

The monk recovered his usual expression.

“Yes, yes,” he said, “I will pardon you if you tell me all.”

“Oh!” cried the executioner, “all! all! all!”

“Answer, then. If she seduced your brother—you said she seduced him,
did you not?”

“Yes.”

“If she caused his death—you said that she caused his death?”

“Yes,” repeated the executioner.

“Then you must know what her name was as a young girl.”

“Oh, mon Dieu!” cried the executioner, “I think I am dying. Absolution,
father! absolution.”

“Tell me her name and I will give it.”

“Her name was——My God, have pity on me!” murmured the executioner; and
he fell back on the bed, pale, trembling, and apparently about to die.

“Her name!” repeated the monk, bending over him as if to tear from him
the name if he would not utter it; “her name! Speak, or no absolution!”

The dying man collected all his forces.

The monk’s eyes glittered.

“Anne de Bueil,” murmured the wounded man.

“Anne de Bueil!” cried the monk, standing up and lifting his hands to
Heaven. “Anne de Bueil! You said Anne de Bueil, did you not?”

“Yes, yes, that was her name; and now absolve me, for I am dying.”

“I, absolve you!” cried the priest, with a laugh which made the dying
man’s hair stand on end; “I, absolve you? I am not a priest.”

“You are not a priest!” cried the executioner. “What, then, are you?”

“I am about to tell you, wretched man.”

“Oh, mon Dieu!”

“I am John Francis de Winter.”

“I do not know you,” said the executioner.

“Wait, wait; you are going to know me. I am John Francis de Winter,” he
repeated, “and that woman——”

“Well, that woman?”

“Was my mother!”

The executioner uttered the first cry, that terrible cry which had been
first heard.

“Oh, pardon me, pardon me!” he murmured; “if not in the name of God, at
least in your own name; if not as priest, then as son.”

“Pardon you!” cried the pretended monk, “pardon you! Perhaps God will
pardon you, but I, never!”

“For pity’s sake,” said the executioner, extending his arms.

“No pity for him who had no pity! Die, impenitent, die in despair, die
and be damned!” And drawing a poniard from beneath his robe he thrust
it into the breast of the wounded man, saying, “Here is my absolution!”

Then was heard that second cry, not so loud as the first and followed
by a long groan.

The executioner, who had lifted himself up, fell back upon his bed. As
to the monk, without withdrawing the poniard from the wound, he ran to
the window, opened it, leaped out into the flowers of a small garden,
glided onward to the stable, took out his mule, went out by a back
gate, ran to a neighbouring thicket, threw off his monkish garb, took
from his valise the complete habiliment of a cavalier, clothed himself
in it, went on foot to the first post, secured there a horse and
continued with a loose rein his journey to Paris.




Chapter XXXIII.
Grimaud Speaks.


Grimaud was left alone with the executioner, who in a few moments
opened his eyes.

“Help, help,” he murmured; “oh, God! have I not a single friend in the
world who will aid me either to live or to die?”

“Take courage,” said Grimaud; “they are gone to find assistance.”

“Who are you?” asked the wounded man, fixing his half opened eyes on
Grimaud.

“An old acquaintance,” replied Grimaud.

“You?” and the wounded man sought to recall the features of the person
now before him.

“Under what circumstances did we meet?” he asked again.

“One night, twenty years ago, my master fetched you from Bethune and
conducted you to Armentieres.”

“I know you well now,” said the executioner; “you were one of the four
grooms.”

“Just so.”

“Where do you come from now?”

“I was passing by and drew up at this inn to rest my horse. They told
me the executioner of Bethune was here and wounded, when you uttered
two piercing cries. At the first we ran to the door and at the second
forced it open.”

“And the monk?” exclaimed the executioner, “did you see the monk?”

“What monk?”

“The monk that was shut in with me.”

“No, he was no longer here; he appears to have fled by the window. Was
he the man that stabbed you?”

“Yes,” said the executioner.

Grimaud moved as if to leave the room.

“What are you going to do?” asked the wounded man.

“He must be apprehended.”

“Do not attempt it; he has revenged himself and has done well. Now I
may hope that God will forgive me, since my crime is expiated.”

“Explain yourself.” said Grimaud.

“The woman whom you and your masters commanded me to kill——”

“Milady?”

“Yes, Milady; it is true you called her thus.”

“What has the monk to do with this Milady?”

“She was his mother.”

Grimaud trembled and stared at the dying man in a dull and leaden
manner.

“His mother!” he repeated.

“Yes, his mother.”

“But does he know this secret, then?”

“I mistook him for a monk and revealed it to him in confession.”

“Unhappy man!” cried Grimaud, whose face was covered with sweat at the
bare idea of the evil results such a revelation might cause; “unhappy
man, you named no one, I hope?”

“I pronounced no name, for I knew none, except his mother’s, as a young
girl, and it was by this name that he recognized her, but he knows that
his uncle was among her judges.”

Thus speaking, he fell back exhausted. Grimaud, wishing to relieve him,
advanced his hand toward the hilt of the dagger.

“Touch me not!” said the executioner; “if this dagger is withdrawn I
shall die.”

Grimaud remained with his hand extended; then, striking his forehead,
he exclaimed:

“Oh! if this man should ever discover the names of the others, my
master is lost.”

“Haste! haste to him and warn him,” cried the wounded man, “if he still
lives; warn his friends, too. My death, believe me, will not be the end
of this atrocious misadventure.”

“Where was the monk going?” asked Grimaud.

“Toward Paris.”

“Who stopped him?”

“Two young gentlemen, who were on their way to join the army and the
name of one of whom I heard his companion mention—the Viscount de
Bragelonne.”

“And it was this young man who brought the monk to you? Then it was the
will of God that it should be so and this it is which makes it all so
awful,” continued Grimaud. “And yet that woman deserved her fate; do
you not think so?”

“On one’s death-bed the crimes of others appear very small in
comparison with one’s own,” said the executioner; and falling back
exhausted he closed his eyes.

Grimaud was reluctant to leave the man alone and yet he perceived the
necessity of starting at once to bear these tidings to the Comte de la
Fere. Whilst he thus hesitated the host re-entered the room, followed
not only by a surgeon, but by many other persons, whom curiosity had
attracted to the spot. The surgeon approached the dying man, who seemed
to have fainted.

“We must first extract the steel from the side,” said he, shaking his
head in a significant manner.

The prophecy which the wounded man had just uttered recurred to
Grimaud, who turned away his head. The weapon, as we have already
stated, was plunged into the body to the hilt, and as the surgeon,
taking it by the end, drew it forth, the wounded man opened his eyes
and fixed them on him in a manner truly frightful. When at last the
blade had been entirely withdrawn, a red froth issued from the mouth of
the wounded man and a stream of blood spouted afresh from the wound
when he at length drew breath; then, fixing his eyes upon Grimaud with
a singular expression, the dying man uttered the last death-rattle and
expired.

Then Grimaud, lifting the dagger from the pool of blood which was
gliding along the room, to the horror of all present, made a sign to
the host to follow him, paid him with a generosity worthy of his master
and again mounted his horse. Grimaud’s first intention had been to
return to Paris, but he remembered the anxiety which his prolonged
absence might occasion Raoul, and reflecting that there were now only
two miles between the vicomte and himself and a quarter of an hour’s
riding would unite them, and that the going, returning and explanation
would not occupy an hour, he put spurs to his horse and a few minutes
after had reached the only inn of Mazingarbe.

Raoul was seated at table with the Count de Guiche and his tutor, when
all at once the door opened and Grimaud presented himself,
travel-stained, dirty, and sprinkled with the blood of the unhappy
executioner.

“Grimaud, my good Grimaud!” exclaimed Raoul “here you are at last!
Excuse me, sirs, this is not a servant, but a friend. How did you leave
the count?” continued he. “Does he regret me a little? Have you seen
him since I left him? Answer, for I have many things to tell you, too;
indeed, the last three days some odd adventures have happened—but what
is the matter? how pale you are! and blood, too! What is this?”

“It is the blood of the unfortunate man whom you left at the inn and
who died in my arms.”

“In your arms?—that man! but know you who he was?”

“He used to be the headsman of Bethune.”

“You knew him? and he is dead?”

“Yes.”

“Well, sir,” said D’Arminges, “it is the common lot; even an
executioner is not exempted. I had a bad opinion of him the moment I
saw his wound, and since he asked for a monk you know that it was his
opinion, too, that death would follow.”

At the mention of the monk, Grimaud became pale.

“Come, come,” continued D’Arminges, “to dinner;” for like most men of
his age and generation he did not allow sentiment or sensibility to
interfere with a repast.

“You are right, sir,” said Raoul. “Come, Grimaud, order dinner for
yourself and when you have rested a little we can talk.”

“No, sir, no,” said Grimaud. “I cannot stop a moment; I must start for
Paris again immediately.”

“What? You start for Paris? You are mistaken; it is Olivain who leaves
me; you are to remain.”

“On the contrary, Olivain is to stay and I am to go. I have come for
nothing else but to tell you so.”

“But what is the meaning of this change?”

“I cannot tell you.”

“Explain yourself.”

“I cannot explain myself.”

“Come, tell me, what is the joke?”

“Monsieur le vicomte knows that I never joke.”

“Yes, but I know also that Monsieur le Comte de la Fere arranged that
you were to remain with me and that Olivain should return to Paris. I
shall follow the count’s directions.”

“Not under present circumstances, monsieur.”

“Perhaps you mean to disobey me?”

“Yes, monsieur, I must.”

“You persist, then?”

“Yes, I am going; may you be happy, monsieur,” and Grimaud saluted and
turned toward the door to go out.

Raoul, angry and at the same time uneasy, ran after him and seized him
by the arm. “Grimaud!” he cried; “remain; I wish it.”

“Then,” replied Grimaud, “you wish me to allow monsieur le comte to be
killed.” He saluted and made a movement to depart.

“Grimaud, my friend,” said the viscount, “will you leave me thus, in
such anxiety? Speak, speak, in Heaven’s name!” And Raoul fell back
trembling upon his chair.

“I can tell you but one thing, sir, for the secret you wish to know is
not my own. You met a monk, did you not?”

“Yes.”

The young men looked at each other with an expression of fear.

“You conducted him to the wounded man and you had time to observe him,
and perhaps you would know him again were you to meet him.”

“Yes, yes!” cried both young men.

“Very well; if ever you meet him again, wherever it may be, whether on
the high road or in the street or in a church, anywhere that he or you
may be, put your foot on his neck and crush him without pity, without
mercy, as you would crush a viper or a scorpion! destroy him utterly
and quit him not until he is dead; the lives of five men are not safe,
in my opinion, as long as he is on the earth.”

And without adding another word, Grimaud, profiting by the astonishment
and terror into which he had thrown his auditors, rushed from the room.
Two minutes later the thunder of a horse’s hoofs was heard upon the
road; it was Grimaud, on his way to Paris. When once in the saddle
Grimaud reflected on two things; first, that at the pace he was going
his horse would not carry him ten miles, and secondly, that he had no
money. But Grimaud’s ingenuity was more prolific than his speech, and
therefore at the first halt he sold his steed and with the money
obtained from the purchase took post horses.




Chapter XXXIV.
On the Eve of Battle.


Raoul was aroused from his sombre reflections by his host, who rushed
into the apartment crying out, “The Spaniards! the Spaniards!”

That cry was of such importance as to overcome all preoccupation. The
young men made inquiries and ascertained that the enemy was advancing
by way of Houdin and Bethune.

While Monsieur d’Arminges gave orders for the horses to be made ready
for departure, the two young men ascended to the upper windows of the
house and saw in the direction of Marsin and of Lens a large body of
infantry and cavalry. This time it was not a wandering troop of
partisans; it was an entire army. There was therefore nothing for them
to do but to follow the prudent advice of Monsieur d’Arminges and beat
a retreat. They quickly went downstairs. Monsieur d’Arminges was
already mounted. Olivain had ready the horses of the young men, and the
lackeys of the Count de Guiche guarded carefully between them the
Spanish prisoner, mounted on a pony which had been bought for his use.
As a further precaution they had bound his hands.

The little company started off at a trot on the road to Cambrin, where
they expected to find the prince. But he was no longer there, having
withdrawn on the previous evening to La Bassee, misled by false
intelligence of the enemy’s movements. Deceived by this intelligence he
had concentrated his forces between Vieille-Chapelle and La Venthie;
and after a reconnoissance along the entire line, in company with
Marshal de Grammont, he had returned and seated himself before a table,
with his officers around him. He questioned them as to the news they
had each been charged to obtain, but nothing positive had been learned.
The hostile army had disappeared two days before and seemed to have
gone out of existence.

Now an enemy is never so near and consequently so threatening, as when
he has completely disappeared. The prince was, therefore, contrary to
his custom, gloomy and anxious, when an officer entered and announced
to Marshal de Grammont that some one wished to see him.

The Duc de Grammont received permission from the prince by a glance and
went out. The prince followed him with his eyes and continued looking
at the door; no one ventured to speak, for fear of disturbing him.

Suddenly a dull and heavy noise was heard. The prince leaped to his
feet, extending his hand in the direction whence came the sound, there
was no mistaking it—it was the noise of cannon. Every one stood up.

At that moment the door opened.

“Monseigneur,” said Marshal de Grammont, with a radiant face, “will
your highness permit my son, Count de Guiche, and his traveling
companion, Viscount de Bragelonne, to come in and give news of the
enemy, whom they have found while we were looking for him?”

“What!” eagerly replied the prince, “will I permit? I not only permit,
I desire; let them come in.”

The marshal introduced the two young men and placed them face to face
with the prince.

“Speak, gentlemen,” said the prince, saluting them; “first speak; we
shall have time afterward for the usual compliments. The most urgent
thing now is to learn where the enemy is and what he is doing.”

It fell naturally to the Count de Guiche to make reply; not only was he
the elder, but he had been presented to the prince by his father.
Besides, he had long known the prince, whilst Raoul now saw him for the
first time. He therefore narrated to the prince what they had seen from
the inn at Mazingarbe.

Meanwhile Raoul closely observed the young general, already made so
famous by the battles of Rocroy, Fribourg, and Nordlingen.

Louis de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, who, since the death of his father,
Henri de Bourbon, was called, in accordance with the custom of that
period, Monsieur le Prince, was a young man, not more than twenty-six
or twenty-seven years old, with the eye of an eagle—agl’ occhi grifani,
as Dante says—aquiline nose, long, waving hair, of medium height, well
formed, possessed of all the qualities essential to the successful
soldier—that is to say, the rapid glance, quick decision, fabulous
courage. At the same time he was a man of elegant manners and strong
mind, so that in addition to the revolution he had made in war, by his
new contributions to its methods, he had also made a revolution at
Paris, among the young noblemen of the court, whose natural chief he
was and who, in distinction from the social leaders of the ancient
court, modeled after Bassompierre, Bellegarde and the Duke d’Angouleme,
were called the petits-maitres.

At the first words of the Count de Guiche, the prince, having in mind
the direction whence came the sound of cannon, had understood
everything. The enemy was marching upon Lens, with the intention,
doubtless, of securing possession of that town and separating from
France the army of France. But in what force was the enemy? Was it a
corps sent out to make a diversion? Was it an entire army? To this
question De Guiche could not respond.

Now, as these questions involved matters of gravest consequence, it was
these to which the prince had especially desired an answer, exact,
precise, positive.

Raoul conquered the very natural feeling of timidity he experienced and
approaching the prince:

“My lord,” he said, “will you permit me to hazard a few words on that
subject, which will perhaps relieve you of your uncertainty?”

The prince turned and seemed to cover the young man with a single
glance; he smiled on perceiving that he was a child hardly fifteen
years old.

“Certainly, monsieur, speak,” he said, softening his stern, accented
tones, as if he were speaking to a woman.

“My lord,” said Raoul, blushing, “might examine the Spanish prisoner.”

“Have you a Spanish prisoner?” cried the prince.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Ah, that is true,” said De Guiche; “I had forgotten it.”

“That is easily understood; it was you who took him, count,” said
Raoul, smiling.

The old marshal turned toward the viscount, grateful for that praise of
his son, whilst the prince exclaimed:

“The young man is right; let the prisoner be brought in.”

Meanwhile the prince took De Guiche aside and asked him how the
prisoner had been taken and who this young man was.

“Monsieur,” said the prince, turning toward Raoul, “I know that you
have a letter from my sister, Madame de Longueville; but I see that you
have preferred commending yourself to me by giving me good counsel.”

“My lord,” said Raoul, coloring up, “I did not wish to interrupt your
highness in a conversation so important as that in which you were
engaged with the count. But here is the letter.”

“Very well,” said the prince; “give it to me later. Here is the
prisoner; let us attend to what is most pressing.”

The prisoner was one of those military adventurers who sold their blood
to whoever would buy, and grew old in stratagems and spoils. Since he
had been taken he had not uttered a word, so that it was not known to
what country he belonged. The prince looked at him with unspeakable
distrust.

“Of what country are you?” asked the prince.

The prisoner muttered a few words in a foreign tongue.

“Ah! ah! it seems that he is a Spaniard. Do you speak Spanish,
Grammont?”

“Faith, my lord, but indifferently.”

“And I not at all,” said the prince, laughing. “Gentlemen,” he said,
turning to those who were near him “can any one of you speak Spanish
and serve me as interpreter?”

“I can, my lord,” said Raoul.

“Ah, you speak Spanish?”

“Enough, I think, to fulfill your highness’s wishes on this occasion.”

Meanwhile the prisoner had remained impassive and as if he had no
understanding of what was taking place.

“My lord asks of what country you are,” said the young man, in the
purest Castilian.

“Ich bin ein Deutscher,” replied the prisoner.

“What in the devil does he say?” asked the prince. “What new gibberish
is that?”

“He says he is German, my lord,” replied Raoul; “but I doubt it, for
his accent is bad and his pronunciation defective.”

“Then you speak German, also?” asked the prince.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Well enough to question him in that language?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“Question him, then.”

Raoul began the examination, but the result justified his opinion. The
prisoner did not understand, or seemed not to understand, what Raoul
said to him; and Raoul could hardly understand his replies, containing
a mixture of Flemish and Alsatian. However, amidst all the prisoner’s
efforts to elude a systematic examination, Raoul had recognized his
natural accent.

“Non siete Spagnuolo,” he said; “non siete Tedesco; siete Italiano.”

The prisoner started and bit his lips.

“Ah, that,” said the prince, “I understand that language thoroughly;
and since he is Italian I will myself continue the examination. Thank
you, viscount,” continued the prince, laughing, “and I appoint you from
this moment my interpreter.”

But the prisoner was not less unwilling to respond in Italian than in
the other languages; his aim was to elude the examination. Therefore,
he knew nothing either of the enemy’s numbers, or of those in command,
or of the purpose of the army.

“Very good,” said the prince, understanding the reason of that
ignorance; “the man was caught in the act of assassination and robbery;
he might have purchased his life by speaking; he doesn’t wish to speak.
Take him out and shoot him.”

The prisoner turned pale. The two soldiers who had brought him in took
him, each by one arm, and led him toward the door, whilst the prince,
turning to Marshal de Grammont, seemed to have already forgotten the
order he had given.

When he reached the threshold of the door the prisoner stopped. The
soldiers, who knew only their orders, attempted to force him along.

“One moment,” said the prisoner, in French. “I am ready to speak, my
lord.”

“Ah! ah!” said the prince, laughing, “I thought we should come to that.
I have a sure method of limbering tongues. Young men, take advantage of
it against the time when you may be in command.”

“But on condition,” continued the prisoner, “that your highness will
swear that my life shall be safe.”

“Upon my honor,” said the prince.

“Question, then, my lord.”

“Where did the army cross the Lys?”

“Between Saint-Venant and Aire.”

“By whom is it commanded?”

“By Count de Fuonsaldagna, General Beck and the archduke.”

“Of how many does it consist?”

“Eighteen thousand men and thirty-six cannon.”

“And its aim is?”

“Lens.”

“You see; gentlemen!” said the prince, turning with a triumphant air
toward Marshal de Grammont and the other officers.

“Yes, my lord,” said the marshal, “you have divined all that was
possible to human genius.”

“Recall Le Plessis, Bellievre, Villequier and D’Erlac,” said the
prince, “recall all the troops that are on this side of the Lys. Let
them hold themselves in readiness to march to-night. To-morrow,
according to all probability, we shall attack the enemy.”

“But, my lord,” said Marshal de Grammont, “consider that when we have
collected all our forces we shall have hardly thirteen thousand men.”

“Monsieur le marechal,” said the prince, with that wonderful glance
that was peculiar to him, “it is with small armies that great battles
are won.”

Then turning toward the prisoner, “Take away that man,” he said, “and
keep him carefully in sight. His life is dependent on the information
he has given us; if it is true, he shall be free; if false, let him be
shot.”

The prisoner was led away.

“Count de Guiche,” said the prince, “it is a long time since you saw
your father, remain here with him. Monsieur,” he continued, addressing
Raoul, “if you are not too tired, follow me.”

“To the end of the world, my lord!” cried Raoul, feeling an unknown
enthusiasm for that young general, who seemed to him so worthy of his
renown.

The prince smiled; he despised flatterers, but he appreciated
enthusiasts.

“Come, monsieur,” he said, “you are good in council, as we have already
discovered; to-morrow we shall know if you are good in action.”

“And I,” said the marshal, “what am I to do?”

“Wait here to receive the troops. I shall either return for them myself
or shall send a courier directing you to bring them to me. Twenty
guards, well mounted, are all that I shall need for my escort.”

“That is very few,” said the marshal.

“It is enough,” replied the prince. “Have you a good horse, Monsieur de
Bragelonne?”

“My horse was killed this morning, my lord, and I am mounted
provisionally on my lackey’s.”

“Choose for yourself in my stables the horse you like best. No false
modesty; take the best horse you can find. You will need it this
evening, perhaps; you will certainly need it to-morrow.”

Raoul didn’t wait to be told twice; he knew that with superiors,
especially when those superiors are princes, the highest politeness is
to obey without delay or argument; he went down to the stables, picked
out a pie-bald Andalusian horse, saddled and bridled it himself, for
Athos had advised him to trust no one with those important offices at a
time of danger, and went to rejoin the prince, who at that moment
mounted his horse.

“Now, monsieur,” he said to Raoul, “will you give me the letter you
have brought?”

Raoul handed the letter to the prince.

“Keep near me,” said the latter.

The prince threw his bridle over the pommel of the saddle, as he was
wont to do when he wished to have both hands free, unsealed the letter
of Madame de Longueville and started at a gallop on the road to Lens,
attended by Raoul and his small escort, whilst messengers sent to
recall the troops set out with a loose rein in other directions. The
prince read as he hastened on.

“Monsieur,” he said, after a moment, “they tell me great things of you.
I have only to say, after the little that I have seen and heard, that I
think even better of you than I have been told.”

Raoul bowed.

Meanwhile, as the little troop drew nearer to Lens, the noise of the
cannon sounded louder. The prince kept his gaze fixed in the direction
of the sound with the steadfastness of a bird of prey. One would have
said that his gaze could pierce the branches of trees which limited his
horizon. From time to time his nostrils dilated as if eager for the
smell of powder, and he panted like a horse.

At length they heard the cannon so near that it was evident they were
within a league of the field of battle, and at a turn of the road they
perceived the little village of Aunay.

The peasants were in great commotion. The report of Spanish cruelty had
gone out and every one was frightened. The women had already fled,
taking refuge in Vitry; only a few men remained. On seeing the prince
they hastened to meet him. One of them recognized him.

“Ah, my lord,” he said, “have you come to drive away those rascal
Spaniards and those Lorraine robbers?”

“Yes,” said the prince, “if you will serve me as guide.”

“Willingly, my lord. Where does your highness wish to go?”

“To some elevated spot whence I can look down on Lens and the
surrounding country——”

“In that case, I’m your man.”

“I can trust you—you are a true Frenchman?”

“I am an old soldier of Rocroy, my lord.”

“Here,” said the prince, handing him a purse, “here is for Rocroy. Now,
do you want a horse, or will you go afoot?”

“Afoot, my lord; I have served always in the infantry. Besides, I
expect to lead your highness into places where you will have to walk.”

“Come, then,” said the prince; “let us lose no time.”

The peasant started off, running before the prince’s horse; then, a
hundred steps from the village, he took a narrow road hidden at the
bottom of the valley. For a half league they proceeded thus, the
cannon-shot sounding so near that they expected at each discharge to
hear the hum of the balls. At length they entered a path which, going
out from the road, skirted the mountainside. The prince dismounted,
ordered one of his aids and Raoul to follow his example, and directed
the others to await his orders, keeping themselves meanwhile on the
alert. He then began to ascend the path.

In about ten minutes they reached the ruins of an old chateau; those
ruins crowned the summit of a hill which overlooked the surrounding
country. At a distance of hardly a quarter of a league they looked down
on Lens, at bay, and before Lens the enemy’s entire army.

With a single glance the prince took in the extent of country that lay
before him, from Lens as far as Vimy. In a moment the plan of the
battle which on the following day was to save France the second time
from invasion was unrolled in his mind. He took a pencil, tore a page
from his tablets and wrote:

“My Dear Marshal,—In an hour Lens will be in the enemy’s possession.
Come and rejoin me; bring with you the whole army. I shall be at Vendin
to place it in position. To-morrow we shall retake Lens and beat the
enemy.”

Then, turning toward Raoul: “Go, monsieur,” he said; “ride fast and
give this letter to Monsieur de Grammont.”

Raoul bowed, took the letter, went hastily down the mountain, leaped on
his horse and set out at a gallop. A quarter of an hour later he was
with the marshal.

A portion of the troops had already arrived and the remainder was
expected from moment to moment. Marshal de Grammont put himself at the
head of all the available cavalry and infantry and took the road to
Vendin, leaving the Duc de Chatillon to await and bring on the rest.
All the artillery was ready to move, and started off at a moment’s
notice.

It was seven o’clock in the evening when the marshal arrived at the
appointed place. The prince awaited him there. As he had foreseen, Lens
had fallen into the hands of the enemy immediately after Raoul’s
departure. The event was announced by the cessation of the firing.

As the shadows of night deepened the troops summoned by the prince
arrived in successive detachments. Orders were given that no drum
should be beaten, no trumpet sounded.

At nine o’clock the night had fully come. Still a last ray of twilight
lighted the plain. The army marched silently, the prince at the head of
the column. Presently the army came in sight of Lens; two or three
houses were in flames and a dull noise was heard which indicated what
suffering was endured by a town taken by assault.

The prince assigned to every one his post. Marshal de Grammont was to
hold the extreme left, resting on Mericourt. The Duc de Chatillon
commanded the centre. Finally, the prince led the right wing, resting
on Aunay. The order of battle on the morrow was to be that of the
positions taken in the evening. Each one, on awaking, would find
himself on the field of battle.

The movement was executed in silence and with precision. At ten o’clock
every one was in his appointed position; at half-past ten the prince
visited the posts and gave his final orders for the following day.

Three things were especially urged upon the officers, who were to see
that the soldiers observed them scrupulously: the first, that the
different corps should so march that cavalry and infantry should be on
the same line and that each body should protect its gaps; the second,
to go to the charge no faster than a walk; the third, to let the enemy
fire first.

The prince assigned the Count de Guiche to his father and kept
Bragelonne near his own person; but the two young men sought the
privilege of passing the night together and it was accorded them. A
tent was erected for them near that of the marshal.

Although the day had been fatiguing, neither of them was inclined to
sleep. And besides, even for old soldiers the evening before a battle
is a serious time; it was so with greater reason to two young men who
were about to witness for the first time that terrible spectacle. On
the evening before a battle one thinks of a thousand things forgotten
till then; those who are indifferent to one another become friends and
those who are friends become brothers. It need not be said that if in
the depths of the heart there is a sentiment more tender, it reaches
then, quite naturally, the highest exaltation of which it is capable.
Some sentiment of this kind must have been cherished by each one of
these two friends, for each of them almost immediately sat down by
himself at an end of the tent and began to write.

The letters were long—the four pages were covered with closely written
words. The writers sometimes looked up at each other and smiled; they
understood without speaking, their organizations were so delicate and
sympathetic. The letters being finished, each put his own into two
envelopes, so that no one, without tearing the first envelope, could
discover to whom the second was addressed; then they drew near to each
other and smilingly exchanged their letters.

“In case any evil should happen to me,” said Bragelonne.

“In case I should be killed,” said De Guiche.

They then embraced each other like two brothers, and each wrapping
himself in his cloak they soon passed into that kindly sleep of youth
which is the prerogative of birds, flowers and infants.




Chapter XXXV.
A Dinner in the Old Style.


The second interview between the former musketeers was not so formal
and threatening as the first. Athos, with his superior understanding,
wisely deemed that the supper table would be the most complete and
satisfactory point of reunion, and at the moment when his friends, in
deference to his deportment and sobriety, dared scarcely speak of some
of their former good dinners, he was the first to propose that they
should all assemble around some well spread table and abandon
themselves unreservedly to their own natural character and manners—a
freedom which had formerly contributed so much to that good
understanding between them which gave them the name of the
inseparables. For different reasons this was an agreeable proposition
to them all, and it was therefore agreed that each should leave a very
exact address and that upon the request of any of the associates a
meeting should be convoked at a famous eating house in the Rue de la
Monnaie, of the sign of the Hermitage. The first rendezvous was fixed
for the following Wednesday, at eight o’clock in the evening precisely.

On that day, in fact, the four friends arrived punctually at the hour,
each from his own abode or occupation. Porthos had been trying a new
horse; D’Artagnan was on guard at the Louvre; Aramis had been to visit
one of his penitents in the neighborhood; and Athos, whose domicile was
established in the Rue Guenegaud, found himself close at hand. They
were, therefore, somewhat surprised to meet altogether at the door of
the Hermitage, Athos starting out from the Pont Neuf, Porthos by the
Rue de la Roule, D’Artagnan by the Rue des Fosse Saint Germain
l’Auxerrois, and Aramis by the Rue de Bethisy.

The first words exchanged between the four friends, on account of the
ceremony which each of them mingled with their demonstration, were
somewhat forced and even the repast began with a kind of stiffness.
Athos perceived this embarrassment, and by way of supplying an
effectual remedy, called for four bottles of champagne.

At this order, given in Athos’s habitually calm manner, the face of the
Gascon relaxed and Porthos’s brow grew smooth. Aramis was astonished.
He knew that Athos not only never drank, but more, that he had a kind
of repugnance to wine. This astonishment was doubled when Aramis saw
Athos fill a bumper and toss it off with all his former enthusiasm. His
companions followed his example. In a very few minutes the four bottles
were empty and this excellent specific succeeded in dissipating even
the slightest cloud that might have rested on their spirits. Now the
four friends began to speak loud, scarcely waiting till one had
finished before another began, and each assumed his favorite attitude
on or at the table. Soon—strange fact—Aramis undid two buttons of his
doublet, seeing which, Porthos unfastened his entirely.

Battles, long journeys, blows given and received, sufficed for the
first themes of conversation, which turned upon the silent struggles
sustained against him who was now called the great cardinal.

“Faith,” said Aramis, laughing, “we have praised the dead enough, let
us revile the living a little; I should like to say something evil of
Mazarin; is it permissible?”

“Go on, go on,” replied D’Artagnan, laughing heartily; “relate your
story and I will applaud it if it is a good one.”

“A great prince,” said Aramis, “with whom Mazarin sought an alliance,
was invited by him to send him a list of the conditions on which he
would do him the honor to negotiate with him. The prince, who had a
great repugnance to treat with such an ill-bred fellow, made out a
list, against the grain, and sent it. In this list there were three
conditions which displeased Mazarin and he offered the prince ten
thousand crowns to renounce them.”

“Ah, ha, ha!” laughed the three friends, “not a bad bargain; and there
was no fear of being taken at his word; what did the prince do then?”

“The prince immediately sent fifty thousand francs to Mazarin, begging
him never to write to him again, and offered twenty thousand francs
more, on condition that he would never speak to him. What did Mazarin
do?”

“Stormed!” suggested Athos.

“Beat the messenger!” cried Porthos.

“Accepted the money!” said D’Artagnan.

“You have guessed it,” answered Aramis; and they all laughed so
heartily that the host appeared in order to inquire whether the
gentlemen wanted anything; he thought they were fighting.

At last their hilarity calmed down and:

“Faith!” exclaimed D’Artagnan to the two friends, “you may well wish
ill to Mazarin; for I assure you, on his side he wishes you no good.”

“Pooh! really?” asked Athos. “If I thought the fellow knew me by my
name I would be rebaptized, for fear it might be thought I knew him.”

“He knows you better by your actions than your name; he is quite aware
that there are two gentlemen who greatly aided the escape of Monsieur
de Beaufort, and he has instigated an active search for them, I can
answer for it.”

“By whom?”

“By me; and this morning he sent for me to ask me if I had obtained any
information.”

“And what did you reply?”

“That I had none as yet; but that I was to dine to-day with two
gentlemen, who would be able to give me some.”

“You told him that?” said Porthos, a broad smile spreading over his
honest face. “Bravo! and you are not afraid of that, Athos?”

“No,” replied Athos, “it is not the search of Mazarin that I fear.”

“Now,” said Aramis, “tell me a little what you do fear.”

“Nothing for the present; at least, nothing in good earnest.”

“And with regard to the past?” asked Porthos.

“Oh! the past is another thing,” said Athos, sighing; “the past and the
future.”

“Are you afraid for your young Raoul?” asked Aramis.

“Well,” said D’Artagnan, “one is never killed in a first engagement.”

“Nor in the second,” said Aramis

“Nor in the third,” returned Porthos; “and even when one is killed, one
rises again, the proof of which is, that here we are!”

“No,” said Athos, “it is not Raoul about whom I am anxious, for I trust
he will conduct himself like a gentleman; and if he is killed—well, he
will die bravely; but hold—should such a misfortune happen—well—” Athos
passed his hand across his pale brow.

“Well?” asked Aramis.

“Well, I shall look upon it as an expiation.”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan; “I know what you mean.”

“And I, too,” added Aramis; “but you must not think of that, Athos;
what is past, is past.”

“I don’t understand,” said Porthos.

“The affair at Armentieres,” whispered D’Artagnan.

“The affair at Armentieres?” asked he again.

“Milady.”

“Oh, yes!” said Porthos; “true, I had forgotten it!”

Athos looked at him intently.

“You have forgotten it, Porthos?” said he.

“Faith! yes, it is so long ago,” answered Porthos.

“This affair does not, then, weigh upon your conscience?”

“Faith, no.”

“And you, D’Artagnan?”

“I—I own that when my mind returns to that terrible period I have no
recollection of anything but the rigid corpse of poor Madame
Bonancieux. Yes, yes,” murmured he, “I have often felt regret for the
victim, but never the very slightest remorse for the assassin.”

Athos shook his dead doubtfully.

“Consider,” said Aramis, “if you admit divine justice and its
participation in the things of this world, that woman was punished by
the will of heaven. We were but the instruments, that is all.”

“But as to free will, Aramis?”

“How acts the judge? He has a free will, yet he fearlessly condemns.
What does the executioner? He is master of his arm, yet he strikes
without remorse.”

“The executioner!” muttered Athos, as if arrested by some recollection.

“I know that it is terrible,” said D’Artagnan; “but when I reflect that
we have killed English, Rochellais, Spaniards, nay, even French, who
never did us any other harm but to aim at and to miss us, whose only
fault was to cross swords with us and to be unable to ward off our
blows—I can, on my honor, find an excuse for my share in the murder of
that woman.”

“As for me,” said Porthos, “now that you have reminded me of it, Athos,
I have the scene again before me, as if I now were there. Milady was
there, as it were, where you sit.” (Athos changed color.) “I—I was
where D’Artagnan stands. I wore a long sword which cut like a
Damascus—you remember it, Aramis for you always called it Balizarde.
Well, I swear to you, all three, that had the executioner of
Bethune—was he not of Bethune?—yes, egad! of Bethune!—not been there, I
would have cut off the head of that infamous being without thinking of
it, or even after thinking of it. She was a most atrocious woman.”

“And then,” said Aramis, with the tone of philosophical indifference
which he had assumed since he had belonged to the church and in which
there was more atheism than confidence in God, “what is the use of
thinking of it all? At the last hour we must confess this action and
God knows better than we can whether it is a crime, a fault, or a
meritorious deed. I repent of it? Egad! no. Upon my honor and by the
holy cross; I only regret it because she was a woman.”

“The most satisfactory part of the matter,” said D’Artagnan, “is that
there remains no trace of it.”

“She had a son,” observed Athos.

“Oh! yes, I know that,” said D’Artagnan, “and you mentioned it to me;
but who knows what has become of him? If the serpent be dead, why not
its brood? Do you think his uncle De Winter would have brought up that
young viper? De Winter probably condemned the son as he had done the
mother.”

“Then,” said Athos, “woe to De Winter, for the child had done no harm.”

“May the devil take me, if the child be not dead,” said Porthos. “There
is so much fog in that detestable country, at least so D’Artagnan
declares.”

Just as the quaint conclusion reached by Porthos was about to bring
back hilarity to faces now more or less clouded, hasty footsteps were
heard upon the stair and some one knocked at the door.

“Come in,” cried Athos.

“Please your honors,” said the host, “a person in a great hurry wishes
to speak to one of you.”

“To which of us?” asked all the four friends.

“To him who is called the Comte de la Fere.”

“It is I,” said Athos, “and what is the name of the person?”

“Grimaud.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Athos, turning pale. “Back already! What can have
happened, then, to Bragelonne?”

“Let him enter,” cried D’Artagnan; “let him come up.”

But Grimaud had already mounted the staircase and was waiting on the
last step; so springing into the room he motioned the host to leave it.
The door being closed, the four friends waited in expectation.
Grimaud’s agitation, his pallor, the sweat which covered his face, the
dust which soiled his clothes, all indicated that he was the messenger
of some important and terrible news.

“Your honors,” said he, “that woman had a child; that child has become
a man; the tigress had a little one, the tiger has roused himself; he
is ready to spring upon you—beware!”

Athos glanced around at his friends with a melancholy smile. Porthos
turned to look at his sword, which was hanging on the wall; Aramis
seized his knife; D’Artagnan arose.

“What do you mean, Grimaud?” he exclaimed.

“That Milady’s son has left England, that he is in France, on his road
to Paris, if he be not here already.”

“The devil he is!” said Porthos. “Are you sure of it?”

“Certain,” replied Grimaud.

This announcement was received in silence. Grimaud was so breathless,
so exhausted, that he had fallen back upon a chair. Athos filled a
beaker with champagne and gave it to him.

“Well, after all,” said D’Artagnan, “supposing that he lives, that he
comes to Paris; we have seen many other such. Let him come.”

“Yes,” echoed Porthos, glancing affectionately at his sword, still
hanging on the wall; “we can wait for him; let him come.”

“Moreover, he is but a child,” said Aramis.

Grimaud rose.

“A child!” he exclaimed. “Do you know what he has done, this child?
Disguised as a monk he discovered the whole history in confession from
the executioner of Bethune, and having confessed him, after having
learned everything from him, he gave him absolution by planting this
dagger into his heart. See, it is on fire yet with his hot blood, for
it is not thirty hours since it was drawn from the wound.”

And Grimaud threw the dagger on the table.

D’Artagnan, Porthos and Aramis rose and in one spontaneous motion
rushed to their swords. Athos alone remained seated, calm and
thoughtful.

“And you say he is dressed as a monk, Grimaud?”

“Yes, as an Augustine monk.”

“What sized man is he?”

“About my height; thin, pale, with light blue eyes and tawny flaxen
hair.”

“And he did not see Raoul?” asked Athos.

“Yes, on the contrary, they met, and it was the viscount himself who
conducted him to the bed of the dying man.”

Athos, in his turn, rising without speaking, went and unhooked his
sword.

“Heigh, sir,” said D’Artagnan, trying to laugh, “do you know we look
very much like a flock of silly, mouse-evading women! How is it that
we, four men who have faced armies without blinking, begin to tremble
at the mention of a child?”

“It is true,” said Athos, “but this child comes in the name of Heaven.”

And very soon they left the inn.




Chapter XXXVI.
A Letter from Charles the First.


The reader must now cross the Seine with us and follow us to the door
of the Carmelite Convent in the Rue Saint Jacques. It is eleven o’clock
in the morning and the pious sisters have just finished saying mass for
the success of the armies of King Charles I. Leaving the church, a
woman and a young girl dressed in black, the one as a widow and the
other as an orphan, have re-entered their cell.

The woman kneels on a prie-dieu of painted wood and at a short distance
from her stands the young girl, leaning against a chair, weeping.

The woman must have once been handsome, but traces of sorrow have aged
her. The young girl is lovely and her tears only embellish her; the
lady appears to be about forty years of age, the girl about fourteen.

“Oh, God!” prayed the kneeling suppliant, “protect my husband, guard my
son, and take my wretched life instead!”

“Oh, God!” murmured the girl, “leave me my mother!”

“Your mother can be of no use to you in this world, Henrietta,” said
the lady, turning around. “Your mother has no longer either throne or
husband; she has neither son, money nor friends; the whole world, my
poor child, has abandoned your mother!” And she fell back, weeping,
into her daughter’s arms.

“Courage, take courage, my dear mother!” said the girl.

“Ah! ’tis an unfortunate year for kings,” said the mother. “And no one
thinks of us in this country, for each must think about his own
affairs. As long as your brother was with me he kept me up; but he is
gone and can no longer send us news of himself, either to me or to your
father. I have pledged my last jewels, sold your clothes and my own to
pay his servants, who refused to accompany him unless I made this
sacrifice. We are now reduced to live at the expense of these daughters
of Heaven; we are the poor, succored by God.”

“But why not address yourself to your sister, the queen?” asked the
girl.

“Alas! the queen, my sister, is no longer queen, my child. Another
reigns in her name. One day you will be able to understand how all this
is.”

“Well, then, to the king, your nephew. Shall I speak to him? You know
how much he loves me, my mother.

“Alas! my nephew is not yet king, and you know Laporte has told us
twenty times that he himself is in need of almost everything.”

“Then let us pray to Heaven,” said the girl.

The two women who thus knelt in united prayer were the daughter and
grand-daughter of Henry IV., the wife and daughter of Charles I.

They had just finished their double prayer, when a nun softly tapped at
the door of the cell.

“Enter, my sister,” said the queen.

“I trust your majesty will pardon this intrusion on her meditations,
but a foreign lord has arrived from England and waits in the parlor,
demanding the honor of presenting a letter to your majesty.”

“Oh, a letter! a letter from the king, perhaps. News from your father,
do you hear, Henrietta? And the name of this lord?”

“Lord de Winter.”

“Lord de Winter!” exclaimed the queen, “the friend of my husband. Oh,
bid him enter!”

And the queen advanced to meet the messenger, whose hand she seized
affectionately, whilst he knelt down and presented a letter to her,
contained in a case of gold.

“Ah! my lord!” said the queen, “you bring us three things which we have
not seen for a long time. Gold, a devoted friend, and a letter from the
king, our husband and master.”

De Winter bowed again, unable to reply from excess of emotion.

On their side the mother and daughter retired into the embrasure of a
window to read eagerly the following letter:

“Dear Wife,—We have now reached the moment of decision. I have
concentrated here at Naseby camp all the resources Heaven has left me,
and I write to you in haste from thence. Here I await the army of my
rebellious subjects. I am about to struggle for the last time with
them. If victorious, I shall continue the struggle; if beaten, I am
lost. I shall try, in the latter case (alas! in our position, one must
provide for everything), I shall try to gain the coast of France. But
can they, will they receive an unhappy king, who will bring such a sad
story into a country already agitated by civil discord? Your wisdom and
your affection must serve me as guides. The bearer of this letter will
tell you, madame, what I dare not trust to pen and paper and the risks
of transit. He will explain to you the steps that I expect you to
pursue. I charge him also with my blessing for my children and with the
sentiments of my soul for yourself, my dearest sweetheart.”

The letter bore the signature, not of “Charles, King,” but of
“Charles—still king.”

“And let him be no longer king,” cried the queen. “Let him be
conquered, exiled, proscribed, provided he still lives. Alas! in these
days the throne is too dangerous a place for me to wish him to retain
it. But my lord, tell me,” she continued, “hide nothing from me—what
is, in truth, the king’s position? Is it as hopeless as he thinks?”

“Alas! madame, more hopeless than he thinks. His majesty has so good a
heart that he cannot understand hatred; is so loyal that he does not
suspect treason! England is torn in twain by a spirit of disturbance
which, I greatly fear, blood alone can exorcise.”

“But Lord Montrose,” replied the queen, “I have heard of his great and
rapid successes of battles gained. I heard it said that he was marching
to the frontier to join the king.”

“Yes, madame; but on the frontier he was met by Lesly; he had tried
victory by means of superhuman undertakings. Now victory has abandoned
him. Montrose, beaten at Philiphaugh, was obliged to disperse the
remains of his army and to fly, disguised as a servant. He is at
Bergen, in Norway.”

“Heaven preserve him!” said the queen. “It is at least a consolation to
know that some who have so often risked their lives for us are safe.
And now, my lord, that I see how hopeless the position of the king is,
tell me with what you are charged on the part of my royal husband.”

“Well, then, madame,” said De Winter, “the king wishes you to try and
discover the dispositions of the king and queen toward him.”

“Alas! you know that even now the king is but a child and the queen a
woman weak enough. Here, Monsieur Mazarin is everything.”

“Does he desire to play the part in France that Cromwell plays in
England?”

“Oh, no! He is a subtle, conscienceless Italian, who though he very
likely dreams of crime, dares not commit it; and unlike Cromwell, who
disposes of both Houses, Mazarin has had the queen to support him in
his struggle with the parliament.”

“More reason, then, he should protect a king pursued by parliament.”

The queen shook her head despairingly.

“If I judge for myself, my lord,” she said, “the cardinal will do
nothing, and will even, perhaps, act against us. The presence of my
daughter and myself in France is already irksome to him; much more so
would be that of the king. My lord,” added Henrietta, with a melancholy
smile, “it is sad and almost shameful to be obliged to say that we have
passed the winter in the Louvre without money, without linen, almost
without bread, and often not rising from bed because we wanted fire.”

“Horrible!” cried De Winter; “the daughter of Henry IV., and the wife
of King Charles! Wherefore did you not apply, then, madame, to the
first person you saw from us?”

“Such is the hospitality shown to a queen by the minister from whom a
king demands it.”

“But I heard that a marriage between the Prince of Wales and
Mademoiselle d’Orleans was spoken of,” said De Winter.

“Yes, for an instant I hoped it was so. The young people felt a mutual
esteem; but the queen, who at first sanctioned their affection, changed
her mind, and Monsieur, the Duc d’Orleans, who had encouraged the
familiarity between them, has forbidden his daughter to think any more
about the union. Oh, my lord!” continued the queen, without restraining
her tears, “it is better to fight as the king has done, and to die, as
perhaps he will, than live in beggary like me.”

“Courage, madame! courage! Do not despair! The interests of the French
crown, endangered at this moment, are to discountenance rebellion in a
neighboring nation. Mazarin, as a statesman, will understand the
politic necessity.”

“Are you sure,” said the queen doubtfully, “that you have not been
forestalled?”

“By whom?”

“By the Joices, the Prinns, the Cromwells?”

“By a tailor, a coachmaker, a brewer! Ah! I hope, madame, that the
cardinal will not enter into negotiations with such men!”

“Ah! what is he himself?” asked Madame Henrietta.

“But for the honor of the king—of the queen.”

“Well, let us hope he will do something for the sake of their honor,”
said the queen. “A true friend’s eloquence is so powerful, my lord,
that you have reassured me. Give me your hand and let us go to the
minister; and yet,” she added, “suppose he should refuse and that the
king loses the battle?”

“His majesty will then take refuge in Holland, where I hear his
highness the Prince of Wales now is.”

“And can his majesty count upon many such subjects as yourself for his
flight?”

“Alas! no, madame,” answered De Winter; “but the case is provided for
and I am come to France to seek allies.”

“Allies!” said the queen, shaking her head.

“Madame,” replied De Winter, “provided I can find some of my good old
friends of former times I will answer for anything.”

“Come then, my lord,” said the queen, with the painful doubt that is
felt by those who have suffered much; “come, and may Heaven hear you.”




Chapter XXXVII.
Cromwell’s Letter.


At the very moment when the queen quitted the convent to go to the
Palais Royal, a young man dismounted at the gate of this royal abode
and announced to the guards that he had something of importance to
communicate to Cardinal Mazarin. Although the cardinal was often
tormented by fear, he was more often in need of counsel and
information, and he was therefore sufficiently accessible. The true
difficulty of being admitted was not to be found at the first door, and
even the second was passed easily enough; but at the third watched,
besides the guard and the doorkeepers, the faithful Bernouin, a
Cerberus whom no speech could soften, no wand, even of gold, could
charm.

It was therefore at the third door that those who solicited or were
bidden to an audience underwent their formal interrogatory.

The young man having left his horse tied to the gate in the court,
mounted the great staircase and addressed the guard in the first
chamber.

“Cardinal Mazarin?” said he.

“Pass on,” replied the guard.

The cavalier entered the second hall, which was guarded by the
musketeers and doorkeepers.

“Have you a letter of audience?” asked a porter, advancing to the new
arrival.

“I have one, but not one from Cardinal Mazarin.”

“Enter, and ask for Monsieur Bernouin,” said the porter, opening the
door of the third room. Whether he only held his usual post or whether
it was by accident, Monsieur Bernouin was found standing behind the
door and must have heard all that had passed.

“You seek me, sir,” said he. “From whom may the letter be you bear to
his eminence?”

“From General Oliver Cromwell,” said the new comer. “Be so good as to
mention this name to his eminence and to bring me word whether he will
receive me—yes or no.”

Saying which, he resumed the proud and sombre bearing peculiar at that
time to Puritans. Bernouin cast an inquisitorial glance at the person
of the young man and entered the cabinet of the cardinal, to whom he
transmitted the messenger’s words.

“A man bringing a letter from Oliver Cromwell?” said Mazarin. “And what
kind of a man?”

“A genuine Englishman, your eminence. Hair sandy-red—more red than
sandy; gray-blue eyes—more gray than blue; and for the rest, stiff and
proud.”

“Let him give in his letter.”

“His eminence asks for the letter,” said Bernouin, passing back into
the ante-chamber.

“His eminence cannot see the letter without the bearer of it,” replied
the young man; “but to convince you that I am really the bearer of a
letter, see, here it is; and kindly add,” continued he, “that I am not
a simple messenger, but an envoy extraordinary.”

Bernouin re-entered the cabinet, returning in a few seconds. “Enter,
sir,” said he.

The young man appeared on the threshold of the minister’s closet, in
one hand holding his hat, in the other the letter. Mazarin rose. “Have
you, sir,” asked he, “a letter accrediting you to me?”

“There it is, my lord,” said the young man.

Mazarin took the letter and read it thus:

“Mr. Mordaunt, one of my secretaries, will remit this letter of
introduction to His Eminence, the Cardinal Mazarin, in Paris. He is
also the bearer of a second confidential epistle for his eminence.

“Oliver Cromwell.”

“Very well, Monsieur Mordaunt,” said Mazarin, “give me this second
letter and sit down.”

The young man drew from his pocket a second letter, presented it to the
cardinal, and took his seat. The cardinal, however, did not unseal the
letter at once, but continued to turn it again and again in his hand;
then, in accordance with his usual custom and judging from experience
that few people could hide anything from him when he began to question
them, fixing his eyes upon them at the same time, he thus addressed the
messenger:

“You are very young, Monsieur Mordaunt, for this difficult task of
ambassador, in which the oldest diplomatists often fail.”

“My lord, I am twenty-three years of age; but your eminence is mistaken
in saying that I am young. I am older than your eminence, although I
possess not your wisdom. Years of suffering, in my opinion, count
double, and I have suffered for twenty years.”

“Ah, yes, I understand,” said Mazarin; “want of fortune, perhaps. You
are poor, are you not?” Then he added to himself: “These English
Revolutionists are all beggars and ill-bred.”

“My lord, I ought to have a fortune of six millions, but it has been
taken from me.”

“You are not, then, a man of the people?” said Mazarin, astonished.

“If I bore my proper title I should be a lord. If I bore my name you
would have heard one of the most illustrious names of England.”

“What is your name, then?” asked Mazarin.

“My name is Mordaunt,” replied the young man, bowing.

Mazarin now understood that Cromwell’s envoy desired to retain his
incognito. He was silent for an instant, and during that time he
scanned the young man even more attentively than he had done at first.
The messenger was unmoved.

“Devil take these Puritans,” said Mazarin aside; “they are carved from
granite.” Then he added aloud, “But you have relations left you?”

“I have one remaining. Three times I presented myself to ask his
support and three times he ordered his servants to turn me away.”

“Oh, mon Dieu! my dear Mr. Mordaunt,” said Mazarin, hoping by a display
of affected pity to catch the young man in a snare, “how extremely your
history interests me! You know not, then, anything of your birth—you
have never seen your mother?”

“Yes, my lord; she came three times, whilst I was a child, to my
nurse’s house; I remember the last time she came as well as if it were
to-day.”

“You have a good memory,” said Mazarin.

“Oh! yes, my lord,” said the young man, with such peculiar emphasis
that the cardinal felt a shudder run through every vein.

“And who brought you up?” he asked again.

“A French nurse, who sent me away when I was five years old because no
one paid her for me, telling me the name of a relation of whom she had
heard my mother often speak.”

“What became of you?”

“As I was weeping and begging on the high road, a minister from
Kingston took me in, instructed me in the Calvinistic faith, taught me
all he knew himself and aided me in my researches after my family.”

“And these researches?”

“Were fruitless; chance did everything.”

“You discovered what had become of your mother?”

“I learned that she had been assassinated by my relation, aided by four
friends, but I was already aware that I had been robbed of my wealth
and degraded from my nobility by King Charles I.”

“Oh! I now understand why you are in the service of Cromwell; you hate
the king.”

“Yes, my lord, I hate him!” said the young man.

Mazarin marked with surprise the diabolical expression with which the
young man uttered these words. Just as, ordinarily, faces are colored
by blood, his face seemed dyed by hatred and became livid.

“Your history is a terrible one, Mr. Mordaunt, and touches me keenly;
but happily for you, you serve an all-powerful master; he ought to aid
you in your search; we have so many means of gaining information.”

“My lord, to a well-bred dog it is only necessary to show one end of a
track; he is certain to reach the other.”

“But this relation you mentioned—do you wish me to speak to him?” said
Mazarin, who was anxious to make a friend about Cromwell’s person.

“Thanks, my lord, I will speak to him myself. He will treat me better
the next time I see him.”

“You have the means, then, of touching him?”

“I have the means of making myself feared.”

Mazarin looked at the young man, but at the fire which shot from his
glance he bent his head; then, embarrassed how to continue such a
conversation, he opened Cromwell’s letter.

The young man’s eyes gradually resumed their dull and glassy appearance
and he fell into a profound reverie. After reading the first lines of
the letter Mazarin gave a side glance at him to see if he was watching
the expression of his face as he read. Observing his indifference, he
shrugged his shoulders, saying:

“Send on your business those who do theirs at the same time! Let us see
what this letter contains.”

We here present the letter verbatim:

“To his Eminence, Monseigneur le Cardinal Mazarini:

“I have wished, monseigneur, to learn your intentions relating to the
existing state of affairs in England. The two kingdoms are so near that
France must be interested in our situation, as we are interested in
that of France. The English are almost of one mind in contending
against the tyranny of Charles and his adherents. Placed by popular
confidence at the head of that movement, I can appreciate better than
any other its significance and its probable results. I am at present in
the midst of war, and am about to deliver a decisive battle against
King Charles. I shall gain it, for the hope of the nation and the
Spirit of the Lord are with me. This battle won by me, the king will
have no further resources in England or in Scotland; and if he is not
captured or killed, he will endeavor to pass over into France to
recruit soldiers and to refurnish himself with arms and money. France
has already received Queen Henrietta, and, unintentionally, doubtless,
has maintained a centre of inextinguishable civil war in my country.
But Madame Henrietta is a daughter of France and was entitled to the
hospitality of France. As to King Charles, the question must be viewed
differently; in receiving and aiding him, France will censure the acts
of the English nation, and thus so essentially harm England, and
especially the well-being of the government, that such a proceeding
will be equivalent to pronounced hostilities.”

At this moment Mazarin became very uneasy at the turn which the letter
was taking and paused to glance under his eyes at the young man. The
latter continued in thought. Mazarin resumed his reading:

“It is important, therefore, monseigneur, that I should be informed as
to the intentions of France. The interests of that kingdom and those of
England, though taking now diverse directions, are very nearly the
same. England needs tranquillity at home, in order to consummate the
expulsion of her king; France needs tranquillity to establish on solid
foundations the throne of her young monarch. You need, as much as we
do, that interior condition of repose which, thanks to the energy of
our government, we are about to attain.

“Your quarrels with the parliament, your noisy dissensions with the
princes, who fight for you to-day and to-morrow will fight against you,
the popular following directed by the coadjutor, President Blancmesnil,
and Councillor Broussel—all that disorder, in short, which pervades the
several departments of the state, must lead you to view with uneasiness
the possibility of a foreign war; for in that event England, exalted by
the enthusiasm of new ideas, will ally herself with Spain, already
seeking that alliance. I have therefore believed, monseigneur, knowing
your prudence and your personal relation to the events of the present
time, that you will choose to hold your forces concentrated in the
interior of the French kingdom and leave to her own the new government
of England. That neutrality consists simply in excluding King Charles
from the territory of France and in refraining from helping him—a
stranger to your country—with arms, with money or with troops.

“My letter is private and confidential, and for that reason I send it
to you by a man who shares my most intimate counsels. It anticipates,
through a sentiment which your eminence will appreciate, measures to be
taken after the events. Oliver Cromwell considered it more expedient to
declare himself to a mind as intelligent as Mazarin’s than to a queen
admirable for firmness, without doubt, but too much guided by vain
prejudices of birth and of divine right.

“Farewell, monseigneur; should I not receive a reply in the space of
fifteen days, I shall presume my letter will have miscarried.

“Oliver Cromwell.”

“Mr. Mordaunt,” said the cardinal, raising his voice, as if to arouse
the dreamer, “my reply to this letter will be more satisfactory to
General Cromwell if I am convinced that all are ignorant of my having
given one; go, therefore, and await it at Boulogne-sur-Mer, and promise
me to set out to-morrow morning.”

“I promise, my lord,” replied Mordaunt; “but how many days does your
eminence expect me to await your reply?”

“If you do not receive it in ten days you can leave.”

Mordaunt bowed.

“That is not all, sir,” continued Mazarin; “your private adventures
have touched me to the quick; besides, the letter from Mr. Cromwell
makes you an important person as ambassador; come, tell me, what can I
do for you?”

Mordaunt reflected a moment and, after some hesitation, was about to
speak, when Bernouin entered hastily and bending down to the ear of the
cardinal, whispered:

“My lord, the Queen Henrietta Maria, accompanied by an English noble,
is entering the Palais Royal at this moment.”

Mazarin made a bound from his chair, which did not escape the attention
of the young man and suppressed the confidence he was about to make.

“Sir,” said the cardinal, “you have heard me? I fix on Boulogne because
I presume that every town in France is indifferent to you; if you
prefer another, name it; but you can easily conceive that, surrounded
as I am by influences I can only muzzle by discretion, I desire your
presence in Paris to be unknown.”

“I go, sir,” said Mordaunt, advancing a few steps to the door by which
he had entered.

“No, not that way, I beg, sir,” quickly exclaimed the cardinal, “be so
good as to pass by yonder gallery, by which you can regain the hall. I
do not wish you to be seen leaving; our interview must be kept secret.”

Mordaunt followed Bernouin, who led him through the adjacent chamber
and left him with a doorkeeper, showing him the way out.




Chapter XXXVIII.
Henrietta Maria and Mazarin.


The cardinal rose, and advanced in haste to receive the queen of
England. He showed the more respect to this queen, deprived of every
mark of pomp and stripped of followers, as he felt some self-reproach
for his own want of heart and his avarice. But supplicants for favor
know how to accommodate the expression of their features, and the
daughter of Henry IV. smiled as she advanced to meet a man she hated
and despised.

“Ah!” said Mazarin to himself, “what a sweet face; does she come to
borrow money of me?”

And he threw an uneasy glance at his strong box; he even turned inside
the bevel of the magnificent diamond ring, the brilliancy of which drew
every eye upon his hand, which indeed was white and handsome.

“Your eminence,” said the august visitor, “it was my first intention to
speak of the matters that have brought me here to the queen, my sister,
but I have reflected that political affairs are more especially the
concern of men.”

“Madame,” said Mazarin, “your majesty overwhelms me with flattering
distinction.”

“He is very gracious,” thought the queen; “can he have guessed my
errand?”

“Give,” continued the cardinal, “your commands to the most respectful
of your servants.”

“Alas, sir,” replied the queen, “I have lost the habit of commanding
and have adopted instead that of making petitions. I am here to
petition you, too happy should my prayer be favorably heard.”

“I am listening, madame, with the greatest interest,” said Mazarin.

“Your eminence, it concerns the war which the king, my husband, is now
sustaining against his rebellious subjects. You are perhaps ignorant
that they are fighting in England,” added she, with a melancholy smile,
“and that in a short time they will fight in a much more decided
fashion than they have done hitherto.”

“I am completely ignorant of it, madame,” said the cardinal,
accompanying his words with a slight shrug of the shoulders; “alas, our
own wars quite absorb the time and the mind of a poor, incapable,
infirm old minister like me.”

“Well, then, your eminence,” said the queen, “I must inform you that
Charles I., my husband, is on the eve of a decisive engagement. In case
of a check” (Mazarin made a slight movement), “one must foresee
everything; in the case of a check, he desires to retire into France
and to live here as a private individual. What do you say to this
project?”

The cardinal had listened without permitting a single fibre of his face
to betray what he felt, and his smile remained as it ever was—false and
flattering; and when the queen finished speaking, he said:

“Do you think, madame, that France, agitated and disturbed as it is,
would be a safe retreat for a dethroned king? How will the crown, which
is scarce firmly set on the head of Louis XIV., support a double
weight?”

“The weight was not so heavy when I was in peril,” interrupted the
queen, with a sad smile, “and I ask no more for my husband than has
been done for me; you see that we are very humble monarchs, sir.”

“Oh, you, madame,” the cardinal hastened to say, in order to cut short
the explanation he foresaw was coming, “with regard to you, that is
another thing. A daughter of Henry IV., of that great, that sublime
sovereign——”

“All which does not prevent you refusing hospitality to his son-in-law,
sir! Nevertheless, you ought to remember that that great, that sublime
monarch, when proscribed at one time, as my husband may be, demanded
aid from England and England accorded it to him; and it is but just to
say that Queen Elizabeth was not his niece.”

“Peccato!” said Mazarin, writhing beneath this simple eloquence, “your
majesty does not understand me; you judge my intentions wrongly, and
that is partly because, doubtless, I explain myself in French.”

“Speak Italian, sir. Ere the cardinal, your predecessor, sent our
mother, Marie de Medicis, to die in exile, she taught us that language.
If anything yet remains of that great, that sublime king, Henry, of
whom you have just spoken, he would be much surprised at so little pity
for his family being united to such a profound admiration of himself.”

The perspiration stood in large drops on Mazarin’s brow.

“That admiration is, on the contrary, so great, so real, madame,”
returned Mazarin, without noticing the change of language offered to
him by the queen, “that if the king, Charles I.—whom Heaven protect
from evil!—came into France, I would offer him my house—my own house;
but, alas! it would be but an unsafe retreat. Some day the people will
burn that house, as they burned that of the Marechal d’Ancre. Poor
Concino Concini! And yet he but desired the good of the people.”

“Yes, my lord, like yourself!” said the queen, ironically.

Mazarin pretended not to understand the double meaning of his own
sentence, but continued to compassionate the fate of Concino Concini.

“Well then, your eminence,” said the queen, becoming impatient, “what
is your answer?”

“Madame,” cried Mazarin, more and more moved, “will your majesty permit
me to give you counsel?”

“Speak, sir,” replied the queen; “the counsels of so prudent a man as
yourself ought certainly to be available.”

“Madame, believe me, the king ought to defend himself to the last.”

“He has done so, sir, and this last battle, which he encounters with
resources much inferior to those of the enemy, proves that he will not
yield without a struggle; but in case he is beaten?”

“Well, madame, in that case, my advice—I know that I am very bold to
offer advice to your majesty—my advice is that the king should not
leave his kingdom. Absent kings are very soon forgotten; if he passes
over into France his cause is lost.”

“But,” persisted the queen, “if such be your advice and you have his
interest at heart, send him help of men and money, for I can do nothing
for him; I have sold even to my last diamond to aid him. If I had had a
single ornament left, I should have bought wood this winter to make a
fire for my daughter and myself.”

“Oh, madame,” said Mazarin, “your majesty knows not what you ask. On
the day when foreign succor follows in the train of a king to replace
him on his throne, it is an avowal that he no longer possesses the help
and love of his own subjects.”

“To the point, sir,” said the queen, “to the point, and answer me, yes
or no; if the king persists in remaining in England will you send him
succor? If he comes to France will you accord him hospitality? What do
you intend to do? Speak.”

“Madame,” said the cardinal, affecting an effusive frankness of speech,
“I shall convince your majesty, I trust, of my devotion to you and my
desire to terminate an affair which you have so much at heart. After
which your majesty will, I think, no longer doubt my zeal in your
behalf.”

The queen bit her lips and moved impatiently on her chair.

“Well, what do you propose to do?” she, said at length; “come, speak.”

“I will go this instant and consult the queen, and we will refer the
affair at once to parliament.”

“With which you are at war—is it not so? You will charge Broussel to
report it. Enough, sir, enough. I understand you or rather, I am wrong.
Go to the parliament, for it was from this parliament, the enemy of
monarchs, that the daughter of the great, the sublime Henry IV., whom
you so much admire, received the only relief this winter which
prevented her from dying of hunger and cold!”

And with these words Henrietta rose in majestic indignation, whilst the
cardinal, raising his hands clasped toward her, exclaimed, “Ah, madame,
madame, how little you know me, mon Dieu!”

But Queen Henrietta, without even turning toward him who made these
hypocritical pretensions, crossed the cabinet, opened the door for
herself and passing through the midst of the cardinal’s numerous
guards, courtiers eager to pay homage, the luxurious show of a
competing royalty, she went and took the hand of De Winter, who stood
apart in isolation. Poor queen, already fallen! Though all bowed before
her, as etiquette required, she had now but a single arm on which she
could lean.

“It signifies little,” said Mazarin, when he was alone. “It gave me
pain and it was an ungracious part to play, but I have said nothing
either to the one or to the other. Bernouin!”

Bernouin entered.

“See if the young man with the black doublet and the short hair, who
was with me just now, is still in the palace.”

Bernouin went out and soon returned with Comminges, who was on guard.

“Your eminence,” said Comminges, “as I was re-conducting the young man
for whom you have asked, he approached the glass door of the gallery,
and gazed intently upon some object, doubtless the picture by Raphael,
which is opposite the door. He reflected for a second and then
descended the stairs. I believe I saw him mount a gray horse and leave
the palace court. But is not your eminence going to the queen?”

“For what purpose?”

“Monsieur de Guitant, my uncle, has just told me that her majesty had
received news of the army.”

“It is well; I will go.”

Comminges had seen rightly, and Mordaunt had really acted as he had
related. In crossing the gallery parallel to the large glass gallery,
he perceived De Winter, who was waiting until the queen had finished
her negotiation.

At this sight the young man stopped short, not in admiration of
Raphael’s picture, but as if fascinated at the sight of some terrible
object. His eyes dilated and a shudder ran through his body. One would
have said that he longed to break through the wall of glass which
separated him from his enemy; for if Comminges had seen with what an
expression of hatred the eyes of this young man were fixed upon De
Winter, he would not have doubted for an instant that the Englishman
was his eternal foe.

But he stopped, doubtless to reflect; for instead of allowing his first
impulse, which had been to go straight to Lord de Winter, to carry him
away, he leisurely descended the staircase, left the palace with his
head down, mounted his horse, which he reined in at the corner of the
Rue Richelieu, and with his eyes fixed on the gate, waited until the
queen’s carriage had left the court.

He had not long to wait, for the queen scarcely remained a quarter of
an hour with Mazarin, but this quarter of an hour of expectation
appeared a century to him. At last the heavy machine, which was called
a chariot in those days, came out, rumbling against the gates, and De
Winter, still on horseback, bent again to the door to converse with her
majesty.

The horses started on a trot and took the road to the Louvre, which
they entered. Before leaving the convent of the Carmelites, Henrietta
had desired her daughter to attend her at the palace, which she had
inhabited for a long time and which she had only left because their
poverty seemed to them more difficult to bear in gilded chambers.

Mordaunt followed the carriage, and when he had watched it drive
beneath the sombre arches he went and stationed himself under a wall
over which the shadow was extended, and remained motionless, amidst the
moldings of Jean Goujon, like a bas-relievo, representing an equestrian
statue.




Chapter XXXIX.
How, sometimes, the Unhappy mistake Chance for Providence.


Well, madame,” said De Winter, when the queen had dismissed her
attendants.

“Well, my lord, what I foresaw has come to pass.”

“What? does the cardinal refuse to receive the king? France refuse
hospitality to an unfortunate prince? Ay, but it is for the first time,
madame!”

“I did not say France, my lord; I said the cardinal, and the cardinal
is not even a Frenchman.”

“But did you see the queen?”

“It is useless,” replied Henrietta, “the queen will not say yes when
the cardinal says no. Are you not aware that this Italian directs
everything, both indoors and out? And moreover, I should not be
surprised had we been forestalled by Cromwell. He was embarrassed
whilst speaking to me and yet quite firm in his determination to
refuse. Then did you not observe the agitation in the Palais Royal, the
passing to and fro of busy people? Can they have received any news, my
lord?”

“Not from England, madame. I made such haste that I am certain of not
having been forestalled. I set out three days ago, passing miraculously
through the Puritan army, and I took post horses with my servant Tony;
the horses upon which we were mounted were bought in Paris. Besides,
the king, I am certain, awaits your majesty’s reply before risking
anything.”

“You will tell him, my lord,” resumed the queen, despairingly, “that I
can do nothing; that I have suffered as much as himself—more than he
has—obliged as I am to eat the bread of exile and to ask hospitality
from false friends who smile at my tears; and as regards his royal
person, he must sacrifice it generously and die like a king. I shall go
and die by his side.”

“Madame, madame,” exclaimed De Winter, “your majesty abandons yourself
to despair; and yet, perhaps, there still remains some hope.”

“No friends left, my lord; no other friends left in the wide world but
yourself! Oh, God!” exclaimed the poor queen, raising her eyes to
Heaven, “have You indeed taken back all the generous hearts that once
existed in the world?”

“I hope not, madame,” replied De Winter, thoughtfully; “I once spoke to
you of four men.”

“What can be done with four?”

“Four devoted, resolute men can do much, assure yourself, madame; and
those of whom I speak performed great things at one time.”

“And where are these four men?”

“Ah, that is what I do not know. It is twenty years since I saw them,
and yet whenever I have seen the king in danger I have thought of
them.”

“And these men were your friends?”

“One of them held my life in his hands and gave it to me. I know not
whether he is still my friend, but since that time I have remained
his.”

“And these men are in France, my lord?”

“I believe so.”

“Tell me their names; perhaps I may have heard them mentioned and might
be able to aid you in finding them.”

“One of them was called the Chevalier d’Artagnan.”

“Ah, my lord, if I mistake not, the Chevalier d’Artagnan is lieutenant
of royal guards; but take care, for I fear that this man is entirely
devoted to the cardinal.”

“That would be a misfortune,” said De Winter, “and I shall begin to
think that we are really doomed.”

“But the others,” said the queen, who clung to this last hope as a
shipwrecked man clings to the hull of his vessel. “The others, my
lord!”

“The second—I heard his name by chance; for before fighting us, these
four gentlemen told us their names; the second was called the Comte de
la Fere. As for the two others, I had so much the habit of calling them
by nicknames that I have forgotten their real ones.”

“Oh, mon Dieu, it is a matter of the greatest urgency to find them
out,” said the queen, “since you think these worthy gentlemen might be
so useful to the king.”

“Oh, yes,” said De Winter, “for they are the same men. Listen, madame,
and recall your remembrances. Have you never heard that Queen Anne of
Austria was once saved from the greatest danger ever incurred by a
queen?”

“Yes, at the time of her relations with Monsieur de Buckingham; it had
to do in some way with certain studs and diamonds.”

“Well, it was that affair, madame; these men are the ones who saved
her; and I smile with pity when I reflect that if the names of those
gentlemen are unknown to you it is because the queen has forgotten
them, who ought to have made them the first noblemen of the realm.”

“Well, then, my lord, they must be found; but what can four men, or
rather three men do—for I tell you, you must not count on Monsieur
d’Artagnan.”

“It will be one valiant sword the less, but there will remain still
three, without reckoning my own; now four devoted men around the king
to protect him from his enemies, to be at his side in battle, to aid
him with counsel, to escort him in flight, are sufficient, not to make
the king a conqueror, but to save him if conquered; and whatever
Mazarin may say, once on the shores of France your royal husband may
find as many retreats and asylums as the seabird finds in a storm.”

“Seek, then, my lord, seek these gentlemen; and if they will consent to
go with you to England, I will give to each a duchy the day that we
reascend the throne, besides as much gold as would pave Whitehall. Seek
them, my lord, and find them, I conjure you.”

“I will search for them, madame,” said De Winter “and doubtless I shall
find them; but time fails me. Has your majesty forgotten that the king
expects your reply and awaits it in agony?”

“Then indeed we are lost!” cried the queen, in the fullness of a broken
heart.

At this moment the door opened and the young Henrietta appeared; then
the queen, with that wonderful strength which is the privilege of
parents, repressed her tears and motioned to De Winter to change the
subject.

But that act of self-control, effective as it was, did not escape the
eyes of the young princess. She stopped on the threshold, breathed a
sigh, and addressing the queen:

“Why, then, do you always weep, mother, when I am away from you?” she
said.

The queen smiled, but instead of answering:

“See, De Winter,” she said, “I have at least gained one thing in being
only half a queen; and that is that my children call me ‘mother’
instead of ‘madame.’”

Then turning toward her daughter:

“What do you want, Henrietta?” she demanded.

“My mother,” replied the young princess, “a cavalier has just entered
the Louvre and wishes to present his respects to your majesty; he
arrives from the army and has, he says, a letter to remit to you, on
the part of the Marechal de Grammont, I think.”

“Ah!” said the queen to De Winter, “he is one of my faithful adherents;
but do you not observe, my dear lord, that we are so poorly served that
it is left to my daughter to fill the office of doorkeeper?”

“Madame, have pity on me,” exclaimed De Winter; “you wring my heart!”

“And who is this cavalier, Henrietta?” asked the queen.

“I saw him from the window, madame; he is a young man that appears
scarce sixteen years of age, and is called the Viscount de Bragelonne.”

The queen, smiling, made a sign with her head; the young princess
opened the door and Raoul appeared on the threshold.

Advancing a few steps toward the queen, he knelt down.

“Madame,” said he, “I bear to your majesty a letter from my friend the
Count de Guiche, who told me he had the honor of being your servant;
this letter contains important news and the expression of his respect.”

At the name of the Count de Guiche a blush spread over the cheeks of
the young princess and the queen glanced at her with some degree of
severity.

“You told me that the letter was from the Marechal de Grammont,
Henrietta!” said the queen.

“I thought so, madame,” stammered the young girl.

“It is my fault, madame,” said Raoul. “I did announce myself, in truth,
as coming on the part of the Marechal de Grammont; but being wounded in
the right arm he was unable to write and therefore the Count de Guiche
acted as his secretary.”

“There has been fighting, then?” asked the queen, motioning to Raoul to
rise.

“Yes, madame,” said the young man.

At this announcement of a battle having taken place, the princess
opened her mouth as though to ask a question of interest; but her lips
closed again without articulating a word, while the color gradually
faded from her cheeks.

The queen saw this, and doubtless her maternal heart translated the
emotion, for addressing Raoul again:

“And no evil has happened to the young Count de Guiche?” she asked;
“for not only is he our servant, as you say, sir, but more—he is one of
our friends.”

“No, madame,” replied Raoul; “on the contrary, he gained great glory
and had the honor of being embraced by his highness, the prince, on the
field of battle.”

The young princess clapped her hands; and then, ashamed of having been
betrayed into such a demonstration of joy, she half turned away and
bent over a vase of roses, as if to inhale their odor.

“Let us see,” said the queen, “what the count says.” And she opened the
letter and read:

“Madame,—Being unable to have the honor of writing to you myself, by
reason of a wound I have received in my right hand, I have commanded my
son, the Count de Guiche, who, with his father, is equally your humble
servant, to write to tell you that we have just gained the battle of
Lens, and that this victory cannot fail to give great power to Cardinal
Mazarin and to the queen over the affairs of Europe. If her majesty
will have faith in my counsels she ought to profit by this event to
address at this moment, in favor of her august husband, the court of
France. The Vicomte de Bragelonne, who will have the honor of remitting
this letter to your majesty, is the friend of my son, who owes to him
his life; he is a gentleman in whom your majesty may confide entirely,
in case your majesty may have some verbal or written order to remit to
me.

“I have the honor to be, with respect, etc.,

“Marechal de Grammont.”

At the moment mention occurred of his having rendered a service to the
count, Raoul could not help turning his glance toward the young
princess, and then he saw in her eyes an expression of infinite
gratitude to the young man; he no longer doubted that the daughter of
King Charles I. loved his friend.

“The battle of Lens gained!” said the queen; “they are lucky here
indeed; they can gain battles! Yes, the Marechal de Grammont is right;
this will change the aspect of French affairs, but I much fear it will
do nothing for English, even if it does not harm them. This is recent
news, sir,” continued she, “and I thank you for having made such haste
to bring it to me; without this letter I should not have heard till
to-morrow, perhaps after to-morrow—the last of all Paris.”

“Madame,” said Raoul, “the Louvre is but the second palace this news
has reached; it is as yet unknown to all, and I had sworn to the Count
de Guiche to remit this letter to your majesty before even I should
embrace my guardian.”

“Your guardian! is he, too, a Bragelonne?” asked Lord de Winter. “I
once knew a Bragelonne—is he still alive?”

“No, sir, he is dead; and I believe it is from him my guardian, whose
near relation he was, inherited the estate from which I take my name.”

“And your guardian, sir,” asked the queen, who could not help feeling
some interest in the handsome young man before her, “what is his name?”

“The Comte de la Fere, madame,” replied the young man, bowing.

De Winter made a gesture of surprise and the queen turned to him with a
start of joy.

“The Comte de la Fere!” she cried. “Have you not mentioned that name to
me?”

As for De Winter he could scarcely believe that he had heard aright.
“The Comte de la Fere!” he cried in his turn. “Oh, sir, reply, I
entreat you—is not the Comte de la Fere a noble whom I remember,
handsome and brave, a musketeer under Louis XIII., who must be now
about forty-seven or forty-eight years of age?”

“Yes, sir, you are right in every particular!”

“And who served under an assumed name?”

“Under the name of Athos. Latterly I heard his friend, Monsieur
d’Artagnan, give him that name.”

“That is it, madame, that is the same. God be praised! And he is in
Paris?” continued he, addressing Raoul; then turning to the queen: “We
may still hope. Providence has declared for us, since I have found this
brave man again in so miraculous a manner. And, sir, where does he
reside, pray?”

“The Comte de la Fere lodges in the Rue Guenegaud, Hotel du Grand Roi
Charlemagne.”

“Thanks, sir. Inform this dear friend that he may remain within, that I
shall go and see him immediately.”

“Sir, I obey with pleasure, if her majesty will permit me to depart.”

“Go, Monsieur de Bragelonne,” said the queen, “and rest assured of our
affection.”

Raoul bent respectfully before the two princesses, and bowing to De
Winter, departed.

The queen and De Winter continued to converse for some time in low
voices, in order that the young princess should not overhear them; but
the precaution was needless: she was in deep converse with her own
thoughts.

Then, when De Winter rose to take leave:

“Listen, my lord,” said the queen; “I have preserved this diamond cross
which came from my mother, and this order of St. Michael which came
from my husband. They are worth about fifty thousand pounds. I had
sworn to die of hunger rather than part with these precious pledges;
but now that this ornament may be useful to him or his defenders,
everything must be sacrificed. Take them, and if you need money for
your expedition, sell them fearlessly, my lord. But should you find the
means of retaining them, remember, my lord, that I shall esteem you as
having rendered the greatest service that a gentleman can render to a
queen; and in the day of my prosperity he who brings me this order and
this cross shall be blessed by me and my children.”

“Madame,” replied De Winter, “your majesty will be served by a man
devoted to you. I hasten to deposit these two objects in a safe place,
nor should I accept them if the resources of our ancient fortune were
left to us, but our estates are confiscated, our ready money is
exhausted, and we are reduced to turn to service everything we possess.
In an hour hence I shall be with the Comte de la Fere, and to-morrow
your majesty shall have a definite reply.”

The queen tendered her hand to Lord de Winter, who, kissing it
respectfully, went out and traversed alone and unconducted those large,
dark and deserted apartments, brushing away tears which, blase as he
was by fifty years spent as a courtier, he could not withhold at the
spectacle of royal distress so dignified, yet so intense.




Chapter XL.
Uncle and Nephew.


The horse and servant belonging to De Winter were waiting for him at
the door; he proceeded toward his abode very thoughtfully, looking
behind him from time to him to contemplate the dark and silent frontage
of the Louvre. It was then that he saw a horseman, as it were, detach
himself from the wall and follow him at a little distance. In leaving
the Palais Royal he remembered to have observed a similar shadow.

“Tony,” he said, motioning to his groom to approach.

“Here I am, my lord.”

“Did you remark that man who is following us?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“Who is he?”

“I do not know, only he has followed your grace from the Palais Royal,
stopped at the Louvre to wait for you, and now leaves the Louvre with
you.”

“Some spy of the cardinal,” said De Winter to him, aside. “Let us
pretend not to notice that he is watching us.”

And spurring on he plunged into the labyrinth of streets which led to
his hotel, situated near the Marais, for having for so long a time
lived near the Place Royale, Lord de Winter naturally returned to lodge
near his ancient dwelling.

The unknown spurred his horse to a gallop.

De Winter dismounted at his hotel and went up into his apartment,
intending to watch the spy; but as he was about to place his gloves and
hat on a table, he saw reflected in a glass opposite to him a figure
which stood on the threshold of the room. He turned around and Mordaunt
stood before him.

There was a moment of frozen silence between these two.

“Sir,” said De Winter, “I thought I had already made you aware that I
am weary of this persecution; withdraw, then, or I shall call and have
you turned out as you were in London. I am not your uncle, I know you
not.”

“My uncle,” replied Mordaunt, with his harsh and bantering tone, “you
are mistaken; you will not have me turned out this time as you did in
London—you dare not. As for denying that I am your nephew, you will
think twice about it, now that I have learned some things of which I
was ignorant a year ago.”

“And how does it concern me what you have learned?” said De Winter.

“Oh, it concerns you very closely, my uncle, I am sure, and you will
soon be of my opinion,” added he, with a smile which sent a shudder
through the veins of him he thus addressed. “When I presented myself
before you for the first time in London, it was to ask you what had
become of my fortune; the second time it was to demand who had sullied
my name; and this time I come before you to ask a question far more
terrible than any other, to say to you as God said to the first
murderer: ‘Cain, what hast thou done to thy brother Abel?’ My lord,
what have you done with your sister—your sister, who was my mother?”

De Winter shrank back from the fire of those scorching eyes.

“Your mother?” he said.

“Yes, my lord, my mother,” replied the young man, advancing into the
room until he was face to face with Lord de Winter, and crossing his
arms. “I have asked the headsman of Bethune,” he said, his voice hoarse
and his face livid with passion and grief. “And the headsman of Bethune
gave me a reply.”

De Winter fell back in a chair as though struck by a thunderbolt and in
vain attempted a reply.

“Yes,” continued the young man; “all is now explained; with this key I
open the abyss. My mother inherited an estate from her husband, you
have assassinated her; my name would have secured me the paternal
estate, you have deprived me of it; you have despoiled me of my
fortune. I am no longer astonished that you knew me not. I am not
surprised that you refused to recognize me. When a man is a robber it
is hard to call him nephew whom he has impoverished; when one is a
murderer, to recognize the man whom one has made an orphan.”

These words produced a contrary effect to that which Mordaunt had
anticipated. De Winter remembered the monster that Milady had been; he
rose, dignified and calm, restraining by the severity of his look the
wild glance of the young man.

“You desire to fathom this horrible secret?” said De Winter; “well,
then, so be it. Know, then, what manner of woman it was for whom to-day
you call me to account. That woman had, in all probability, poisoned my
brother, and in order to inherit from me she was about to assassinate
me in my turn. I have proof of it. What say you to that?”

“I say that she was my mother.”

“She caused the unfortunate Duke of Buckingham to be stabbed by a man
who was, ere that, honest, good and pure. What say you to that crime,
of which I have the proof?”

“She was my mother.”

“On our return to France she had a young woman who was attached to one
of her opponents poisoned in the convent of the Augustines at Bethune.
Will this crime persuade you of the justice of her punishment—for of
all this I have the proofs?”

“She was my mother!” cried the young man, who uttered these three
successive exclamations with constantly increasing force.

“At last, charged with murders, with debauchery, hated by every one and
yet threatening still, like a panther thirsting for blood, she fell
under the blows of men whom she had rendered desperate, though they had
never done her the least injury; she met with judges whom her hideous
crimes had evoked; and that executioner you saw—that executioner who
you say told you everything—that executioner, if he told you
everything, told you that he leaped with joy in avenging on her his
brother’s shame and suicide. Depraved as a girl, adulterous as a wife,
an unnatural sister, homicide, poisoner, execrated by all who knew her,
by every nation that had been visited by her, she died accursed by
Heaven and earth.”

A sob which Mordaunt could not repress burst from his throat and his
livid face became suffused with blood; he clenched his fists, sweat
covered his face, his hair, like Hamlet’s, stood on end, and racked
with fury he cried out:

“Silence, sir! she was my mother! Her crimes, I know them not; her
disorders, I know them not; her vices, I know them not. But this I
know, that I had a mother, that five men leagued against one woman,
murdered her clandestinely by night—silently—like cowards. I know that
you were one of them, my uncle, and that you cried louder than the
others: ‘She must die.’ Therefore I warn you, and listen well to my
words, that they may be engraved upon your memory, never to be
forgotten: this murder, which has robbed me of everything—this murder,
which has deprived me of my name—this murder, which has impoverished
me—this murder, which has made me corrupt, wicked, implacable—I shall
summon you to account for it first and then those who were your
accomplices, when I discover them!”

With hatred in his eyes, foaming at his mouth, and his fist extended,
Mordaunt had advanced one more step, a threatening, terrible step,
toward De Winter. The latter put his hand to his sword, and said, with
the smile of a man who for thirty years has jested with death:

“Would you assassinate me, sir? Then I shall recognize you as my
nephew, for you would be a worthy son of such a mother.”

“No,” replied Mordaunt, forcing his features and the muscles of his
body to resume their usual places and be calm; “no, I shall not kill
you; at least not at this moment, for without you I could not discover
the others. But when I have found them, then tremble, sir. I stabbed to
the heart the headsman of Bethune, without mercy or pity, and he was
the least guilty of you all.”

With these words the young man went out and descended the stairs with
sufficient calmness to pass unobserved; then upon the lowest landing
place he passed Tony, leaning over the balustrade, waiting only for a
call from his master to mount to his room.

But De Winter did not call; crushed, enfeebled, he remained standing
and with listening ear; then only when he had heard the step of the
horse going away he fell back on a chair, saying:

“My God, I thank Thee that he knows me only.”




Chapter XLI.
Paternal Affection.


Whilst this terrible scene was passing at Lord de Winter’s, Athos,
seated near his window, his elbow on the table and his head supported
on his hand, was listening intently to Raoul’s account of the
adventures he met with on his journey and the details of the battle.

Listening to the relation of those emotions so fresh and pure, the
fine, noble face of Athos betrayed indescribable pleasure; he inhaled
the tones of that young voice, as harmonious music. He forgot all that
was dark in the past and that was cloudy in the future. It almost
seemed as if the return of this much loved boy had changed his fears to
hopes. Athos was happy—happy as he had never been before.

“And you assisted and took part in this great battle, Bragelonne!”
cried the former musketeer.

“Yes, sir.”

“And it was a fierce one?”

“His highness the prince charged eleven times in person.”

“He is a great commander, Bragelonne.”

“He is a hero, sir. I did not lose sight of him for an instant. Oh! how
fine it is to be called Condé and to be so worthy of such a name!”

“He was calm and radiant, was he not?”

“As calm as at parade, radiant as at a fete. When we went up to the
enemy it was slowly; we were forbidden to draw first and we were
marching toward the Spaniards, who were on a height with lowered
muskets. When we arrived about thirty paces from them the prince turned
around to the soldiers: ‘Comrades,’ he said, ‘you are about to suffer a
furious discharge; but after that you will make short work with those
fellows.’ There was such dead silence that friends and enemies could
have heard these words; then raising his sword, ‘Sound trumpets!’ he
cried.”

“Well, very good; you will do as much when the opportunity occurs, will
you, Raoul?”

“I know not, sir, but I thought it really very fine and grand!”

“Were you afraid, Raoul?” asked the count.

“Yes, sir,” replied the young man naively; “I felt a great chill at my
heart, and at the word ‘fire,’ which resounded in Spanish from the
enemy’s ranks, I closed my eyes and thought of you.”

“In honest truth, Raoul?” said Athos, pressing his hand.

“Yes, sir; at that instant there was such a rataplan of musketry that
one might have imagined the infernal regions had opened. Those who were
not killed felt the heat of the flames. I opened my eyes, astonished to
find myself alive and even unhurt; a third of the squadron were lying
on the ground, wounded, dead or dying. At that moment I encountered the
eye of the prince. I had but one thought and that was that he was
observing me. I spurred on and found myself in the enemy’s ranks.”

“And the prince was pleased with you?”

“He told me so, at least, sir, when he desired me to return to Paris
with Monsieur de Chatillon, who was charged to carry the news to the
queen and to bring the colors we had taken. ‘Go,’ said he; ‘the enemy
will not rally for fifteen days and until that time I have no need of
your service. Go and see those whom you love and who love you, and tell
my sister De Longueville that I thank her for the present that she made
me of you.’ And I came, sir,” added Raoul, gazing at the count with a
smile of real affection, “for I thought you would be glad to see me
again.”

Athos drew the young man toward him and pressed his lips to his brow,
as he would have done to a young daughter.

“And now, Raoul,” said he, “you are launched; you have dukes for
friends, a marshal of France for godfather, a prince of the blood as
commander, and on the day of your return you have been received by two
queens; it is not so bad for a novice.”

“Oh sir,” said Raoul, suddenly, “you recall something, which, in my
haste to relate my exploits, I had forgotten; it is that there was with
Her Majesty the Queen of England, a gentleman who, when I pronounced
your name, uttered a cry of surprise and joy; he said he was a friend
of yours, asked your address, and is coming to see you.”

“What is his name?”

“I did not venture to ask, sir; he spoke elegantly, although I thought
from his accent he was an Englishman.”

“Ah!” said Athos, leaning down his head as if to remember who it could
be. Then, when he raised it again, he was struck by the presence of a
man who was standing at the open door and was gazing at him with a
compassionate air.

“Lord de Winter!” exclaimed the count.

“Athos, my friend!”

And the two gentlemen were for an instant locked in each other’s arms;
then Athos, looking into his friend’s face and taking him by both
hands, said:

“What ails you, my lord? you appear as unhappy as I am the reverse.”

“Yes, truly, dear friend; and I may even say the sight of you increases
my dismay.”

And De Winter glancing around him, Raoul quickly understood that the
two friends wished to be alone and he therefore left the room
unaffectedly.

“Come, now that we are alone,” said Athos, “let us talk of yourself.”

“Whilst we are alone let us speak of ourselves,” replied De Winter. “He
is here.”

“Who?”

“Milady’s son.”

Athos, again struck by this name, which seemed to pursue him like an
echo, hesitated for a moment, then slightly knitting his brows, he
calmly said:

“I know it, Grimaud met him between Bethune and Arras and then came
here to warn me of his presence.”

“Does Grimaud know him, then?”

“No; but he was present at the deathbed of a man who knew him.”

“The headsman of Bethune?” exclaimed De Winter.

“You know about that?” cried Athos, astonished.

“He has just left me,” replied De Winter, “after telling me all. Ah! my
friend! what a horrible scene! Why did we not destroy the child with
the mother?”

“What need you fear?” said Athos, recovering from the instinctive fear
he had at first experienced, by the aid of reason; “are we not men
accustomed to defend ourselves? Is this young man an assassin by
profession—a murderer in cold blood? He has killed the executioner of
Bethune in an access of passion, but now his fury is assuaged.”

De Winter smiled sorrowfully and shook his head.

“Do you not know the race?” said he.

“Pooh!” said Athos, trying to smile in his turn. “It must have lost its
ferocity in the second generation. Besides, my friend, Providence has
warned us, that we may be on our guard. All we can now do is to wait.
Let us wait; and, as I said before, let us speak of yourself. What
brings you to Paris?”

“Affairs of importance which you shall know later. But what is this
that I hear from Her Majesty the Queen of England? Monsieur d’Artagnan
sides with Mazarin! Pardon my frankness, dear friend. I neither hate
nor blame the cardinal, and your opinions will be held ever sacred by
me. But do you happen to belong to him?”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” replied Athos, “is in the service; he is a
soldier and obeys all constitutional authority. Monsieur d’Artagnan is
not rich and has need of his position as lieutenant to enable him to
live. Millionaires like yourself, my lord, are rare in France.”

“Alas!” said De Winter, “I am at this moment as poor as he is, if not
poorer. But to return to our subject.”

“Well, then, you wish to know if I am of Mazarin’s party? No. Pardon my
frankness, too, my lord.”

“I am obliged to you, count, for this pleasing intelligence! You make
me young and happy again by it. Ah! so you are not a Mazarinist?
Delightful! Indeed, you could not belong to him. But pardon me, are you
free? I mean to ask if you are married?”

“Ah! as to that, no,” replied Athos, laughing.

“Because that young man, so handsome, so elegant, so polished——”

“Is a child I have adopted and who does not even know who was his
father.”

“Very well; you are always the same, Athos, great and generous. Are you
still friends with Monsieur Porthos and Monsieur Aramis?”

“Add Monsieur d’Artagnan, my lord. We still remain four friends devoted
to each other; but when it becomes a question of serving the cardinal
or of fighting him, of being Mazarinists or Frondists, then we are only
two.”

“Is Monsieur Aramis with D’Artagnan?” asked Lord de Winter.

“No,” said Athos; “Monsieur Aramis does me the honor to share my
opinions.”

“Could you put me in communication with your witty and agreeable
friend? Is he much changed?”

“He has become an abbé, that is all.”

“You alarm me; his profession must have made him renounce any great
undertakings.”

“On the contrary,” said Athos, smiling, “he has never been so much a
musketeer as since he became an abbé, and you will find him a veritable
soldier.”

“Could you engage to bring him to me to-morrow morning at ten o’clock,
on the Pont du Louvre?”

“Oh, oh!” exclaimed Athos, smiling, “you have a duel in prospect.”

“Yes, count, and a splendid duel, too; a duel in which I hope you will
take your part.”

“Where are we to go, my lord?”

“To Her Majesty the Queen of England, who has desired me to present you
to her.”

“This is an enigma,” said Athos, “but it matters not; since you know
the solution of it I ask no further. Will your lordship do me the honor
to sup with me?”

“Thanks, count, no,” replied De Winter. “I own to you that that young
man’s visit has subdued my appetite and probably will rob me of my
sleep. What undertaking can have brought him to Paris? It was not to
meet me that he came, for he was ignorant of my journey. This young man
terrifies me, my lord; there lies in him a sanguinary predisposition.”

“What occupies him in England?”

“He is one of Cromwell’s most enthusiastic disciples.”

“But what attached him to the cause? His father and mother were
Catholics, I believe?”

“His hatred of the king, who deprived him of his estates and forbade
him to bear the name of De Winter.”

“And what name does he now bear?”

“Mordaunt.”

“A Puritan, yet disguised as a monk he travels alone in France.”

“Do you say as a monk?”

“It was thus, and by mere accident—may God pardon me if I
blaspheme—that he heard the confession of the executioner of Bethune.”

“Then I understand it all! he has been sent by Cromwell to Mazarin, and
the queen guessed rightly; we have been forestalled. Everything is
clear to me now. Adieu, count, till to-morrow.”

“But the night is dark,” said Athos, perceiving that Lord de Winter
seemed more uneasy than he wished to appear; “and you have no servant.”

“I have Tony, a safe if simple youth.”

“Halloo, there, Grimaud, Olivain, and Blaisois! call the viscount and
take the musket with you.”

Blaisois was the tall youth, half groom, half peasant, whom we saw at
the Chateau de Bragelonne, whom Athos had christened by the name of his
province.

“Viscount,” said Athos to Raoul, as he entered, “you will conduct my
lord as far as his hotel and permit no one to approach him.”

“Oh! count,” said De Winter, “for whom do you take me?”

“For a stranger who does not know Paris,” said Athos, “and to whom the
viscount will show the way.”

De Winter shook him by the hand.

“Grimaud,” said Athos, “put yourself at the head of the troop and
beware of the monk.”

Grimaud shuddered, and nodding, awaited the departure, regarding the
butt of his musket with silent eloquence. Then obeying the orders given
him by Athos, he headed the small procession, bearing the torch in one
hand and the musket in the other, until it reached De Winter’s inn,
when pounding on the portal with his fist, he bowed to my lord and
faced about without a word.

The same order was followed in returning, nor did Grimaud’s searching
glance discover anything of a suspicious appearance, save a dark
shadow, as it were, in ambuscade, at the corner of the Rue Guenegaud
and of the Quai. He fancied, also, that in going he had already
observed the street watcher who had attracted his attention. He pushed
on toward him, but before he could reach it the shadow had disappeared
into an alley, into which Grimaud deemed it scarcely prudent to pursue
it.

The next day, on awaking, the count perceived Raoul by his bedside. The
young man was already dressed and was reading a new book by M.
Chapelain.

“Already up, Raoul?” exclaimed the count.

“Yes, sir,” replied Raoul, with slight hesitation; “I did not sleep
well.”

“You, Raoul, not sleep well! then you must have something on your
mind!” said Athos.

“Sir, you will perhaps think that I am in a great hurry to leave you
when I have only just arrived, but——”

“Have you only two days of leave, Raoul?”

“On the contrary, sir, I have ten; nor is it to the camp I wish to go.”

“Where, then?” said Athos, smiling, “if it be not a secret. You are now
almost a man, since you have made your first passage of arms, and have
acquired the right to go where you will without consulting me.”

“Never, sir,” said Raoul, “as long as I possess the happiness of having
you for a protector, shall I deem I have the right of freeing myself
from a guardianship so valuable to me. I have, however, a wish to go
and pass a day at Blois. You look at me and you are going to laugh at
me.”

“No, on the contrary, I am not inclined to laugh,” said Athos,
suppressing a sigh. “You wish to see Blois again; it is but natural.”

“Then you permit me to go, you are not angry in your heart?” exclaimed
Raoul, joyously.

“Certainly; and why should I regret what gives you pleasure?”

“Oh! how kind you are,” exclaimed the young man, pressing his
guardian’s hand; “and I can set out immediately?”

“When you like, Raoul.”

“Sir,” said Raoul, as he turned to leave the room, “I have thought of
one thing, and that is about the Duchess of Chevreuse, who was so kind
to me and to whom I owe my introduction to the prince.”

“And you ought to thank her, Raoul. Well, try the Hotel de Luynes,
Raoul, and ask if the duchess can receive you. I am glad to see you pay
attention to the usages of the world. You must take Grimaud and
Olivain.”

“Both, sir?” asked Raoul, astonished.

“Both.”

Raoul went out, and when Athos heard his young, joyous voice calling to
Grimaud and Olivain, he sighed.

“It is very soon to leave me,” he thought, “but he follows the common
custom. Nature has made us thus; she makes the young look ever forward,
not behind. He certainly likes the child, but will he love me less as
his affection grows for her?”

And Athos confessed to himself that, he was unprepared for so prompt a
departure; but Raoul was so happy that this reflection effaced
everything else from the consideration of his guardian.

Everything was ready at ten o’clock for the departure, and as Athos was
watching Raoul mount, a groom rode up from the Duchess de Chevreuse. He
was charged to tell the Comte de la Fere, that she had learned of the
return of her youthful protege, and also the manner he had conducted
himself on the field, and she added that she should be very glad to
offer him her congratulations.

“Tell her grace,” replied Athos, “that the viscount has just mounted
his horse to proceed to the Hotel de Luynes.”

Then, with renewed instructions to Grimaud, Athos signified to Raoul
that he could set out, and ended by reflecting that it was perhaps
better that Raoul should be away from Paris at that moment.




Chapter XLII.
Another Queen in Want of Help.


Athos had not failed to send early to Aramis and had given his letter
to Blaisois, the only serving-man whom he had left. Blaisois found
Bazin donning his beadle’s gown, his services being required that day
at Notre Dame.

Athos had desired Blaisois to try to speak to Aramis himself. Blaisois,
a tall, simple youth, who understood nothing but what he was expressly
told, asked, therefore for the Abbé d’Herblay, and in spite of Bazin’s
assurances that his master was not at home, he persisted in such a
manner as to put Bazin into a passion. Blaisois seeing Bazin in
clerical guise, was a little discomposed at his denials and wanted to
pass at all risks, believing too, that the man with whom he had to do
was endowed with the virtues of his cloth, namely, patience and
Christian charity.

But Bazin, still the servant of a musketeer, when once the blood
mounted to his fat cheeks, seized a broomstick and began belaboring
Blaisois, saying:

“You have insulted the church, my friend, you have insulted the
church!”

At this moment Aramis, aroused by this unusual disturbance, cautiously
opened the door of his room; and Blaisois, looking reproachfully at the
Cerberus, drew the letter from his pocket and presented it to Aramis.

“From the Comte de la Fere,” said Aramis. “All right.” And he retired
into his room without even asking the cause of so much noise.

Blaisois returned disconsolate to the Hotel of the Grand Roi
Charlemagne and when Athos inquired if his commission was executed, he
related his adventure.

“You foolish fellow!” said Athos, laughing. “And you did not tell him
that you came from me?”

“No, sir.”

At ten o’clock Athos, with his habitual exactitude, was waiting on the
Pont du Louvre and was almost immediately joined by Lord de Winter.

They waited ten minutes and then his lordship began to fear Aramis was
not coming to join them.

“Patience,” said Athos, whose eyes were fixed in the direction of the
Rue du Bac, “patience; I see an abbé cuffing a man, then bowing to a
woman; it must be Aramis.”

It was indeed Aramis. Having run against a young shopkeeper who was
gaping at the crows and who had splashed him, Aramis with one blow of
his fist had distanced him ten paces.

At this moment one of his penitents passed, and as she was young and
pretty Aramis took off his cap to her with his most gracious smile.

A most affectionate greeting, as one can well believe took place
between him and Lord de Winter.

“Where are we going?” inquired Aramis; “are we going to fight,
perchance? I carry no sword this morning and cannot return home to
procure one.”

“No,” said Lord de Winter, “we are going to pay a visit to Her Majesty
the Queen of England.”

“Oh, very well,” replied Aramis; then bending his face down to Athos’s
ear, “what is the object of this visit?” continued he.

“Nay, I know not; some evidence required from us, perhaps.”

“May it not be about that cursed affair?” asked Aramis, “in which case
I do not greatly care to go, for it will be to pocket a lecture; and
since it is my function to give them to others I am rather averse to
receiving them myself.”

“If it were so,” answered Athos, “we should not be taken there by Lord
de Winter, for he would come in for his share; he was one of us.”

“You’re right; yes, let us go.”

On arriving at the Louvre Lord de Winter entered first; indeed, there
was but one porter there to receive them at the gate.

It was impossible in daylight for the impoverished state of the
habitation grudging charity had conceded to an unfortunate queen to
pass unnoticed by Athos, Aramis, and even the Englishman. Large rooms,
completely stripped of furniture, bare walls upon which, here and
there, shone the old gold moldings which had resisted time and neglect,
windows with broken panes (impossible to close), no carpets, neither
guards nor servants: this is what first met the eyes of Athos, to which
he, touching his companion’s elbow, directed his attention by his
glances.

“Mazarin is better lodged,” said Aramis.

“Mazarin is almost king,” answered Athos; “Madame Henrietta is almost
no longer queen.”

“If you would condescend to be clever, Athos,” observed Aramis, “I
really do think you would be wittier than poor Monsieur de Voiture.”

Athos smiled.

The queen appeared to be impatiently expecting them, for at the first
slight noise she heard in the hall leading to her room she came herself
to the door to receive these courtiers in the corridors of Misfortune.

“Enter. You are welcome, gentlemen,” she said.

The gentlemen entered and remained standing, but at a motion from the
queen they seated themselves. Athos was calm and grave, but Aramis was
furious; the sight of such royal misery exasperated him and his eyes
examined every new trace of poverty that presented itself.

“You are examining the luxury I enjoy,” said the queen, glancing sadly
around her.

“Madame,” replied Aramis, “I must ask your pardon, but I know not how
to hide my indignation at seeing how a daughter of Henry IV. is treated
at the court of France.”

“Monsieur Aramis is not an officer?” asked the queen of Lord de Winter.

“That gentleman is the Abbé d’Herblay,” replied he.

Aramis blushed. “Madame,” he said, “I am an abbé, it is true, but I am
so against my will. I never had a vocation for the bands; my cassock is
fastened by one button only, and I am always ready to become a
musketeer once more. This morning, being ignorant that I should have
the honor of seeing your majesty, I encumbered myself with this dress,
but you will find me none the less a man devoted to your majesty’s
service, in whatever way you may see fit to use me.”

“The Abbé d’Herblay,” resumed De Winter, “is one of those gallant
musketeers formerly belonging to His Majesty King Louis XIII., of whom
I have spoken to you, madame.” Then turning to Athos, he continued,
“And this gentleman is that noble Comte de la Fere, whose high
reputation is so well known to your majesty.”

“Gentlemen,” said the queen, “a few years ago I had around me ushers,
treasures, armies; and by the lifting of a finger all these were busied
in my service. To-day, look around you, and it may astonish you, that
in order to accomplish a plan which is dearer to me than life I have
only Lord de Winter, the friend of twenty years, and you, gentlemen,
whom I see for the first time and whom I know but as my countrymen.”

“It is enough,” said Athos, bowing low, “if the lives of three men can
purchase yours, madame.”

“I thank you, gentlemen. But hear me,” continued she. “I am not only
the most miserable of queens, but the most unhappy of mothers, the most
wretched of wives. My children, two of them, at least, the Duke of York
and the Princess Elizabeth, are far away from me, exposed to the blows
of the ambitious and our foes; my husband, the king, is leading in
England so wretched an existence that it is no exaggeration to aver
that he seeks death as a thing to be desired. Hold! gentlemen, here is
the letter conveyed to me by Lord de Winter. Read it.”

Obeying the queen, Athos read aloud the letter which we have already
seen, in which King Charles demanded to know whether the hospitality of
France would be accorded him.

“Well?” asked Athos, when he had closed the letter.

“Well,” said the queen, “it has been refused.”

The two friends exchanged a smile of contempt.

“And now,” said Athos, “what is to be done? I have the honor to inquire
from your majesty what you desire Monsieur d’Herblay and myself to do
in your service. We are ready.”

“Ah, sir, you have a noble heart!” exclaimed the queen, with a burst of
gratitude; whilst Lord de Winter turned to her with a glance which
said, “Did I not answer for them?”

“But you, sir?” said the queen to Aramis.

“I, madame,” replied he, “follow Monsieur de la Fere wherever he leads,
even were it on to death, without demanding wherefore; but when it
concerns your majesty’s service, then,” added he, looking at the queen
with all the grace of former days, “I precede the count.”

“Well, then, gentlemen,” said the queen, “since it is thus, and since
you are willing to devote yourselves to the service of a poor princess
whom the whole world has abandoned, this is what is required to be done
for me. The king is alone with a few gentlemen, whom he fears to lose
every day; surrounded by the Scotch, whom he distrusts, although he be
himself a Scotchman. Since Lord de Winter left him I am distracted,
sirs. I ask much, too much, perhaps, for I have no title to request it.
Go to England, join the king, be his friends, protectors, march to
battle at his side, and be near him in his house, where conspiracies,
more dangerous than the perils of war, are hatching every day. And in
exchange for the sacrifice that you make, gentlemen, I promise—not to
reward you, I believe that word would offend you—but to love you as a
sister, to prefer you, next to my husband and my children, to every
one. I swear it before Heaven.”

And the queen raised her eyes solemnly upward.

“Madame,” said Athos, “when must we set out?”

“You consent then?” exclaimed the queen, joyfully.

“Yes, madame; only it seems to me that your majesty goes too far in
engaging to load us with a friendship so far above our merit. We render
service to God, madame, in serving a prince so unfortunate, a queen so
virtuous. Madame, we are yours, body and soul.”

“Oh, sirs,” said the queen, moved even to tears, “this is the first
time for five years I have felt the least approach to joy or hope. God,
who can read my heart, all the gratitude I feel, will reward you! Save
my husband! Save the king, and although you care not for the price that
is placed upon a good action in this world, leave me the hope that we
shall meet again, when I may be able to thank you myself. In the
meantime, I remain here. Have you anything to ask of me? From this
moment I become your friend, and since you are engaged in my affairs I
ought to occupy myself in yours.”

“Madame,” replied Athos, “I have only to ask your majesty’s prayers.”

“And I,” said Aramis, “I am alone in the world and have only your
majesty to serve.”

The queen held out her hand, which they kissed, and she said in a low
tone to De Winter:

“If you need money, my lord, separate the jewels I have given you;
detach the diamonds and sell them to some Jew. You will receive for
them fifty or sixty thousand francs; spend them if necessary, but let
these gentlemen be treated as they deserve, that is to say, like
kings.”

The queen had two letters ready, one written by herself, the other by
her daughter, the Princess Henrietta. Both were addressed to King
Charles. She gave the first to Athos and the other to Aramis, so that
should they be separated by chance they might make themselves known to
the king; after which they withdrew.

At the foot of the staircase De Winter stopped.

“Not to arouse suspicions, gentlemen,” said he, “go your way and I will
go mine, and this evening at nine o’clock we will assemble again at the
Gate Saint Denis. We will travel on horseback as far as our horses can
go and afterward we can take the post. Once more, let me thank you, my
good friends, both in my own name and the queen’s.”

The three gentlemen then shook hands, Lord de Winter taking the Rue
Saint Honore, and Athos and Aramis remaining together.

“Well,” said Aramis, when they were alone, “what do you think of this
business, my dear count?”

“Bad,” replied Athos, “very bad.”

“But you received it with enthusiasm.”

“As I shall ever receive the defense of a great principle, my dear
D’Herblay. Monarchs are only strong by the assistance of the
aristocracy, but aristocracy cannot survive without the countenance of
monarchs. Let us, then, support monarchy, in order to support
ourselves.

“We shall be murdered there,” said Aramis. “I hate the English—they are
coarse, like every nation that swills beer.”

“Would it be better to remain here,” said Athos, “and take a turn in
the Bastile or the dungeon of Vincennes for having favored the escape
of Monsieur de Beaufort? I’faith, Aramis, believe me, there is little
left to regret. We avoid imprisonment and we play the part of heroes;
the choice is easy.”

“It is true; but in everything, friend, one must always return to the
same question—a stupid one, I admit, but very necessary—have you any
money?”

“Something like a hundred pistoles, that my farmer sent to me the day
before I left Bragelonne; but out of that sum I ought to leave fifty
for Raoul—a young man must live respectably. I have then about fifty
pistoles. And you?”

“As for me, I am quite sure that after turning out all my pockets and
emptying my drawers I shall not find ten louis at home. Fortunately
Lord de Winter is rich.”

“Lord de Winter is ruined for the moment; Oliver Cromwell has annexed
his income resources.”

“Now is the time when Baron Porthos would be useful.”

“Now it is that I regret D’Artagnan.”

“Let us entice them away.”

“This secret, Aramis, does not belong to us; take my advice, then, and
let no one into our confidence. And moreover, in taking such a step we
should appear to be doubtful of ourselves. Let us regret their absence
to ourselves for our own sakes, but not speak of it.”

“You are right; but what are you going to do until this evening? I have
two things to postpone.”

“And what are they?”

“First, a thrust with the coadjutor, whom I met last night at Madame de
Rambouillet’s and whom I found particular in his remarks respecting
me.”

“Oh, fie—a quarrel between priests, a duel between allies!”

“What can I do, friend? he is a bully and so am I; his cassock is a
burden to him and I imagine I have had enough of mine; in fact, there
is so much resemblance between us that I sometimes believe he is Aramis
and I am the coadjutor. This kind of life fatigues and oppresses me;
besides, he is a turbulent fellow, who will ruin our party. I am
convinced that if I gave him a box on the ear, such as I gave this
morning to the little citizen who splashed me, it would change the
appearance of things.”

“And I, my dear Aramis,” quietly replied Athos, “I think it would only
change Monsieur de Retz’s appearance. Take my advice, leave things just
as they are; besides, you are neither of you now your own masters; he
belongs to the Fronde and you to the queen of England. So, if the
second matter which you regret being unable to attend to is not more
important than the first——”

“Oh! that is of the first importance.”

“Attend to it, then, at once.”

“Unfortunately, it is a thing that I can’t perform at any time I
choose. It was arranged for the evening and no other time will serve.”

“I understand,” said Athos smiling, “midnight.”

“About that time.”

“But, my dear fellow, those are things that bear postponement and you
must put it off, especially with so good an excuse to give on your
return——”

“Yes, if I return.”

“If you do not return, how does it concern you? Be reasonable. Come,
you are no longer twenty years old.”

“To my great regret, mordieu! Ah, if I were but twenty years old!”

“Yes,” said Athos, “doubtless you would commit great follies! But now
we must part. I have one or two visits to make and a letter yet to
write. Call for me at eight o’clock or shall I wait supper for you at
seven?”

“That will do very well,” said Aramis. “I have twenty visits to make
and as many letters to write.”

They then separated. Athos went to pay a visit to Madame de Vendome,
left his name at Madame de Chevreuse’s and wrote the following letter
to D’Artagnan:

“Dear Friend,—I am about to set off with Aramis on important business.
I wished to make my adieux to you, but time does not permit. Remember
that I write to you now to repeat how much affection for you I still
cherish.

“Raoul is gone to Blois and is ignorant of my departure; watch over him
in my absence as much as you possibly can; and if by chance you receive
no news of me three months hence, tell him to open a packet which he
will find addressed to him in my bronze casket at Blois, of which I
send you now the key.

“Embrace Porthos from Aramis and myself. Adieu, perhaps farewell.”

At the hour agreed upon Aramis arrived; he was dressed as an officer
and had the old sword at his side which he had drawn so often and which
he was more than ever ready to draw.

“By-the-bye,” he said, “I think that we are decidedly wrong to depart
thus, without leaving a line for Porthos and D’Artagnan.”

“The thing is done, dear friend,” said Athos; “I foresaw that and have
embraced them both from you and myself.”

“You are a wonderful man, my dear count,” said Aramis; “you think of
everything.”

“Well, have you made up your mind to this journey?”

“Quite; and now that I reflect about it, I am glad to leave Paris at
this moment.”

“And so am I,” replied Athos; “my only regret is not having seen
D’Artagnan; but the rascal is so cunning, he might have guessed our
project.”

When supper was over Blaisois entered. “Sir,” said he, “here is
Monsieur d’Artagnan’s answer.”

“But I did not tell you there would be an answer, stupid!” said Athos.

“And I set off without waiting for one, but he called me back and gave
me this;” and he presented a little leather bag, plump and giving out a
golden jingle.

Athos opened it and began by drawing forth a little note, written in
these terms:

“My dear Count,—When one travels, and especially for three months, one
never has a superfluity of money. Now, recalling former times of mutual
distress, I send you half my purse; it is money to obtain which I made
Mazarin sweat. Don’t make a bad use of it, I entreat you.

“As to what you say about not seeing you again, I believe not a word of
it; with such a heart as yours—and such a sword—one passes through the
valley of the shadow of death a dozen times, unscathed and unalarmed.
Au revoir, not farewell.

“It is unnecessary to say that from the day I saw Raoul I loved him;
nevertheless, believe that I heartily pray that I may not become to him
a father, however much I might be proud of such a son.

“Your

“D’Artagnan.

“P.S.—Be it well understood that the fifty louis which I send are
equally for Aramis as for you—for you as Aramis.”

Athos smiled, and his fine eye was dimmed by a tear. D’Artagnan, who
had loved him so tenderly, loved him still, although a Mazarinist.

“There are the fifty louis, i’faith,” said Aramis, emptying the purse
on the table, all bearing the effigy of Louis XIII. “Well, what shall
you do with this money, count? Shall you keep it or send it back?”

“I shall keep it, Aramis, and even though I had no need of it I still
should keep it. What is offered from a generous heart should be
accepted generously. Take twenty-five of them, Aramis, and give me the
remaining twenty-five.”

“All right; I am glad to see you are of my opinion. There now, shall we
start?”

“When you like; but have you no groom?”

“No; that idiot Bazin had the folly to make himself verger, as you
know, and therefore cannot leave Notre Dame.

“Very well, take Blaisois, with whom I know not what to do, since I
already have Grimaud.”

“Willingly,” said Aramis.

At this moment Grimaud appeared at the door. “Ready,” said he, with his
usual curtness.

“Let us go, then,” said Athos.

The two friends mounted, as did their servants. At the corner of the
Quai they encountered Bazin, who was running breathlessly.

“Oh, sir!” exclaimed he, “thank Heaven I have arrived in time. Monsieur
Porthos has just been to your house and has left this for you, saying
that the letter was important and must be given to you before you
left.”

“Good,” said Aramis, taking a purse which Bazin presented to him. “What
is this?”

“Wait, your reverence, there is a letter.”

“You know I have already told you that if you ever call me anything but
chevalier I will break every bone in your body. Give me the letter.”

“How can you read?” asked Athos, “it is as dark as a cold oven.”

“Wait,” said Bazin, striking a flint, and setting afire a twisted
wax-light, with which he started the church candles. Thus illumined,
Aramis read the following epistle:

“My dear D’Herblay,—I learned from D’Artagnan who has embraced me on
the part of the Comte de la Fere and yourself, that you are setting out
on a journey which may perhaps last two or three months; as I know that
you do not like to ask money of your friends I offer you some of my own
accord. Here are two hundred pistoles, which you can dispose of as you
wish and return to me when opportunity occurs. Do not fear that you put
me to inconvenience; if I want money I can send for some to any of my
chateaux; at Bracieux alone, I have twenty thousand francs in gold. So,
if I do not send you more it is because I fear you would not accept a
larger sum.

“I address you, because you know, that although I esteem him from my
heart I am a little awed by the Comte de la Fere; but it is understood
that what I offer you I offer him at the same time.

“I am, as I trust you do not doubt, your devoted

“Du Vallon de Bracieux de Pierrefonds.”

“Well,” said Aramis, “what do you say to that?”

“I say, my dear D’Herblay, that it is almost sacrilege to distrust
Providence when one has such friends, and therefore we will divide the
pistoles from Porthos, as we divided the louis sent by D’Artagnan.”

The division being made by the light of Bazin’s taper, the two friends
continued their road and a quarter of an hour later they had joined De
Winter at the Porte Saint Denis.




Chapter XLIII.
In which it is proved that first Impulses are oftentimes the best.


The three gentlemen took the road to Picardy, a road so well known to
them and which recalled to Athos and Aramis some of the most
picturesque adventures of their youth.

“If Mousqueton were with us,” observed Athos, on reaching the spot
where they had had a dispute with the paviers, “how he would tremble at
passing this! Do you remember, Aramis, that it was here he received
that famous bullet wound?”

“By my faith, ’twould be excusable in him to tremble,” replied Aramis,
“for even I feel a shudder at the recollection; hold, just above that
tree is the little spot where I thought I was killed.”

It was soon time for Grimaud to recall the past. Arriving before the
inn at which his master and himself had made such an enormous repast,
he approached Athos and said, showing him the airhole of the cellar:

“Sausages!”

Athos began to laugh, for this juvenile escapade of his appeared to be
as amusing as if some one had related it of another person.

At last, after traveling two days and a night, they arrived at Boulogne
toward the evening, favored by magnificent weather. Boulogne was a
strong position, then almost a deserted town, built entirely on the
heights; what is now called the lower town did not then exist.

“Gentlemen,” said De Winter, on reaching the gate of the town, “let us
do here as at Paris—let us separate to avoid suspicion. I know an inn,
little frequented, but of which the host is entirely devoted to me. I
will go there, where I expect to find letters, and you go to the first
tavern in the town, to L’Epee du Grand Henri for instance, refresh
yourselves, and in two hours be upon the jetty; our boat is waiting for
us there.”

The matter being thus decided, the two friends found, about two hundred
paces further, the tavern indicated. Their horses were fed, but not
unsaddled; the grooms supped, for it was already late, and their two
masters, impatient to return, appointed a place of meeting with them on
the jetty and desired them on no account to exchange a word with any
one. It is needless to say that this caution concerned Blaisois
alone—long enough since it had been a useless one to Grimaud.

Athos and Aramis walked down toward the port. From their dress, covered
with dust, and from a certain easy manner by means of which a man
accustomed to travel is always recognizable, the two friends excited
the attention of a few promenaders. There was more especially one upon
whom their arrival had produced a decided impression. This man, whom
they had noticed from the first for the same reason they had themselves
been remarked by others, was walking in a listless way up and down the
jetty. From the moment he perceived them he did not cease to look at
them and seemed to burn with the wish to speak to them.

On reaching the jetty Athos and Aramis stopped to look at a little boat
made fast to a pile and ready rigged as if waiting to start.

“That is doubtless our boat,” said Athos.

“Yes,” replied Aramis, “and the sloop out there making ready to sail
must be that which is to take us to our destination; now,” continued
he, “if only De Winter does not keep us waiting. It is not at all
amusing here; there is not a single woman passing.”

“Hush!” said Athos, “we are overheard.”

In truth, the walker, who, during the observations of the two friends,
had passed and repassed behind them several times, stopped at the name
of De Winter; but as his face betrayed no emotion at mention of this
name, it might have been by chance he stood so still.

“Gentlemen,” said the man, who was young and pale, bowing with ease and
courtesy, “pardon my curiosity, but I see you come from Paris, or at
least that you are strangers at Boulogne.”

“We come from Paris, yes,” replied Athos, with the same courtesy; “what
is there we can do for you?”

“Sir,” said the young man, “will you be so good as to tell me if it be
true that Cardinal Mazarin is no longer minister?”

“That is a strange question,” said Aramis.

“He is and he is not,” replied Athos; “that is to say, he is dismissed
by one-half of France, but by intrigues and promises he makes the other
half sustain him; you will perceive that this may last a long time.”

“However, sir,” said the stranger, “he has neither fled nor is in
prison?”

“No, sir, not at this moment at least.”

“Sirs, accept my thanks for your politeness,” said the young man,
retreating.

“What do you think of that interrogator?” asked Aramis.

“I think he is either a dull provincial person or a spy in search of
information.”

“And you replied to him with that notion?”

“Nothing warranted me to answer him otherwise; he was polite to me and
I was so to him.”

“But if he be a spy——”

“What do you think a spy would be about here? We are not living in the
time of Cardinal Richelieu, who would have closed the ports on bare
suspicion.”

“It matters not; you were wrong to reply to him as you did,” continued
Aramis, following with his eyes the young man, now vanishing behind the
cliffs.

“And you,” said Athos, “you forget that you committed a very different
kind of imprudence in pronouncing Lord de Winter’s name. Did you not
see that at that name the young man stopped?”

“More reason, then, when he spoke to you, for sending him about his
business.”

“A quarrel?” asked Athos.

“And since when have you become afraid of a quarrel?”

“I am always afraid of a quarrel when I am expected at any place and
when such a quarrel might possibly prevent my reaching it. Besides, let
me own something to you. I am anxious to see that young man nearer.”

“And wherefore?”

“Aramis, you will certainly laugh at me, you will say that I am always
repeating the same thing, you will call me the most timorous of
visionaries; but to whom do you see a resemblance in that young man?”

“In beauty or on the contrary?” asked Aramis, laughing.

“In ugliness, in so far as a man can resemble a woman.”

“Ah! Egad!” cried Aramis, “you set me thinking. No, in truth you are no
visionary, my dear friend, and now I think of it—you—yes, i’faith,
you’re right—those delicate, yet firm-set lips, those eyes which seem
always at the command of the intellect and never of the heart! Yes, it
is one of Milady’s bastards!”

“You laugh Aramis.”

“From habit, that is all. I swear to you, I like no better than
yourself to meet that viper in my path.”

“Ah! here is De Winter coming,” said Athos.

“Good! one thing now is only awanting and that is, that our grooms
should not keep us waiting.”

“No,” said Athos. “I see them about twenty paces behind my lord. I
recognize Grimaud by his long legs and his determined slouch. Tony
carries our muskets.”

“Then we set sail to-night?” asked Aramis, glancing toward the west,
where the sun had left a single golden cloud, which, dipping into the
ocean, appeared by degrees to be extinguished.

“Probably,” said Athos.

“Diable!” resumed Aramis, “I have little fancy for the sea by day,
still less at night; the sounds of wind and wave, the frightful
movements of the vessel; I confess I prefer the convent of Noisy.”

Athos smiled sadly, for it was evident that he was thinking of other
things as he listened to his friend and moved toward De Winter.

“What ails our friend?” said Aramis, “he resembles one of Dante’s
damned, whose neck Apollyon has dislocated and who are ever looking at
their heels. What the devil makes him glower thus behind him?”

When De Winter perceived them, in his turn he advanced toward them with
surprising rapidity.

“What is the matter, my lord?” said Athos, “and what puts you out of
breath thus?”

“Nothing,” replied De Winter; “nothing; and yet in passing the heights
it seemed to me——” and he again turned round.

Athos glanced at Aramis.

“But let us go,” continued De Winter; “let us be off; the boat must be
waiting for us and there is our sloop at anchor—do you see it there? I
wish I were on board already,” and he looked back again.

“He has seen him,” said Athos, in a low tone, to Aramis.

They had reached the ladder which led to the boat. De Winter made the
grooms who carried the arms and the porters with the luggage descend
first and was about to follow them.

At this moment Athos perceived a man walking on the seashore parallel
to the jetty, and hastening his steps, as if to reach the other side of
the port, scarcely twenty steps from the place of embarking. He fancied
in the darkness that he recognized the young man who had questioned
him. Athos now descended the ladder in his turn, without losing sight
of the young man. The latter, to make a short cut, had appeared on a
sluice.

“He certainly bodes us no good,” said Athos; “but let us embark; once
out at sea, let him come.”

And Athos sprang into the boat, which was immediately pushed off and
which soon sped seawards under the efforts of four stalwart rowers.

But the young man had begun to follow, or rather to advance before the
boat. She was obliged to pass between the point of the jetty,
surmounted by a beacon just lighted, and a rock which jutted out. They
saw him in the distance climbing the rock in order to look down upon
the boat as it passed.

“Ay, but,” said Aramis, “that young fellow is decidedly a spy.”

“Which is the young man?” asked De Winter, turning around.

“He who followed us and spoke to us awaits us there; behold!”

De Winter turned and followed the direction of Aramis’s finger. The
beacon bathed with light the little strait through which they were
about to pass and the rock where the young man stood with bare head and
crossed arms.

“It is he!” exclaimed De Winter, seizing the arm of Athos; “it is he! I
thought I recognized him and I was not mistaken.”

“Whom do you mean?” asked Aramis.

“Milady’s son,” replied Athos.

“The monk!” exclaimed Grimaud.

The young man heard these words and bent so forward over the rock that
one might have supposed he was about to precipitate himself from it.

“Yes, it is I, my uncle—I, the son of Milady—I, the monk—I, the
secretary and friend of Cromwell—I know you now, both you and your
companions.”

In that boat sat three men, unquestionably brave, whose courage no man
would have dared dispute; nevertheless, at that voice, that accent and
those gestures, they felt a chill access of terror cramp their veins.
As for Grimaud, his hair stood on end and drops of sweat ran down his
brow.

“Ah!” exclaimed Aramis, “that is the nephew, the monk, and the son of
Milady, as he says himself.”

“Alas, yes,” murmured De Winter.

“Then wait,” said Aramis; and with the terrible coolness which on
important occasions he showed, he took one of the muskets from Tony,
shouldered and aimed it at the young man, who stood, like the accusing
angel, upon the rock.

“Fire!” cried Grimaud, unconsciously.

Athos threw himself on the muzzle of the gun and arrested the shot
which was about to be fired.

“The devil take you,” said Aramis. “I had him so well at the point of
my gun I should have sent a ball into his breast.”

“It is enough to have killed the mother,” said Athos, hoarsely.

“The mother was a wretch, who struck at us all and at those dear to
us.”

“Yes, but the son has done us no harm.”

Grimaud, who had risen to watch the effect of the shot, fell back
hopeless, wringing his hands.

The young man burst into a laugh.

“Ah, it is certainly you!” he cried. “I know you even better now.”

His mocking laugh and threatening words passed over their heads,
carried by the breeze, until lost in the depths of the horizon. Aramis
shuddered.

“Be calm,” exclaimed Athos, “for Heaven’s sake! have we ceased to be
men?”

“No,” said Aramis, “but that fellow is a fiend; and ask the uncle
whether I was wrong to rid him of his dear nephew.”

De Winter only replied by a groan.

“It was all up with him,” continued Aramis; “ah I much fear that with
all your wisdom such mercy yet will prove supernal folly.”

Athos took Lord de Winter’s hand and tried to turn the conversation.

“When shall we land in England?” he asked; but De Winter seemed not to
hear his words and made no reply.

“Hold, Athos,” said Aramis, “perhaps there is yet time. See if he is
still in the same place.”

Athos turned around with an effort; the sight of the young man was
evidently painful to him, and there he still was, in fact, on the rock,
the beacon shedding around him, as it were, a doubtful aureole.

“Decidedly, Aramis,” said Athos, “I think I was wrong not to let you
fire.”

“Hold your tongue,” replied Aramis; “you would make me weep, if such a
thing were possible.”

At this moment they were hailed by a voice from the sloop and a few
seconds later men, servants and baggage were aboard. The captain was
only waiting for his passengers; hardly had they put foot on deck ere
her head was turned towards Hastings, where they were to disembark. At
this instant the three friends turned, in spite of themselves, a last
look on the rock, upon the menacing figure which pursued them and now
stood out with a distinctness still. Then a voice reached them once
more, sending this threat: “To our next meeting, sirs, in England.”




Chapter XLIV.
Te Deum for the Victory of Lens.


The bustle which had been observed by Henrietta Maria and for which she
had vainly sought to discover a reason, was occasioned by the battle of
Lens, announced by the prince’s messenger, the Duc de Chatillon, who
had taken such a noble part in the engagement; he was, besides, charged
to hang five and twenty flags, taken from the Lorraine party, as well
as from the Spaniards, upon the arches of Notre Dame.

Such news was decisive; it destroyed, in favor of the court, the
struggle commenced with parliament. The motive given for all the taxes
summarily imposed and to which the parliament had made opposition, was
the necessity of sustaining the honor of France and the uncertain hope
of beating the enemy. Now, since the affair of Nordlingen, they had
experienced nothing but reverses; the parliament had a plea for calling
Mazarin to account for imaginary victories, always promised, ever
deferred; but this time there really had been fighting, a triumph and a
complete one. And this all knew so well that it was a double victory
for the court, a victory at home and abroad; so that even when the
young king learned the news he exclaimed, “Ah, gentlemen of the
parliament, we shall see what you will say now!” Upon which the queen
had pressed the royal child to her heart, whose haughty and unruly
sentiments were in such harmony with her own. A council was called on
the same evening, but nothing transpired of what had been decided on.
It was only known that on the following Sunday a Te Deum would be sung
at Notre Dame in honor of the victory of Lens.

The following Sunday, then, the Parisians arose with joy; at that
period a Te Deum was a grand affair; this kind of ceremony had not then
been abused and it produced a great effect. The shops were deserted,
houses closed; every one wished to see the young king with his mother,
and the famous Cardinal Mazarin whom they hated so much that no one
wished to be deprived of his presence. Moreover, great liberty
prevailed throughout the immense crowd; every opinion was openly
expressed and chorused, so to speak, of coming insurrection, as the
thousand bells of all the Paris churches rang out the Te Deum. The
police belonging to the city being formed by the city itself, nothing
threatening presented itself to disturb this concert of universal
hatred or freeze the frequent scoffs of slanderous lips.

Nevertheless, at eight o’clock in the morning the regiment of the
queen’s guards, commanded by Guitant, under whom was his nephew
Comminges, marched publicly, preceded by drums and trumpets, filing off
from the Palais Royal as far as Notre Dame, a manoeuvre which the
Parisians witnessed tranquilly, delighted as they were with military
music and brilliant uniforms.

Friquet had put on his Sunday clothes, under the pretext of having a
swollen face which he had managed to simulate by introducing a handful
of cherry kernels into one side of his mouth, and had procured a whole
holiday from Bazin. On leaving Bazin, Friquet started off to the Palais
Royal, where he arrived at the moment of the turning out of the
regiment of guards; and as he had only gone there for the enjoyment of
seeing it and hearing the music, he took his place at their head,
beating the drum on two pieces of slate and passing from that exercise
to that of the trumpet, which he counterfeited quite naturally with his
mouth in a manner which had more than once called forth the praises of
amateurs of imitative harmony.

This amusement lasted from the Barriere des Sergens to the place of
Notre Dame, and Friquet found in it very real enjoyment; but when at
last the regiment separated, penetrated the heart of the city and
placed itself at the extremity of the Rue Saint Christophe, near the
Rue Cocatrix, in which Broussel lived, then Friquet remembered that he
had not had breakfast; and after thinking in which direction he had
better turn his steps in order to accomplish this important act of the
day, he reflected deeply and decided that Councillor Broussel should
bear the cost of this repast.

In consequence he took to his heels, arrived breathlessly at the
councillor’s door, and knocked violently.

His mother, the councillor’s old servant, opened it.

“What doest thou here, good-for-nothing?” she said, “and why art thou
not at Notre Dame?”

“I have been there, mother,” said Friquet, “but I saw things happen of
which Master Broussel ought to be warned, and so with Monsieur Bazin’s
permission—you know, mother, Monsieur Bazin, the verger—I came to speak
to Monsieur Broussel.”

“And what hast thou to say, boy, to Monsieur Broussel?”

“I wish to tell him,” replied Friquet, screaming with all his might,
“that there is a whole regiment of guards coming this way. And as I
hear everywhere that at the court they are ill-disposed to him, I wish
to warn him, that he may be on his guard.”

Broussel heard the scream of the young oddity, and, enchanted with this
excess of zeal, came down to the first floor, for he was, in truth,
working in his room on the second.

“Well,” said he, “friend, what matters the regiment of guards to us,
and art thou not mad to make such a disturbance? Knowest thou not that
it is the custom of these soldiers to act thus and that it is usual for
the regiment to form themselves into two solid walls when the king goes
by?”

Friquet counterfeited surprise, and twisting his new cap around in his
fingers, said:

“It is not astonishing for you to know it, Monsieur Broussel, who knows
everything; but as for me, by holy truth, I did not know it and I
thought I would give you good advice; you must not be angry with me for
that, Monsieur Broussel.”

“On the contrary, my boy, on the contrary, I am pleased with your zeal.
Dame Nanette, look for those apricots which Madame de Longueville sent
to us yesterday from Noisy and give half a dozen of them to your son,
with a crust of new bread.”

“Oh, thank you, sir, thank you, Monsieur Broussel,” said Friquet; “I am
so fond of apricots!”

Broussel then proceeded to his wife’s room and asked for breakfast; it
was nine o’clock. The councillor placed himself at the window; the
street was completely deserted, but in the distance was heard, like the
noise of the tide rushing in, the deep hum of the populous waves
increasing now around Notre Dame.

This noise redoubled when D’Artagnan, with a company of musketeers,
placed himself at the gates of Notre Dame to secure the service of the
church. He had instructed Porthos to profit by this opportunity to see
the ceremony; and Porthos, in full dress, mounted his finest horse,
taking the part of supernumerary musketeer, as D’Artagnan had so often
done formerly. The sergeant of this company, a veteran of the Spanish
wars, had recognized Porthos, his old companion, and very soon all
those who served under him were placed in possession of startling facts
concerning the honor of the ancient musketeers of Tréville. Porthos had
not only been well received by the company, but he was moreover looked
on with great admiration.

At ten o’clock the guns of the Louvre announced the departure of the
king, and then a movement, similar to that of trees in a stormy wind
that bend and writhe with agitated tops, ran though the multitude,
which was compressed behind the immovable muskets of the guard. At last
the king appeared with the queen in a gilded chariot. Ten other
carriages followed, containing the ladies of honor, the officers of the
royal household, and the court.

“God save the king!” was the cry in every direction; the young monarch
gravely put his head out of the window, looked sufficiently grateful
and even bowed; at which the cries of the multitude were renewed.

Just as the court was settling down in the cathedral, a carriage,
bearing the arms of Comminges, quitted the line of the court carriages
and proceeded slowly to the end of the Rue Saint Christophe, now
entirely deserted. When it arrived there, four guards and a police
officer, who accompanied it, mounted into the heavy machine and closed
the shutters; then through an opening cautiously made, the policeman
began to watch the length of the Rue Cocatrix, as if he was waiting for
some one.

All the world was occupied with the ceremony, so that neither the
chariot nor the precautions taken by those who were within it had been
observed. Friquet, whose eye, ever on the alert, could alone have
discovered them, had gone to devour his apricots upon the entablature
of a house in the square of Notre Dame. Thence he saw the king, the
queen and Monsieur Mazarin, and heard the mass as well as if he had
been on duty.

Toward the end of the service, the queen, seeing Comminges standing
near her, waiting for a confirmation of the order she had given him
before quitting the Louvre, said in a whisper:

“Go, Comminges, and may God aid you!”

Comminges immediately left the church and entered the Rue Saint
Christophe. Friquet, seeing this fine officer thus walk away, followed
by two guards, amused himself by pursuing them and did this so much the
more gladly as the ceremony ended at that instant and the king
remounted his carriage.

Hardly had the police officer observed Comminges at the end of the Rue
Cocatrix when he said one word to the coachman, who at once put his
vehicle into motion and drove up before Broussel’s door. Comminges
knocked at the door at the same moment, and Friquet was waiting behind
Comminges until the door should be opened.

“What dost thou there, rascal?” asked Comminges.

“I want to go into Master Broussel’s house, captain,” replied Friquet,
in that wheedling way the “gamins” of Paris know so well how to assume
when necessary.

“And on what floor does he live?” asked Comminges.

“In the whole house,” said Friquet; “the house belongs to him; he
occupies the second floor when he works and descends to the first to
take his meals; he must be at dinner now; it is noon.”

“Good,” said Comminges.

At this moment the door was opened, and having questioned the servant
the officer learned that Master Broussel was at home and at dinner.

Broussel was seated at the table with his family, having his wife
opposite to him, his two daughters by his side, and his son, Louvieres,
whom we have already seen when the accident happened to the
councillor—an accident from which he had quite recovered—at the bottom
of the table. The worthy man, restored to perfect health, was tasting
the fine fruit which Madame de Longueville had sent to him.

At sight of the officer Broussel was somewhat moved, but seeing him bow
politely he rose and bowed also. Still, in spite of this reciprocal
politeness, the countenances of the women betrayed a certain amount of
uneasiness; Louvieres became very pale and waited impatiently for the
officer to explain himself.

“Sir,” said Comminges, “I am the bearer of an order from the king.”

“Very well, sir,” replied Broussel, “what is this order?” And he held
out his hand.

“I am commissioned to seize your person, sir,” said Comminges, in the
same tone and with the same politeness; “and if you will believe me you
had better spare yourself the trouble of reading that long letter and
follow me.”

A thunderbolt falling in the midst of these good people, so peacefully
assembled there, would not have produced a more appalling effect. It
was a horrible thing at that period to be imprisoned by the enmity of
the king. Louvieres sprang forward to snatch his sword, which stood
against a chair in a corner of the room; but a glance from the worthy
Broussel, who in the midst of it all did not lose his presence of mind,
checked this foolhardy action of despair. Madame Broussel, separated by
the width of the table from her husband, burst into tears, and the
young girls clung to their father’s arms.

“Come, sir,” said Comminges, “make haste; you must obey the king.”

“Sir,” said Broussel, “I am in bad health and cannot give myself up a
prisoner in this state; I must have time.”

“It is impossible,” said Comminges; “the order is strict and must be
put into execution this instant.”

“Impossible!” said Louvieres; “sir, beware of driving us to despair.”

“Impossible!” cried a shrill voice from the end of the room.

Comminges turned and saw Dame Nanette, her eyes flashing with anger and
a broom in her hand.

“My good Nanette, be quiet, I beseech you,” said Broussel.

“Me! keep quiet while my master is being arrested! he, the support, the
liberator, the father of the people! Ah! well, yes; you have to know me
yet. Are you going?” added she to Comminges.

The latter smiled.

“Come, sir,” said he, addressing Broussel, “silence that woman and
follow me.”

“Silence me! me! me!” said Nanette. “Ah! yet one wants some one besides
you for that, my fine king’s cockatoo! You shall see.” And Dame Nanette
sprang to the window, threw it open, and in such a piercing voice that
it might have been heard in the square of Notre Dame:

“Help!” she screamed, “my master is being arrested; the Councillor
Broussel is being arrested! Help!”

“Sir,” said Comminges, “declare yourself at once; will you obey or do
you intend to rebel against the king?”

“I obey, I obey, sir!” cried Broussel, trying to disengage himself from
the grasp of his two daughters and by a look restrain his son, who
seemed determined to dispute authority.

“In that case,” commanded Comminges, “silence that old woman.”

“Ah! old woman!” screamed Nanette.

And she began to shriek more loudly, clinging to the bars of the
window:

“Help! help! for Master Broussel, who is arrested because he has
defended the people! Help!”

Comminges seized the servant around the waist and would have dragged
her from her post; but at that instant a treble voice, proceeding from
a kind of entresol, was heard screeching:

“Murder! fire! assassins! Master Broussel is being killed! Master
Broussel is being strangled.”

It was Friquet’s voice; and Dame Nanette, feeling herself supported,
recommenced with all her strength to sound her shrilly squawk.

Many curious faces had already appeared at the windows and the people
attracted to the end of the street began to run, first men, then
groups, and then a crowd of people; hearing cries and seeing a chariot
they could not understand it; but Friquet sprang from the entresol on
to the top of the carriage.

“They want to arrest Master Broussel!” he cried; “the guards are in the
carriage and the officer is upstairs!”

The crowd began to murmur and approached the house. The two guards who
had remained in the lane mounted to the aid of Comminges; those who
were in the chariot opened the doors and presented arms.

“Don’t you see them?” cried Friquet, “don’t you see? there they are!”

The coachman turning around, gave Friquet a slash with his whip which
made him scream with pain.

“Ah! devil’s coachman!” cried Friquet, “you’re meddling too! Wait!”

And regaining his entresol he overwhelmed the coachman with every
projectile he could lay hands on.

The tumult now began to increase; the street was not able to contain
the spectators who assembled from every direction; the crowd invaded
the space which the dreaded pikes of the guards had till then kept
clear between them and the carriage. The soldiers, pushed back by these
living walls, were in danger of being crushed against the spokes of the
wheels and the panels of the carriages. The cries which the police
officer repeated twenty times: “In the king’s name,” were powerless
against this formidable multitude—seemed, on the contrary, to
exasperate it still more; when, at the shout, “In the name of the
king,” an officer ran up, and seeing the uniforms ill-treated, he
sprang into the scuffle sword in hand, and brought unexpected help to
the guards. This gentleman was a young man, scarcely sixteen years of
age, now white with anger. He leaped from his charger, placed his back
against the shaft of the carriage, making a rampart of his horse, drew
his pistols from their holsters and fastened them to his belt, and
began to fight with the back sword, like a man accustomed to the
handling of his weapon.

During ten minutes he alone kept the crowd at bay; at last Comminges
appeared, pushing Broussel before him.

“Let us break the carriage!” cried the people.

“In the king’s name!” cried Comminges.

“The first who advances is a dead man!” cried Raoul, for it was in fact
he, who, feeling himself pressed and almost crushed by a gigantic
citizen, pricked him with the point of his sword and sent him howling
back.

Comminges, so to speak, threw Broussel into the carriage and sprang in
after him. At this moment a shot was fired and a ball passed through
the hat of Comminges and broke the arm of one of the guards. Comminges
looked up and saw amidst the smoke the threatening face of Louvieres
appearing at the window of the second floor.

“Very well, sir,” said Comminges, “you shall hear of this anon.”

“And you of me, sir,” said Louvieres; “and we shall see then who can
speak the loudest.”

Friquet and Nanette continued to shout; the cries, the noise of the
shot and the intoxicating smell of powder produced their usual
maddening effects.

“Down with the officer! down with him!” was the cry.

“One step nearer,” said Comminges, putting down the sashes, that the
interior of the carriage might be well seen, and placing his sword on
his prisoner’s breast, “one step nearer, and I kill the prisoner; my
orders were to carry him off alive or dead. I will take him dead,
that’s all.”

A terrible cry was heard, and the wife and daughters of Broussel held
up their hands in supplication to the people; the latter knew that this
officer, who was so pale, but who appeared so determined, would keep
his word; they continued to threaten, but they began to disperse.

“Drive to the palace,” said Comminges to the coachman, who was by then
more dead than alive.

The man whipped his animals, which cleared a way through the crowd; but
on arriving on the Quai they were obliged to stop; the carriage was
upset, the horses carried off, stifled, mangled by the crowd. Raoul, on
foot, for he had not time to mount his horse again, tired, like the
guards, of distributing blows with the flat of his sword, had recourse
to its point. But this last and dreaded resource served only to
exasperate the multitude. From time to time a shot from a musket or the
blade of a rapier flashed among the crowd; projectiles continued to
hail down from the windows and some shots were heard, the echo of
which, though they were probably fired in the air, made all hearts
vibrate. Voices, unheard except on days of revolution, were
distinguished; faces were seen that only appeared on days of bloodshed.
Cries of “Death! death to the guards! to the Seine with the officer!”
were heard above all the noise, deafening as it was. Raoul, his hat in
ribbons, his face bleeding, felt not only his strength but also his
reason going; a red mist covered his sight, and through this mist he
saw a hundred threatening arms stretched over him, ready to seize upon
him when he fell. The guards were unable to help any one—each one was
occupied with his self-preservation. All was over; carriages, horses,
guards, and perhaps even the prisoner were about to be torn to shreds,
when all at once a voice well known to Raoul was heard, and suddenly a
great sword glittered in the air; at the same time the crowd opened,
upset, trodden down, and an officer of the musketeers, striking and
cutting right and left, rushed up to Raoul and took him in his arms
just as he was about to fall.

“God’s blood!” cried the officer, “have they killed him? Woe to them if
it be so!”

And he turned around, so stern with anger, strength and threat, that
the most excited rebels hustled back on one another, in order to
escape, and some of them even rolled into the Seine.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” murmured Raoul.

“Yes, ‘sdeath! in person, and fortunately it seems for you, my young
friend. Come on, here, you others,” he continued, rising in his
stirrups, raising his sword, and addressing those musketeers who had
not been able to follow his rapid onslaught. “Come, sweep away all that
for me! Shoulder muskets! Present arms! Aim——”

At this command the mountain of populace thinned so suddenly that
D’Artagnan could not repress a burst of Homeric laughter.

“Thank you, D’Artagnan,” said Comminges, showing half of his body
through the window of the broken vehicle, “thanks, my young friend;
your name—that I may mention it to the queen.”

Raoul was about to reply when D’Artagnan bent down to his ear.

“Hold your tongue,” said he, “and let me answer. Do not lose time,
Comminges,” he continued; “get out of the carriage if you can and make
another draw up; be quick, or in five minutes the mob will be on us
again with swords and muskets and you will be killed. Hold! there’s a
carriage coming over yonder.”

Then bending again to Raoul, he whispered: “Above all things do not
divulge your name.”

“That’s right. I will go,” said Comminges; “and if they come back,
fire!”

“Not at all—not at all,” replied D’Artagnan; “let no one move. On the
contrary, one shot at this moment would be paid for dearly to-morrow.”

Comminges took his four guards and as many musketeers and ran to the
carriage, from which he made the people inside dismount, and brought
them to the vehicle which had upset. But when it was necessary to
convey the prisoner from one carriage to the other, the people,
catching sight of him whom they called their liberator, uttered every
imaginable cry and knotted themselves once more around the vehicle.

“Start, start!” said D’Artagnan. “There are ten men to accompany you. I
will keep twenty to hold in check the mob; go, and lose not a moment.
Ten men for Monsieur de Comminges.”

As the carriage started off the cries were redoubled and more than ten
thousand people thronged the Quai and overflowed the Pont Neuf and
adjacent streets. A few shots were fired and one musketeer was wounded.

“Forward!” cried D’Artagnan, driven to extremities, biting his
moustache; and then he charged with his twenty men and dispersed them
in fear. One man alone remained in his place, gun in hand.

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “it is thou who wouldst have him assassinated? Wait
an instant.” And he pointed his gun at D’Artagnan, who was riding
toward him at full speed. D’Artagnan bent down to his horse’s neck, the
young man fired, and the ball severed the feathers from the hat. The
horse started, brushed against the imprudent man, who thought by his
strength alone to stay the tempest, and he fell against the wall.
D’Artagnan pulled up his horse, and whilst his musketeers continued to
charge, he returned and bent with drawn sword over the man he had
knocked down.

“Oh, sir!” exclaimed Raoul, recognizing the young man as having seen
him in the Rue Cocatrix, “spare him! it is his son!”

D’Artagnan’s arm dropped to his side. “Ah, you are his son!” he said;
“that is a different thing.”

“Sir, I surrender,” said Louvieres, presenting his unloaded musket to
the officer.

“Eh, no! do not surrender, egad! On the contrary, be off, and quickly.
If I take you, you will be hung!”

The young man did not wait to be told twice, but passing under the
horse’s head disappeared at the corner of the Rue Guenegaud.

“I’faith!” said D’Artagnan to Raoul, “you were just in time to stay my
hand. He was a dead man; and on my honor, if I had discovered that it
was his son, I should have regretted having killed him.”

“Ah! sir!” said Raoul, “allow me, after thanking you for that poor
fellow’s life, to thank you on my own account. I too, sir, was almost
dead when you arrived.”

“Wait, wait, young man; do not fatigue yourself with speaking. We can
talk of it afterward.”

Then seeing that the musketeers had cleared the Quai from the Pont Neuf
to the Quai Saint Michael, he raised his sword for them to double their
speed. The musketeers trotted up, and at the same time the ten men whom
D’Artagnan had given to Comminges appeared.

“Halloo!” cried D’Artagnan; “has something fresh happened?”

“Eh, sir!” replied the sergeant, “their vehicle has broken down a
second time; it really must be doomed.”

“They are bad managers,” said D’Artagnan, shrugging his shoulders.
“When a carriage is chosen, it ought to be strong. The carriage in
which a Broussel is to be arrested ought to be able to bear ten
thousand men.”

“What are your commands, lieutenant?”

“Take the detachment and conduct him to his place.”

“But you will be left alone?”

“Certainly. So you suppose I have need of an escort? Go.”

The musketeers set off and D’Artagnan was left alone with Raoul.

“Now,” he said, “are you in pain?”

“Yes; my head is not only swimming but burning.”

“What’s the matter with this head?” said D’Artagnan, raising the
battered hat. “Ah! ah! a bruise.”

“Yes, I think I received a flower-pot upon my head.”

“Brutes!” said D’Artagnan. “But were you not on horseback? you have
spurs.”

“Yes, but I got down to defend Monsieur de Comminges and my horse was
taken away. Here it is, I see.”

At this very moment Friquet passed, mounted on Raoul’s horse, waving
his parti-colored cap and crying, “Broussel! Broussel!”

“Halloo! stop, rascal!” cried D’Artagnan. “Bring hither that horse.”

Friquet heard perfectly, but he pretended not to do so and tried to
continue his road. D’Artagnan felt inclined for an instant to pursue
Master Friquet, but not wishing to leave Raoul alone he contented
himself with taking a pistol from the holster and cocking it.

Friquet had a quick eye and a fine ear. He saw D’Artagnan’s movement,
heard the sound of the click, and stopped at once.

“Ah! it is you, your honor,” he said, advancing toward D’Artagnan; “and
I am truly pleased to meet you.”

D’Artagnan looked attentively at Friquet and recognized the little
chorister of the Rue de la Calandre.

“Ah! ’tis thou, rascal!” said he, “come here: so thou hast changed thy
trade; thou art no longer a choir boy nor a tavern boy; thou hast
become a horse stealer?”

“Ah, your honor, how can you say so?” exclaimed Friquet. “I was seeking
the gentleman to whom this horse belongs—an officer, brave and handsome
as a youthful Caesar;” then, pretending to see Raoul for the first
time:

“Ah! but if I mistake not,” continued he, “here he is; you won’t forget
the boy, sir.”

Raoul put his hand in his pocket.

“What are you about?” asked D’Artagnan.

“To give ten francs to this honest fellow,” replied Raoul, taking a
pistole from his pocket.

“Ten kicks on his back!” said D’Artagnan; “be off, you little villain,
and forget not that I have your address.”

Friquet, who did not expect to be let off so cheaply, bounded off like
a gazelle up the Quai a la Rue Dauphine, and disappeared. Raoul mounted
his horse, and both leisurely took their way to the Rue Tiquetonne.

D’Artagnan watched over the youth as if he had been his own son.

They arrived without accident at the Hotel de la Chevrette.

The handsome Madeleine announced to D’Artagnan that Planchet had
returned, bringing Mousqueton with him, who had heroically borne the
extraction of the ball and was as well as his state would permit.

D’Artagnan desired Planchet to be summoned, but he had disappeared.

“Then bring some wine,” said D’Artagnan. “You are much pleased with
yourself,” said he to Raoul when they were alone, “are you not?”

“Well, yes,” replied Raoul. “It seems to me I did my duty. I defended
the king.”

“And who told you to defend the king?”

“The Comte de la Fere himself.”

“Yes, the king; but to-day you have not fought for the king, you have
fought for Mazarin; which is not quite the same thing.”

“But you yourself?”

“Oh, for me; that is another matter. I obey my captain’s orders. As for
you, your captain is the prince, understand that rightly; you have no
other. But has one ever seen such a wild fellow,” continued he, “making
himself a Mazarinist and helping to arrest Broussel! Breathe not a word
of that, or the Comte de la Fere will be furious.”

“You think the count will be angry with me?”

“Think it? I’m certain of it; were it not for that, I should thank you,
for you have worked for us. However, I scold you instead of him, and in
his place; the storm will blow over more easily, believe me. And
moreover, my dear child,” continued D’Artagnan, “I am making use of the
privilege conceded to me by your guardian.”

“I do not understand you, sir,” said Raoul.

D’Artagnan rose, and taking a letter from his writing-desk, presented
it to Raoul. The face of the latter became serious when he had cast his
eyes upon the paper.

“Oh, mon Dieu!” he said, raising his fine eyes to D’Artagnan, moist
with tears, “the count has left Paris without seeing me?”

“He left four days ago,” said D’Artagnan.

“But this letter seems to intimate that he is about to incur danger,
perhaps death.”

“He—he—incur danger of death! No, be not anxious; he is traveling on
business and will return ere long. I hope you have no repugnance to
accept me as your guardian in the interim.”

“Oh, no, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Raoul, “you are such a brave
gentleman and the Comte de la Fere has so much affection for you!”

“Eh! Egad! love me too; I will not torment you much, but only on
condition that you become a Frondist, my young friend, and a hearty
Frondist, too.”

“But can I continue to visit Madame de Chevreuse?”

“I should say you could! and the coadjutor and Madame de Longueville;
and if the worthy Broussel were there, whom you so stupidly helped
arrest, I should tell you to excuse yourself to him at once and kiss
him on both cheeks.”

“Well, sir, I will obey you, although I do not understand you.”

“It is unnecessary for you to understand. Hold,” continued D’Artagnan,
turning toward the door, which had just opened, “here is Monsieur du
Vallon, who comes with his coat torn.”

“Yes, but in exchange,” said Porthos, covered with perspiration and
soiled by dust, “in exchange, I have torn many skins. Those wretches
wanted to take away my sword! Deuce take ’em, what a popular
commotion!” continued the giant, in his quiet manner; “but I knocked
down more than twenty with the hilt of Balizarde. A draught of wine,
D’Artagnan.”

“Oh, I’ll answer for you,” said the Gascon, filling Porthos’s glass to
the brim; “but when you have drunk, give me your opinion.”

“Upon what?” asked Porthos.

“Look here,” resumed D’Artagnan; “here is Monsieur de Bragelonne, who
determined at all risks to aid the arrest of Broussel and whom I had
great difficulty to prevent defending Monsieur de Comminges.”

“The devil!” said Porthos; “and his guardian, what would he have said
to that?”

“Do you hear?” interrupted D’Artagnan; “become a Frondist, my friend,
belong to the Fronde, and remember that I fill the count’s place in
everything;” and he jingled his money.

“Will you come?” said he to Porthos.

“Where?” asked Porthos, filling a second glass of wine.

“To present our respects to the cardinal.”

Porthos swallowed the second glass with the same grace with which he
had imbibed the first, took his beaver and followed D’Artagnan. As for
Raoul, he remained bewildered with what he had seen, having been
forbidden by D’Artagnan to leave the room until the tumult was over.




Chapter XLV.
The Beggar of St. Eustache.


D’Artagnan had calculated that in not going at once to the Palais Royal
he would give Comminges time to arrive before him, and consequently to
make the cardinal acquainted with the eminent services which he,
D’Artagnan, and his friend had rendered to the queen’s party in the
morning.

They were indeed admirably received by Mazarin, who paid them numerous
compliments, and announced that they were more than half on their way
to obtain what they desired, namely, D’Artagnan his captaincy, Porthos
his barony.

D’Artagnan would have preferred money in hand to all that fine talk,
for he knew well that to Mazarin it was easy to promise and hard to
perform. But, though he held the cardinal’s promises as of little
worth, he affected to be completely satisfied, for he was unwilling to
discourage Porthos.

Whilst the two friends were with the cardinal, the queen sent for him.
Mazarin, thinking that it would be the means of increasing the zeal of
his two defenders if he procured them personal thanks from the queen,
motioned them to follow him. D’Artagnan and Porthos pointed to their
dusty and torn dresses, but the cardinal shook his head.

“Those costumes,” he said, “are of more worth than most of those which
you will see on the backs of the queen’s courtiers; they are costumes
of battle.”

D’Artagnan and Porthos obeyed. The court of Anne of Austria was full of
gayety and animation; for, after having gained a victory over the
Spaniard, it had just gained another over the people. Broussel had been
conducted out of Paris without further resistance, and was at this time
in the prison of Saint Germain; while Blancmesnil, who was arrested at
the same time, but whose arrest had been made without difficulty or
noise, was safe in the Castle of Vincennes.

Comminges was near the queen, who was questioning him upon the details
of his expedition, and every one was listening to his account, when
D’Artagnan and Porthos were perceived at the door, behind the cardinal.

“Ah, madame,” said Comminges, hastening to D’Artagnan, “here is one who
can tell you better than myself, for he was my protector. Without him I
should probably at this moment be a dead fish in the nets at Saint
Cloud, for it was a question of nothing less than throwing me into the
river. Speak, D’Artagnan, speak.”

D’Artagnan had been a hundred times in the same room with the queen
since he had become lieutenant of the musketeers, but her majesty had
never once spoken to him.

“Well, sir,” at last said Anne of Austria, “you are silent, after
rendering such a service?”

“Madame,” replied D’Artagnan, “I have nought to say, save that my life
is ever at your majesty’s service, and that I shall only be happy the
day I lose it for you.”

“I know that, sir; I have known that,” said the queen, “a long time;
therefore I am delighted to be able thus publicly to mark my gratitude
and my esteem.”

“Permit me, madame,” said D’Artagnan, “to reserve a portion for my
friend; like myself” (he laid an emphasis on these words) “an ancient
musketeer of the company of Tréville; he has done wonders.”

“His name?” asked the queen.

“In the regiment,” said D’Artagnan, “he is called Porthos” (the queen
started), “but his true name is the Chevalier du Vallon.”

“De Bracieux de Pierrefonds,” added Porthos.

“These names are too numerous for me to remember them all, and I will
content myself with the first,” said the queen, graciously. Porthos
bowed. At this moment the coadjutor was announced; a cry of surprise
ran through the royal assemblage. Although the coadjutor had preached
that same morning it was well known that he leaned much to the side of
the Fronde; and Mazarin, in requesting the archbishop of Paris to make
his nephew preach, had evidently had the intention of administering to
Monsieur de Retz one of those Italian kicks he so much enjoyed giving.

The fact was, in leaving Notre Dame the coadjutor had learned the event
of the day. Although almost engaged to the leaders of the Fronde he had
not gone so far but that retreat was possible should the court offer
him the advantages for which he was ambitious and to which the
coadjutorship was but a stepping-stone. Monsieur de Retz wished to
become archbishop in his uncle’s place, and cardinal, like Mazarin; and
the popular party could with difficulty accord him favors so entirely
royal. He therefore hastened to the palace to congratulate the queen on
the battle of Lens, determined beforehand to act with or against the
court, as his congratulations were well or ill received.

The coadjutor possessed, perhaps, as much wit as all those put together
who were assembled at the court to laugh at him. His speech, therefore,
was so well turned, that in spite of the great wish felt by the
courtiers to laugh, they could find no point on which to vent their
ridicule. He concluded by saying that he placed his feeble influence at
her majesty’s command.

During the whole time he was speaking, the queen appeared to be well
pleased with the coadjutor’s harangue; but terminating as it did with
such a phrase, the only one which could be caught at by the jokers,
Anne turned around and directed a glance toward her favorites, which
announced that she delivered up the coadjutor to their tender mercies.
Immediately the wits of the court plunged into satire. Nogent-Beautin,
the fool of the court, exclaimed that “the queen was very happy to have
the succor of religion at such a moment.” This caused a universal burst
of laughter. The Count de Villeroy said that “he did not know how any
fear could be entertained for a moment, when the court had, to defend
itself against the parliament and the citizens of Paris, his holiness
the coadjutor, who by a signal could raise an army of curates, church
porters and vergers.”

The Marechal de la Meilleraie added that in case the coadjutor should
appear on the field of battle it would be a pity that he should not be
distinguished in the melee by wearing a red hat, as Henry IV. had been
distinguished by his white plume at the battle of Ivry.

During this storm, Gondy, who had it in his power to make it most
unpleasant for the jesters, remained calm and stern. The queen at last
asked him if he had anything to add to the fine discourse he had just
made to her.

“Yes, madame,” replied the coadjutor; “I have to beg you to reflect
twice ere you cause a civil war in the kingdom.”

The queen turned her back and the laughing recommenced.

The coadjutor bowed and left the palace, casting upon the cardinal such
a glance as is best understood by mortal foes. That glance was so sharp
that it penetrated the heart of Mazarin, who, reading in it a
declaration of war, seized D’Artagnan by the arm and said:

“If occasion requires, monsieur, you will remember that man who has
just gone out, will you not?”

“Yes, my lord,” he replied. Then, turning toward Porthos, “The devil!”
said he, “this has a bad look. I dislike these quarrels among men of
the church.”

Gondy withdrew, distributing benedictions on his way, and finding a
malicious satisfaction in causing the adherents of his foes to
prostrate themselves at his feet.

“Oh!” he murmured, as he left the threshold of the palace: “ungrateful
court! faithless court! cowardly court! I will teach you how to laugh
to-morrow—but in another manner.”

But whilst they were indulging in extravagant joy at the Palais Royal,
to increase the hilarity of the queen, Mazarin, a man of sense, and
whose fear, moreover, gave him foresight, lost no time in making idle
and dangerous jokes; he went out after the coadjutor, settled his
account, locked up his gold, and had confidential workmen to contrive
hiding places in his walls.

On his return home the coadjutor was informed that a young man had come
in after his departure and was waiting for him; he started with delight
when, on demanding the name of this young man, he learned that it was
Louvieres. He hastened to his cabinet. Broussel’s son was there, still
furious, and still bearing bloody marks of his struggle with the king’s
officers. The only precaution he had taken in coming to the
archbishopric was to leave his arquebuse in the hands of a friend.

The coadjutor went to him and held out his hand. The young man gazed at
him as if he would have read the secret of his heart.

“My dear Monsieur Louvieres,” said the coadjutor, “believe me, I am
truly concerned for the misfortune which has happened to you.”

“Is that true, and do you speak seriously?” asked Louvieres.

“From the depth of my heart,” said Gondy.

“In that case, my lord, the time for words has passed and the hour for
action is at hand; my lord, in three days, if you wish it, my father
will be out of prison and in six months you may be cardinal.”

The coadjutor started.

“Oh! let us speak frankly,” continued Louvieres, “and act in a
straightforward manner. Thirty thousand crowns in alms is not given, as
you have done for the last six months, out of pure Christian charity;
that would be too grand. You are ambitious—it is natural; you are a man
of genius and you know your worth. As for me, I hate the court and have
but one desire at this moment—vengeance. Give us the clergy and the
people, of whom you can dispose, and I will bring you the citizens and
the parliament; with these four elements Paris is ours in a week; and
believe me, monsieur coadjutor, the court will give from fear what it
will not give from good-will.”

It was now the coadjutor’s turn to fix his piercing eyes on Louvieres.

“But, Monsieur Louvieres, are you aware that it is simply civil war you
are proposing to me?”

“You have been preparing long enough, my lord, for it to be welcome to
you now.”

“Never mind,” said the coadjutor; “you must be well aware that this
requires reflection.”

“And how many hours of reflection do you ask?”

“Twelve hours, sir; is it too long?”

“It is now noon; at midnight I will be at your house.”

“If I should not be in, wait for me.”

“Good! at midnight, my lord.”

“At midnight, my dear Monsieur Louvieres.”

When once more alone Gondy sent to summon all the curates with whom he
had any connection to his house. Two hours later, thirty officiating
ministers from the most populous, and consequently the most disturbed
parishes of Paris had assembled there. Gondy related to them the
insults he had received at the Palais Royal and retailed the jests of
Beautin, the Count de Villeroy and Marechal de la Meilleraie. The
curates asked him what was to be done.

“Simply this,” said the coadjutor. “You are the directors of all
consciences. Well, undermine in them the miserable prejudice of respect
and fear of kings; teach your flocks that the queen is a tyrant; and
repeat often and loudly, so that all may know it, that the misfortunes
of France are caused by Mazarin, her lover and her destroyer; begin
this work to-day, this instant even, and in three days I shall expect
the result. For the rest, if any one of you have further or better
counsel to expound, I will listen to him with the greatest pleasure.”

Three curates remained—those of St. Merri, St. Sulpice and St.
Eustache. The others withdrew.

“You think, then, that you can help me more efficaciously than your
brothers?” said Gondy.

“We hope so,” answered the curates.

“Let us hear. Monsieur de St. Merri, you begin.”

“My lord, I have in my parish a man who might be of the greatest use to
you.”

“Who and what is this man?”

“A shopkeeper in the Rue des Lombards, who has great influence upon the
commerce of his quarter.”

“What is his name?”

“He is named Planchet, who himself also caused a rising about six weeks
ago; but as he was searched for after this emeute he disappeared.”

“And can you find him?”

“I hope so. I think he has not been arrested, and as I am his wife’s
confessor, if she knows where he is I shall know it too.”

“Very well, sir, find this man, and when you have found him bring him
to me.”

“We will be with you at six o’clock, my lord.”

“Go, my dear curate, and may God assist you!”

“And you, sir?” continued Gondy, turning to the curate of St. Sulpice.

“I, my lord,” said the latter, “I know a man who has rendered great
services to a very popular prince and who would make an excellent
leader of revolt. Him I can place at your disposal; it is Count de
Rochefort.”

“I know him also, but unfortunately he is not in Paris.”

“My lord, he has been for three days at the Rue Cassette.”

“And wherefore has he not been to see me?”

“He was told—my lord will pardon me——”

“Certainly, speak.”

“That your lordship was about to treat with the court.”

Gondy bit his lips.

“They are mistaken; bring him here at eight o’clock, sir, and may
Heaven bless you as I bless you!”

“And now ’tis your turn,” said the coadjutor, turning to the last that
remained; “have you anything as good to offer me as the two gentlemen
who have left us?”

“Better, my lord.”

“Diable! think what a solemn engagement you are making; one has offered
a wealthy shopkeeper, the other a count; you are going, then, to offer
a prince, are you?”

“I offer you a beggar, my lord.”

“Ah! ah!” said Gondy, reflecting, “you are right, sir; some one who
could raise the legion of paupers who choke up the crossings of Paris;
some one who would know how to cry aloud to them, that all France might
hear it, that it is Mazarin who has reduced them to poverty.”

“Exactly your man.”

“Bravo! and the man?”

“A plain and simple beggar, as I have said, my lord, who asks for alms,
as he gives holy water; a practice he has carried on for six years on
the steps of St. Eustache.”

“And you say that he has a great influence over his compeers?”

“Are you aware, my lord, that mendacity is an organized body, a kind of
association of those who have nothing against those who have
everything; an association in which every one takes his share; one that
elects a leader?”

“Yes, I have heard it said,” replied the coadjutor.

“Well, the man whom I offer you is a general syndic.”

“And what do you know of him?”

“Nothing, my lord, except that he is tormented with remorse.”

“What makes you think so?”

“On the twenty-eighth of every month he makes me say a mass for the
repose of the soul of one who died a violent death; yesterday I said
this mass again.”

“And his name?”

“Maillard; but I do not think it is his right one.”

“And think you that we should find him at this hour at his post?”

“Certainly.”

“Let us go and see your beggar, sir, and if he is such as you describe
him, you are right—it will be you who have discovered the true
treasure.”

Gondy dressed himself as an officer, put on a felt cap with a red
feather, hung on a long sword, buckled spurs to his boots, wrapped
himself in an ample cloak and followed the curate.

The coadjutor and his companion passed through all the streets lying
between the archbishopric and the St. Eustache Church, watching
carefully to ascertain the popular feeling. The people were in an
excited mood, but, like a swarm of frightened bees, seemed not to know
at what point to concentrate; and it was very evident that if leaders
of the people were not provided all this agitation would pass off in
idle buzzing.

On arriving at the Rue des Prouvaires, the curate pointed toward the
square before the church.

“Stop!” he said, “there he is at his post.”

Gondy looked at the spot indicated and perceived a beggar seated in a
chair and leaning against one of the moldings; a little basin was near
him and he held a holy water brush in his hand.

“Is it by permission that he remains there?” asked Gondy.

“No, my lord; these places are bought. I believe this man paid his
predecessor a hundred pistoles for his.”

“The rascal is rich, then?”

“Some of those men sometimes die worth twenty thousand and twenty-five
and thirty thousand francs and sometimes more.”

“Hum!” said Gondy, laughing; “I was not aware my alms were so well
invested.”

In the meantime they were advancing toward the square, and the moment
the coadjutor and the curate put their feet on the first church step
the mendicant arose and proffered his brush.

He was a man between sixty-six and sixty-eight years of age, little,
rather stout, with gray hair and light eyes. His countenance denoted
the struggle between two opposite principles—a wicked nature, subdued
by determination, perhaps by repentance.

He started on seeing the cavalier with the curate. The latter and the
coadjutor touched the brush with the tips of their fingers and made the
sign of the cross; the coadjutor threw a piece of money into the hat,
which was on the ground.

“Maillard,” began the curate, “this gentleman and I have come to talk
with you a little.”

“With me!” said the mendicant; “it is a great honor for a poor
distributor of holy water.”

There was an ironical tone in his voice which he could not quite
disguise and which astonished the coadjutor.

“Yes,” continued the curate, apparently accustomed to this tone, “yes,
we wish to know your opinion of the events of to-day and what you have
heard said by people going in and out of the church.”

The mendicant shook his head.

“These are melancholy doings, your reverence, which always fall again
upon the poor. As to what is said, everybody is discontented, everybody
complains, but ‘everybody’ means ‘nobody.’”

“Explain yourself, my good friend,” said the coadjutor.

“I mean that all these cries, all these complaints, these curses,
produce nothing but storms and flashes and that is all; but the
lightning will not strike until there is a hand to guide it.”

“My friend,” said Gondy, “you seem to be a clever and a thoughtful man;
are you disposed to take a part in a little civil war, should we have
one, and put at the command of the leader, should we find one, your
personal influence and the influence you have acquired over your
comrades?”

“Yes, sir, provided this war were approved of by the church and would
advance the end I wish to attain—I mean, the remission of my sins.”

“The war will not only be approved of, but directed by the church. As
for the remission of your sins, we have the archbishop of Paris, who
has the very greatest power at the court of Rome, and even the
coadjutor, who possesses some plenary indulgences; we will recommend
you to him.”

“Consider, Maillard,” said the curate, “that I have recommended you to
this gentleman, who is a powerful lord, and that I have made myself
responsible for you.”

“I know, monsieur le curé,” said the beggar, “that you have always been
very kind to me, and therefore I, in my turn, will be serviceable to
you.”

“And do you think your power as great with the fraternity as monsieur
le curé told me it was just now?”

“I think they have some esteem for me,” said the mendicant with pride,
“and that not only will they obey me, but wherever I go they will
follow me.”

“And could you count on fifty resolute men, good, unemployed, but
active souls, brawlers, capable of bringing down the walls of the
Palais Royal by crying, ‘Down with Mazarin,’ as fell those at Jericho?”

“I think,” said the beggar, “I can undertake things more difficult and
more important than that.”

“Ah, ah,” said Gondy, “you will undertake, then, some night, to throw
up some ten barricades?”

“I will undertake to throw up fifty, and when the day comes, to defend
them.”

“I’faith!” exclaimed Gondy, “you speak with a certainty that gives me
pleasure; and since monsieur le curé can answer for you——”

“I answer for him,” said the curate.

“Here is a bag containing five hundred pistoles in gold; make all your
arrangements, and tell me where I shall be able to find you this
evening at ten o’clock.”

“It must be on some elevated place, whence a given signal may be seen
in every part of Paris.”

“Shall I give you a line for the vicar of St. Jacques de la Boucherie?
he will let you into the rooms in his tower,” said the curate.

“Capital,” answered the mendicant.

“Then,” said the coadjutor, “this evening, at ten o’clock, and if I am
pleased with you another bag of five hundred pistoles will be at your
disposal.”

The eyes of the mendicant dashed with cupidity, but he quickly
suppressed his emotion.

“This evening, sir,” he replied, “all will be ready.”




Chapter XLVI.
The Tower of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.


At a quarter to six o’clock, Monsieur de Gondy, having finished his
business, returned to the archiepiscopal palace.

At six o’clock the curate of St. Merri was announced.

The coadjutor glanced rapidly behind and saw that he was followed by
another man. The curate then entered, followed by Planchet.

“Your holiness,” said the curate, “here is the person of whom I had the
honor to speak to you.”

Planchet saluted in the manner of one accustomed to fine houses.

“And you are disposed to serve the cause of the people?” asked Gondy.

“Most undoubtedly,” said Planchet. “I am a Frondist from my heart. You
see in me, such as I am, a person sentenced to be hung.”

“And on what account?”

“I rescued from the hands of Mazarin’s police a noble lord whom they
were conducting back to the Bastile, where he had been for five years.”

“Will you name him?”

“Oh, you know him well, my lord—it is Count de Rochefort.”

“Ah! really, yes,” said the coadjutor, “I have heard this affair
mentioned. You raised the whole district, so they told me!”

“Very nearly,” replied Planchet, with a self-satisfied air.

“And your business is——”

“That of a confectioner, in the Rue des Lombards.”

“Explain to me how it happens that, following so peaceful a business,
you had such warlike inclinations.”

“Why does my lord, belonging to the church, now receive me in the dress
of an officer, with a sword at his side and spurs to his boots?”

“Not badly answered, i’faith,” said Gondy, laughing; “but I have, you
must know, always had, in spite of my bands, warlike inclinations.”

“Well, my lord, before I became a confectioner I myself was three years
sergeant in the Piedmontese regiment, and before I became sergeant I
was for eighteen months the servant of Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“The lieutenant of musketeers?” asked Gondy.

“Himself, my lord.”

“But he is said to be a furious Mazarinist.”

“Phew!” whistled Planchet.

“What do you mean by that?”

“Nothing, my lord; Monsieur d’Artagnan belongs to the service; Monsieur
d’Artagnan makes it his business to defend the cardinal, who pays him,
as much as we make it ours, we citizens, to attack him, whom he robs.”

“You are an intelligent fellow, my friend; can we count upon you?”

“You may count upon me, my lord, provided you want to make a complete
upheaval of the city.”

“’Tis that exactly. How many men, think you, you could collect together
to-night?”

“Two hundred muskets and five hundred halberds.”

“Let there be only one man in every district who can do as much and by
to-morrow we shall have quite a powerful army. Are you disposed to obey
Count de Rochefort?”

“I would follow him to hell, and that is saying not a little, as I
believe him entirely capable of the descent.”

“Bravo!”

“By what sign to-morrow shall we be able to distinguish friends from
foes?”

“Every Frondist must put a knot of straw in his hat.”

“Good! Give the watchword.”

“Do you want money?”

“Money never comes amiss at any time, my lord; if one has it not, one
must do without it; with it, matters go on much better and more
rapidly.”

Gondy went to a box and drew forth a bag.

“Here are five hundred pistoles,” he said; “and if the action goes off
well you may reckon upon a similar sum to-morrow.”

“I will give a faithful account of the sum to your lordship,” said
Planchet, putting the bag under his arm.

“That is right; I recommend the cardinal to your attention.”

“Make your mind easy, he is in good hands.”

Planchet went out, the curate remaining for a moment.

“Are you satisfied, my lord?” he asked.

“Yes; he appears to be a resolute fellow.”

“Well, he will do more than he has promised.”

“He will do wonders then.”

The curate rejoined Planchet, who was waiting for him on the stairs.
Ten minutes later the curate of St. Sulpice was announced. As soon as
the door of Gondy’s study was opened a man rushed in. It was the Count
de Rochefort.

“’Tis you, then, my dear count,” cried Gondy, offering his hand.

“You have made up your mind at last, my lord?” said Rochefort.

“It has been made up a long time,” said Gondy.

“Let us say no more on the subject; you tell me so, I believe you.
Well, we are going to give a ball to Mazarin.”

“I hope so.”

“And when will the dance begin?”

“The invitations are given for this evening,” said the coadjutor, “but
the violins will not begin to play until to-morrow morning.”

“You may reckon upon me and upon fifty soldiers which the Chevalier
d’Humieres has promised me whenever I need them.”

“Upon fifty soldiers?”

“Yes, he is making recruits and he will lend them to me; if any are
missing when the fete is over, I shall replace them.”

“Good, my dear Rochefort; but that is not all. What have you done with
Monsieur de Beaufort?”

“He is in Vendome, where he will wait until I write to him to return to
Paris.”

“Write to him; now’s the time.”

“You are sure of your enterprise?”

“Yes, but he must make haste; for hardly will the people of Paris have
revolted before we shall have a score of princes begging to lead them.
If he defers he will find the place of honor taken.”

“Shall I send word to him as coming from you?”

“Yes certainly.”

“Shall I tell him that he can count on you?”

“To the end.”

“And you will leave the command to him?”

“Of the war, yes, but in politics——”

“You must know it is not his element.”

“He must leave me to negotiate for my cardinal’s hat in my own
fashion.”

“You care about it, then, so much?”

“Since they force me to wear a hat of a form which does not become me,”
said Gondy, “I wish at least that the hat should be red.”

“One must not dispute matters of taste and colors,” said Rochefort,
laughing. “I answer for his consent.”

“How soon can he be here?”

“In five days.”

“Let him come and he will find a change, I will answer for it.”

“Therefore, go and collect your fifty men and hold yourself in
readiness.”

“For what?”

“For everything.”

“Is there any signal for the general rally?”

“A knot of straw in the hat.”

“Very good. Adieu, my lord.”

“Adieu, my dear Rochefort.”

“Ah, Monsieur Mazarin, Monsieur Mazarin,” said Rochefort, leading off
his curate, who had not found an opportunity of uttering a single word
during the foregoing dialogue, “you will see whether I am too old to be
a man of action.”

It was half-past nine o’clock and the coadjutor required half an hour
to go from the archbishop’s palace to the tower of St. Jacques de la
Boucherie. He remarked that a light was burning in one of the highest
windows of the tower. “Good,” said he, “our syndic is at his post.”

He knocked and the door was opened. The vicar himself awaited him,
conducted him to the top of the tower, and when there pointed to a
little door, placed the light which he had brought with him in a corner
of the wall, that the coadjutor might be able to find it on his return,
and went down again. Although the key was in the door the coadjutor
knocked.

“Come in,” said a voice which he recognized as that of the mendicant,
whom he found lying on a kind of truckle bed. He rose on the entrance
of the coadjutor, and at that moment ten o’clock struck.

“Well,” said Gondy, “have you kept your word with me?”

“Not exactly,” replied the mendicant.

“How is that?”

“You asked me for five hundred men, did you not? Well, I have ten
thousand for you.”

“You are not boasting?”

“Do you wish for a proof?”

“Yes.”

There were three candles alight, each of which burnt before a window,
one looking upon the city, the other upon the Palais Royal, and a third
upon the Rue Saint Denis.

The man went silently to each of the candles and blew them out one
after the other.

“What are you doing?” asked the coadjutor.

“I have given the signal.”

“For what?”

“For the barricades. When you leave this you will behold my men at
work. Only take care you do not break your legs in stumbling over some
chain or your neck by falling in a hole.”

“Good! there is your money, the same sum as that you have received
already. Now remember that you are a general and do not go and drink.”

“For twenty years I have tasted nothing but water.”

The man took the bag from the hands of the coadjutor, who heard the
sound of his fingers counting and handling the gold pieces.

“Ah! ah!” said the coadjutor, “you are avaricious, my good fellow.”

The mendicant sighed and threw down the bag.

“Must I always be the same?” said he, “and shall I never succeed in
overcoming the old leaven? Oh, misery, oh, vanity!”

“You take it, however.”

“Yes, but I make hereby a vow in your presence, to employ all that
remains to me in pious works.”

His face was pale and drawn, like that of a man who had just undergone
some inward struggle.

“Singular man!” muttered Gondy, taking his hat to go away; but on
turning around he saw the beggar between him and the door. His first
idea was that this man intended to do him some harm, but on the
contrary he saw him fall on his knees before him with his hands
clasped.

“Your blessing, your holiness, before you go, I beseech you!” he cried.

“Your holiness!” said Gondy; “my friend, you take me for some one
else.”

“No, your holiness, I take you for what you are, that is to say, the
coadjutor; I recognized you at the first glance.”

Gondy smiled. “And you want my blessing?” he said.

“Yes, I have need of it.”

The mendicant uttered these words in a tone of such humility, such
earnest repentance, that Gondy placed his hand upon him and gave him
his benediction with all the unction of which he was capable.

“Now,” said Gondy, “there is a communion between us. I have blessed you
and you are sacred to me. Come, have you committed some crime, pursued
by human justice, from which I can protect you?”

The beggar shook his head. “The crime which I have committed, my lord,
has no call upon human justice, and you can only deliver me from it by
blessing me frequently, as you have just done.”

“Come, be candid,” said the coadjutor, “you have not all your life
followed the trade which you do now?”

“No, my lord. I have pursued it for six years only.”

“And previously, where were you?”

“In the Bastile.”

“And before you went to the Bastile?”

“I will tell you, my lord, on the day when you are willing to hear my
confession.”

“Good! At whatsoever hour of the day or night you may present yourself,
remember that I shall be ready to give you absolution.”

“Thank you, my lord,” said the mendicant in a hoarse voice. “But I am
not yet ready to receive it.”

“Very well. Adieu.”

“Adieu, your holiness,” said the mendicant, opening the door and
bending low before the prelate.




Chapter XLVII.
The Riot.


It was about eleven o’clock at night. Gondy had not walked a hundred
steps ere he perceived the strange change which had been made in the
streets of Paris.

The whole city seemed peopled with fantastic beings; silent shadows
were seen unpaving the streets and others dragging and upsetting great
wagons, whilst others again dug ditches large enough to ingulf whole
regiments of horsemen. These active beings flitted here and there like
so many demons completing some unknown labor; these were the beggars of
the Court of Miracles—the agents of the giver of holy water in the
Square of Saint Eustache, preparing barricades for the morrow.

Gondy gazed on these deeds of darkness, on these nocturnal laborers,
with a kind of fear; he asked himself, if, after having called forth
these foul creatures from their dens, he should have the power of
making them retire again. He felt almost inclined to cross himself when
one of these beings happened to approach him. He reached the Rue Saint
Honore and went up it toward the Rue de la Ferronnerie; there the
aspect changed; here it was the tradesmen who were running from shop to
shop; their doors seemed closed like their shutters, but they were only
pushed to in such a manner as to open and allow the men, who seemed
fearful of showing what they carried, to enter, closing immediately.
These men were shopkeepers, who had arms to lend to those who had none.

One individual went from door to door, bending under the weight of
swords, guns, muskets and every kind of weapon, which he deposited as
fast as he could. By the light of a lantern the coadjutor recognized
Planchet.

The coadjutor proceeded onward to the quay by way of the Rue de la
Monnaie; there he found groups of bourgeois clad in black cloaks or
gray, according as they belonged to the upper or lower bourgeoisie.
They were standing motionless, while single men passed from one group
to another. All these cloaks, gray or black, were raised behind by the
point of a sword, or before by the barrel of an arquebuse or a musket.

On reaching the Pont Neuf the coadjutor found it strictly guarded and a
man approached him.

“Who are you?” asked the man. “I do not know you for one of us.”

“Then it is because you do not know your friends, my dear Monsieur
Louvieres,” said the coadjutor, raising his hat.

Louvieres recognized him and bowed.

Gondy continued his way and went as far as the Tour de Nesle. There he
saw a lengthy chain of people gliding under the walls. They might be
said to be a procession of ghosts, for they were all wrapped in white
cloaks. When they reached a certain spot these men appeared to be
annihilated, one after the other, as if the earth had opened under
their feet. Gondy, edged into a corner, saw them vanish from the first
until the last but one. The last raised his eyes, to ascertain,
doubtless, that neither his companions nor himself had been watched,
and, in spite of the darkness, he perceived Gondy. He walked straight
up to him and placed a pistol to his throat.

“Halloo! Monsieur de Rochefort,” said Gondy, laughing, “are you a boy
to play with firearms?”

Rochefort recognized the voice.

“Ah, it is you, my lord!” said he.

“The very same. What people are you leading thus into the bowels of the
earth?”

“My fifty recruits from the Chevalier d’Humieres, who are destined to
enter the light cavalry and who have only received as yet for their
equipment their white cloaks.”

“And where are you going?”

“To the house of one of my friends, a sculptor, only we enter by the
trap through which he lets down his marble.”

“Very good,” said Gondy, shaking Rochefort by the hand, who descended
in his turn and closed the trap after him.

It was now one o’clock in the morning and the coadjutor returned home.
He opened a window and leaned out to listen. A strange,
incomprehensible, unearthly sound seemed to pervade the whole city; one
felt that something unusual and terrible was happening in all the
streets, now dark as ocean’s most unfathomable caves. From time to time
a dull sound was heard, like that of a rising tempest or a billow of
the sea; but nothing clear, nothing distinct, nothing intelligible; it
was like those mysterious subterraneous noises that precede an
earthquake.

The work of revolt continued the whole night thus. The next morning, on
awaking, Paris seemed to be startled at her own appearance. It was like
a besieged town. Armed men, shouldering muskets, watched over the
barricades with menacing looks; words of command, patrols, arrests,
executions, even, were encountered at every step. Those bearing plumed
hats and gold swords were stopped and made to cry, “Long live
Broussel!” “Down with Mazarin!” and whoever refused to comply with this
ceremony was hooted at, spat upon and even beaten. They had not yet
begun to slay, but it was well felt that the inclination to do so was
not wanting.

The barricades had been pushed as far as the Palais Royal. From the Rue
de Bons Enfants to that of the Ferronnerie, from the Rue Saint
Thomas-du-Louvre to the Pont Neuf, from the Rue Richelieu to the Porte
Saint Honore, there were more than ten thousand armed men; those who
were at the front hurled defiance at the impassive sentinels of the
regiment of guards posted around the Palais Royal, the gates of which
were closed behind them, a precaution which made their situation
precarious. Among these thousands moved, in bands numbering from one
hundred to two hundred, pale and haggard men, clothed in rags, who bore
a sort of standard on which was inscribed these words: “Behold the
misery of the people!” Wherever these men passed, frenzied cries were
heard; and there were so many of these bands that the cries were to be
heard in all directions.

The astonishment of Mazarin and of Anne of Austria was great when it
was announced to them that the city, which the previous evening they
had left entirely tranquil, had awakened to such feverish commotion;
nor would either the one or the other believe the reports that were
brought to them, declaring they would rather rely on the evidence of
their own eyes and ears. Then a window was opened and when they saw and
heard they were convinced.

Mazarin shrugged his shoulders and pretended to despise the populace;
but he turned visibly pale and ran to his closet, trembling all over,
locked up his gold and jewels in his caskets and put his finest
diamonds on his fingers. As for the queen, furious, and left to her own
guidance, she went for the Marechal de la Meilleraie and desired him to
take as many men as he pleased and to go and see what was the meaning
of this pleasantry.

The marshal was ordinarily very adventurous and was wont to hesitate at
nothing; and he had that lofty contempt for the populace which army
officers usually profess. He took a hundred and fifty men and attempted
to go out by the Pont du Louvre, but there he met Rochefort and his
fifty horsemen, attended by more than five hundred men. The marshal
made no attempt to force that barrier and returned up the quay. But at
Pont Neuf he found Louvieres and his bourgeois. This time the marshal
charged, but he was welcomed by musket shots, while stones fell like
hail from all the windows. He left there three men.

He beat a retreat toward the market, but there he met Planchet with his
halberdiers; their halberds were leveled at him threateningly. He
attempted to ride over those gray cloaks, but the gray cloaks held
their ground and the marshal retired toward the Rue Saint Honore,
leaving four of his guards dead on the field of battle.

The marshal then entered the Rue Saint Honore, but there he was opposed
by the barricades of the mendicant of Saint Eustache. They were
guarded, not only by armed men, but even by women and children. Master
Friquet, the owner of a pistol and of a sword which Louvieres had given
him, had organized a company of rogues like himself and was making a
tremendous racket.

The marshal thought this barrier not so well fortified as the others
and determined to break through it. He dismounted twenty men to make a
breach in the barricade, whilst he and others, remaining on their
horses, were to protect the assailants. The twenty men marched straight
toward the barrier, but from behind the beams, from among the
wagon-wheels and from the heights of the rocks a terrible fusillade
burst forth and at the same time Planchet’s halberdiers appeared at the
corner of the Cemetery of the Innocents, and Louvieres’s bourgeois at
the corner of the Rue de la Monnaie.

The Marechal de la Meilleraie was caught between two fires, but he was
brave and made up his mind to die where he was. He returned blow for
blow and cries of pain began to be heard in the crowd. The guards, more
skillful, did greater execution; but the bourgeois, more numerous,
overwhelmed them with a veritable hurricane of iron. Men fell around
him as they had fallen at Rocroy or at Lerida. Fontrailles, his
aide-de-camp, had an arm broken; his horse had received a bullet in his
neck and he had difficulty in controlling him, maddened by pain. In
short, he had reached that supreme moment when the bravest feel a
shudder in their veins, when suddenly, in the direction of the Rue de
l’Arbre-Sec, the crowd opened, crying: “Long live the coadjutor!” and
Gondy, in surplice and cloak, appeared, moving tranquilly in the midst
of the fusillade and bestowing his benedictions to the right and left,
as undisturbed as if he were leading a procession of the Fete Dieu.

All fell to their knees. The marshal recognized him and hastened to
meet him.

“Get me out of this, in Heaven’s name!” he said, “or I shall leave my
carcass here and those of all my men.”

A great tumult arose, in the midst of which even the noise of thunder
could not have been heard. Gondy raised his hand and demanded silence.
All were still.

“My children,” he said, “this is the Marechal de la Meilleraie, as to
whose intentions you have been deceived and who pledges himself, on
returning to the Louvre, to demand of the queen, in your name, our
Broussel’s release. You pledge yourself to that, marshal?” added Gondy,
turning to La Meilleraie.

“Morbleu!” cried the latter, “I should say that I do pledge myself to
it! I had no hope of getting off so easily.”

“He gives you his word of honor,” said Gondy.

The marshal raised his hand in token of assent.

“Long live the coadjutor!” cried the crowd. Some voices even added:
“Long live the marshal!” But all took up the cry in chorus: “Down with
Mazarin!”

The crowd gave place, the barricade was opened, and the marshal, with
the remnant of his company, retreated, preceded by Friquet and his
bandits, some of them making a presence of beating drums and others
imitating the sound of the trumpet. It was almost a triumphal
procession; only, behind the guards the barricades were closed again.
The marshal bit his fingers.

In the meantime, as we have said, Mazarin was in his closet, putting
his affairs in order. He called for D’Artagnan, but in the midst of
such tumult he little expected to see him, D’Artagnan not being on
service. In about ten minutes D’Artagnan appeared at the door, followed
by the inseparable Porthos.

“Ah, come in, come in, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the cardinal, “and
welcome your friend too. But what is going on in this accursed Paris?”

“What is going on, my lord? nothing good,” replied D’Artagnan, shaking
his head. “The town is in open revolt, and just now, as I was crossing
the Rue Montorgueil with Monsieur du Vallon, who is here, and is your
humble servant, they wanted in spite of my uniform, or perhaps because
of my uniform, to make us cry ‘Long live Broussel!’ and must I tell
you, my lord what they wished us to cry as well?”

“Speak, speak.”

“‘Down with Mazarin!’ I’faith, the treasonable word is out.”

Mazarin smiled, but became very pale.

“And you did cry?” he asked.

“I’faith, no,” said D’Artagnan; “I was not in voice; Monsieur du Vallon
has a cold and did not cry either. Then, my lord——”

“Then what?” asked Mazarin.

“Look at my hat and cloak.”

And D’Artagnan displayed four gunshot holes in his cloak and two in his
beaver. As for Porthos’s coat, a blow from a halberd had cut it open on
the flank and a pistol shot had cut his feather in two.

“Diavolo!” said the cardinal, pensively gazing at the two friends with
lively admiration; “I should have cried, I should.”

At this moment the tumult was heard nearer.

Mazarin wiped his forehead and looked around him. He had a great desire
to go to the window, but he dared not.

“See what is going on, Monsieur D’Artagnan,” said he.

D’Artagnan went to the window with his habitual composure. “Oho!” said
he, “what is this? Marechal de la Meilleraie returning without a
hat—Fontrailles with his arm in a sling—wounded guards—horses bleeding;
eh, then, what are the sentinels about? They are aiming—they are going
to fire!”

“They have received orders to fire on the people if the people approach
the Palais Royal!” exclaimed Mazarin.

“But if they fire, all is lost!” cried D’Artagnan.

“We have the gates.”

“The gates! to hold for five minutes—the gates, they will be torn down,
twisted into iron wire, ground to powder! God’s death, don’t fire!”
screamed D’Artagnan, throwing open the window.

In spite of this recommendation, which, owing to the noise, could
scarcely have been heard, two or three musket shots resounded,
succeeded by a terrible discharge. The balls might be heard peppering
the facade of the Palais Royal, and one of them, passing under
D’Artagnan’s arm, entered and broke a mirror, in which Porthos was
complacently admiring himself.

“Alack! alack!” cried the cardinal, “a Venetian glass!”

“Oh, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, quietly shutting the window, “it is not
worth while weeping yet, for probably an hour hence there will not be
one of your mirrors remaining in the Palais Royal, whether they be
Venetian or Parisian.”

“But what do you advise, then?” asked Mazarin, trembling.

“Eh, egad, to give up Broussel as they demand! What the devil do you
want with a member of the parliament? He is of no earthly use to
anybody.”

“And you, Monsieur du Vallon, is that your advice? What would you do?”

“I should give up Broussel,” said Porthos.

“Come, come with me, gentlemen!” exclaimed Mazarin. “I will go and
discuss the matter with the queen.”

He stopped at the end of the corridor and said:

“I can count upon you, gentlemen, can I not?”

“We do not give ourselves twice over,” said D’Artagnan; “we have given
ourselves to you; command, we shall obey.”

“Very well, then,” said Mazarin; “enter this cabinet and wait till I
come back.”

And turning off he entered the drawing-room by another door.




Chapter XLVIII.
The Riot becomes a Revolution.


The closet into which D’Artagnan and Porthos had been ushered was
separated from the drawing-room where the queen was by tapestried
curtains only, and this thin partition enabled them to hear all that
passed in the adjoining room, whilst the aperture between the two
hangings, small as it was, permitted them to see.

The queen was standing in the room, pale with anger; her self-control,
however, was so great that it might have been imagined that she was
calm. Comminges, Villequier and Guitant were behind her and the women
again were behind the men. The Chancellor Sequier, who twenty years
previously had persecuted her so ruthlessly, stood before her, relating
how his carriage had been smashed, how he had been pursued and had
rushed into the Hotel d’O——, that the hotel was immediately invaded,
pillaged and devastated; happily he had time to reach a closet hidden
behind tapestry, in which he was secreted by an old woman, together
with his brother, the Bishop of Meaux. Then the danger was so imminent,
the rioters came so near, uttering such threats, that the chancellor
thought his last hour had come and confessed himself to his brother
priest, so as to be all ready to die in case he was discovered.
Fortunately, however, he had not been taken; the people, believing that
he had escaped by some back entrance, retired and left him at liberty
to retreat. Then, disguised in the clothes of the Marquis d’O——, he had
left the hotel, stumbling over the bodies of an officer and two guards
who had been killed whilst defending the street door.

During the recital Mazarin entered and glided noiselessly up to the
queen to listen.

“Well,” said the queen, when the chancellor had finished speaking;
“what do you think of it all?”

“I think that matters look very gloomy, madame.”

“But what step would you propose to me?”

“I could propose one to your majesty, but I dare not.”

“You may, you may, sir,” said the queen with a bitter smile; “you were
not so timid once.”

The chancellor reddened and stammered some words.

“It is not a question of the past, but of the present,” said the queen;
“you said you could give me advice—what is it?”

“Madame,” said the chancellor, hesitating, “it would be to release
Broussel.”

The queen, although already pale, became visibly paler and her face was
contracted.

“Release Broussel!” she cried, “never!”

At this moment steps were heard in the ante-room and without any
announcement the Marechal de la Meilleraie appeared at the door.

“Ah, there you are, marechal,” cried Anne of Austria joyfully. “I trust
you have brought this rabble to reason.”

“Madame,” replied the marechal, “I have left three men on the Pont
Neuf, four at the Halle, six at the corner of the Rue de l’Arbre-Sec
and two at the door of your palace—fifteen in all. I have brought away
ten or twelve wounded. I know not where I have left my hat, and in all
probability I should have been left with my hat, had the coadjutor not
arrived in time to rescue me.”

“Ah, indeed,” said the queen, “it would have much astonished me if that
low cur, with his distorted legs, had not been mixed up with all this.”

“Madame,” said La Meilleraie, “do not say too much against him before
me, for the service he rendered me is still fresh.”

“Very good,” said the queen, “be as grateful as you like, it does not
implicate me; you are here safe and sound, that is all I wished for;
you are not only welcome, but welcome back.”

“Yes, madame; but I only came back on one condition—that I would
transmit to your majesty the will of the people.”

“The will!” exclaimed the queen, frowning. “Oh! oh! monsieur marechal,
you must indeed have found yourself in wondrous peril to have
undertaken so strange a commission!”

The irony with which these words were uttered did not escape the
marechal.

“Pardon, madame,” he said, “I am not a lawyer, I am a mere soldier, and
probably, therefore, I do not quite comprehend the value of certain
words; I ought to have said the wishes, and not the will, of the
people. As for what you do me the honor to say, I presume you mean I
was afraid?”

The queen smiled.

“Well, then, madame, yes, I did feel fear; and though I have been
through twelve pitched battles and I cannot count how many charges and
skirmishes, I own for the third time in my life I was afraid. Yes, and
I would rather face your majesty, however threatening your smile, than
face those demons who accompanied me hither and who sprung from I know
not whence, unless from deepest hell.”

(“Bravo,” said D’Artagnan in a whisper to Porthos; “well answered.”)

“Well,” said the queen, biting her lips, whilst her courtiers looked at
each other with surprise, “what is the desire of my people?”

“That Broussel shall be given up to them, madame.”

“Never!” said the queen, “never!”

“Your majesty is mistress,” said La Meilleraie, retreating a few steps.

“Where are you going, marechal?” asked the queen.

“To give your majesty’s reply to those who await it.”

“Stay, marechal; I will not appear to parley with rebels.”

“Madame, I have pledged my word, and unless you order me to be arrested
I shall be forced to return.”

Anne of Austria’s eyes shot glances of fire.

“Oh! that is no impediment, sir,” said she; “I have had greater men
than you arrested—Guitant!”

Mazarin sprang forward.

“Madame,” said he, “if I dared in my turn advise——”

“Would it be to give up Broussel, sir? If so, you can spare yourself
the trouble.”

“No,” said Mazarin; “although, perhaps, that counsel is as good as any
other.”

“Then what may it be?”

“To call for monsieur le coadjuteur.”

“The coadjutor!” cried the queen, “that dreadful mischief maker! It is
he who has raised all this revolt.”

“The more reason,” said Mazarin; “if he has raised it he can put it
down.”

“And hold, madame,” suggested Comminges, who was near a window, out of
which he could see; “hold, the moment is a happy one, for there he is
now, giving his blessing in the square of the Palais Royal.”

The queen sprang to the window.

“It is true,” she said, “the arch hypocrite—see!”

“I see,” said Mazarin, “that everybody kneels before him, although he
be but coadjutor, whilst I, were I in his place, though I am cardinal,
should be torn to pieces. I persist, then, madame, in my wish” (he laid
an emphasis on the word), “that your majesty should receive the
coadjutor.”

“And wherefore do you not say, like the rest, your will?” replied the
queen, in a low voice.

Mazarin bowed.

“Monsieur le marechal,” said the queen, after a moment’s reflection,
“go and find the coadjutor and bring him to me.”

“And what shall I say to the people?”

“That they must have patience,” said Anne, “as I have.”

The fiery Spanish woman spoke in a tone so imperative that the marechal
made no reply; he bowed and went out.

(D’Artagnan turned to Porthos. “How will this end?” he said.

“We shall soon see,” said Porthos, in his tranquil way.)

In the meantime Anne of Austria approached Comminges and conversed with
him in a subdued tone, whilst Mazarin glanced uneasily at the corner
occupied by D’Artagnan and Porthos. Ere long the door opened and the
marechal entered, followed by the coadjutor.

“There, madame,” he said, “is Monsieur Gondy, who hastens to obey your
majesty’s summons.”

The queen advanced a few steps to meet him, and then stopped, cold,
severe, unmoved, with her lower lip scornfully protruded.

Gondy bowed respectfully.

“Well, sir,” said the queen, “what is your opinion of this riot?”

“That it is no longer a riot, madame,” he replied, “but a revolt.”

“The revolt is at the door of those who think my people can rebel,”
cried Anne, unable to dissimulate before the coadjutor, whom she looked
upon, and probably with reason, as the promoter of the tumult. “Revolt!
thus it is called by those who have wished for this demonstration and
who are, perhaps, the cause of it; but, wait, wait! the king’s
authority will put all this to rights.”

“Was it to tell me that, madame,” coldly replied Gondy, “that your
majesty admitted me to the honor of entering your presence?”

“No, my dear coadjutor,” said Mazarin; “it was to ask your advice in
the unhappy dilemma in which we find ourselves.”

“Is it true,” asked Gondy, feigning astonishment, “that her majesty
summoned me to ask for my opinion?”

“Yes,” said the queen, “it is requested.”

The coadjutor bowed.

“Your majesty wishes, then——”

“You to say what you would do in her place,” Mazarin hastened to reply.

The coadjutor looked at the queen, who replied by a sign in the
affirmative.

“Were I in her majesty’s place,” said Gondy, coldly, “I should not
hesitate; I should release Broussel.”

“And if I do not give him up, what think you will be the result?”
exclaimed the queen.

“I believe that not a stone in Paris will remain unturned,” put in the
marechal.

“It was not your opinion that I asked,” said the queen, sharply,
without even turning around.

“If it is I whom your majesty interrogates,” replied the coadjutor in
the same calm manner, “I reply that I hold monsieur le marechal’s
opinion in every respect.”

The color mounted to the queen’s face; her fine blue eyes seemed to
start out of her head and her carmine lips, compared by all the poets
of the day to a pomegranate in flower, were trembling with anger.
Mazarin himself, who was well accustomed to the domestic outbreaks of
this disturbed household, was alarmed.

“Give up Broussel!” she cried; “fine counsel, indeed. Upon my word! one
can easily see it comes from a priest.”

Gondy remained firm, and the abuse of the day seemed to glide over his
head as the sarcasms of the evening before had done; but hatred and
revenge were accumulating in his heart silently and drop by drop. He
looked coldly at the queen, who nudged Mazarin to make him say
something in his turn.

Mazarin, according to his custom, was thinking much and saying little.

“Ho! ho!” said he, “good advice, advice of a friend. I, too, would give
up that good Monsieur Broussel, dead or alive, and all would be at an
end.”

“If you yield him dead, all will indeed be at an end, my lord, but
quite otherwise than you mean.”

“Did I say ‘dead or alive?’” replied Mazarin. “It was only a way of
speaking. You know I am not familiar with the French language, which
you, monsieur le coadjuteur, both speak and write so well.”

(“This is a council of state,” D’Artagnan remarked to Porthos; “but we
held better ones at La Rochelle, with Athos and Aramis.”

“At the Saint Gervais bastion,” said Porthos.

“There and elsewhere.”)

The coadjutor let the storm pass over his head and resumed, still with
the same tranquillity:

“Madame, if the opinion I have submitted to you does not please you it
is doubtless because you have better counsels to follow. I know too
well the wisdom of the queen and that of her advisers to suppose that
they will leave the capital long in trouble that may lead to a
revolution.”

“Thus, then, it is your opinion,” said Anne of Austria, with a sneer
and biting her lips with rage, “that yesterday’s riot, which to-day is
already a rebellion, to-morrow may become a revolution?”

“Yes, madame,” replied the coadjutor, gravely.

“But if I am to believe you, sir, the people seem to have thrown off
all restraint.”

“It is a bad year for kings,” said Gondy, shaking his head; “look at
England, madame.”

“Yes; but fortunately we have no Oliver Cromwell in France,” replied
the queen.

“Who knows?” said Gondy; “such men are like thunderbolts—one recognizes
them only when they have struck.”

Every one shuddered and there was a moment of silence, during which the
queen pressed her hand to her side, evidently to still the beatings of
her heart.

(“Porthos,” murmured D’Artagnan, “look well at that priest.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “I see him. What then?”

“Well, he is a man.”

Porthos looked at D’Artagnan in astonishment. Evidently he did not
understand his meaning.)

“Your majesty,” continued the coadjutor, pitilessly, “is about to take
such measures as seem good to you, but I foresee that they will be
violent and such as will still further exasperate the rioters.”

“In that case, you, monsieur le coadjuteur, who have such power over
them and are at the same time friendly to us,” said the queen,
ironically, “will quiet them by bestowing your blessing upon them.”

“Perhaps it will be too late,” said Gondy, still unmoved; “perhaps I
shall have lost all influence; while by giving up Broussel your majesty
will strike at the root of the sedition and will gain the right to
punish severely any revival of the revolt.”

“Have I not, then, that right?” cried the queen.

“If you have it, use it,” replied Gondy.

(“Peste!” said D’Artagnan to Porthos. “There is a man after my own
heart. Oh! if he were minister and I were his D’Artagnan, instead of
belonging to that beast of a Mazarin, mordieu! what fine things we
would do together!”

“Yes,” said Porthos.)

The queen made a sign for every one, except Mazarin, to quit the room;
and Gondy bowed, as if to leave with the rest.

“Stay, sir,” said Anne to him.

“Good,” thought Gondy, “she is going to yield.”

(“She is going to have him killed,” said D’Artagnan to Porthos, “but at
all events it shall not be by me. I swear to Heaven, on the contrary,
that if they fall upon him I will fall upon them.”

“And I, too,” said Porthos.)

“Good,” muttered Mazarin, sitting down, “we shall soon see something
startling.”

The queen’s eyes followed the retreating figures and when the last had
closed the door she turned away. It was evident that she was making
unnatural efforts to subdue her anger; she fanned herself, smelled at
her vinaigrette and walked up and down. Gondy, who began to feel
uneasy, examined the tapestry with his eyes, touched the coat of mail
which he wore under his long gown and felt from time to time to see if
the handle of a good Spanish dagger, which was hidden under his cloak,
was well within reach.

“And now,” at last said the queen, “now that we are alone, repeat your
counsel, monsieur le coadjuteur.”

“It is this, madame: that you should appear to have reflected, and
publicly acknowledge an error, which constitutes the extra strength of
a strong government; release Broussel from prison and give him back to
the people.”

“Oh!” cried Anne, “to humble myself thus! Am I, or am I not, the queen?
This screaming mob, are they, or are they not, my subjects? Have I
friends? Have I guards? Ah! by Notre Dame! as Queen Catherine used to
say,” continued she, excited by her own words, “rather than give up
this infamous Broussel to them I will strangle him with my own hands!”

And she sprang toward Gondy, whom assuredly at that moment she hated
more than Broussel, with outstretched arms. The coadjutor remained
immovable and not a muscle of his face was discomposed; only his glance
flashed like a sword in returning the furious looks of the queen.

(“He were a dead man” said the Gascon, “if there were still a Vitry at
the court and if Vitry entered at this moment; but for my part, before
he could reach the good prelate I would kill Vitry at once; the
cardinal would be infinitely pleased with me.”

“Hush!” said Porthos; “listen.”)

“Madame,” cried the cardinal, seizing hold of Anne and drawing her
back, “Madame, what are you about?”

Then he added in Spanish, “Anne, are you mad? You, a queen to quarrel
like a washerwoman! And do you not perceive that in the person of this
priest is represented the whole people of Paris and that it is
dangerous to insult him at this moment, and if this priest wished it,
in an hour you would be without a crown? Come, then, on another
occasion you can be firm and strong; but to-day is not the proper time;
to-day, flatter and caress, or you are only a common woman.”

(At the first words of this address D’Artagnan had seized Porthos’s
arm, which he pressed with gradually increasing force. When Mazarin
ceased speaking he said to Porthos in a low tone:

“Never tell Mazarin that I understand Spanish, or I am a lost man and
you are also.”

“All right,” said Porthos.)

This rough appeal, marked by the eloquence which characterized Mazarin
when he spoke in Italian or Spanish and which he lost entirely in
speaking French, was uttered with such impenetrable expression that
Gondy, clever physiognomist as he was, had no suspicion of its being
more than a simple warning to be more subdued.

The queen, on her part, thus chided, softened immediately and sat down,
and in an almost weeping voice, letting her arms fall by her side,
said:

“Pardon me, sir, and attribute this violence to what I suffer. A woman,
and consequently subject to the weaknesses of my sex, I am alarmed at
the idea of civil war; a queen, accustomed to be obeyed, I am excited
at the first opposition.”

“Madame,” replied Gondy, bowing, “your majesty is mistaken in
qualifying my sincere advice as opposition. Your majesty has none but
submissive and respectful subjects. It is not the queen with whom the
people are displeased; they ask for Broussel and are only too happy, if
you release him to them, to live under your government.”

Mazarin, who at the words, “It is not the queen with whom the people
are displeased,” had pricked up his ears, thinking that the coadjutor
was about to speak of the cries, “Down with Mazarin,” and pleased with
Gondy’s suppression of this fact, he said with his sweetest voice and
his most gracious expression:

“Madame, credit the coadjutor, who is one of the most able politicians
we have; the first available cardinal’s hat seems to belong already to
his noble brow.”

“Ah! how much you have need of me, cunning rogue!” thought Gondy.

(“And what will he promise us?” said D’Artagnan. “Peste, if he is
giving away hats like that, Porthos, let us look out and both demand a
regiment to-morrow. Corbleu! let the civil war last but one year and I
will have a constable’s sword gilt for me.”

“And for me?” put in Porthos.

“For you? I will give you the baton of the Marechal de la Meilleraie,
who does not seem to be much in favor just now.”)

“And so, sir,” said the queen, “you are seriously afraid of a public
tumult.”

“Seriously,” said Gondy, astonished at not having further advanced; “I
fear that when the torrent has broken its embankment it will cause
fearful destruction.”

“And I,” said the queen, “think that in such a case other embankments
should be raised to oppose it. Go; I will reflect.”

Gondy looked at Mazarin, astonished, and Mazarin approached the queen
to speak to her, but at this moment a frightful tumult arose from the
square of the Palais Royal.

Gondy smiled, the queen’s color rose and Mazarin grew even paler.

“What is that again?” he asked.

At this moment Comminges rushed into the room.

“Pardon, your majesty,” he cried, “but the people have dashed the
sentinels against the gates and they are now forcing the doors; what
are your commands?”

“Listen, madame,” said Gondy.

The moaning of waves, the noise of thunder, the roaring of a volcano,
cannot be compared with the tempest of cries heard at that moment.

“What are my commands?” said the queen.

“Yes, for time presses.”

“How many men have you about the Palais Royal?”

“Six hundred.”

“Place a hundred around the king and with the remainder sweep away this
mob for me.”

“Madame,” cried Mazarin, “what are you about?”

“Go!” said the queen.

Comminges went out with a soldier’s passive obedience.

At this moment a monstrous battering was heard. One of the gates began
to yield.

“Oh! madame,” cried Mazarin, “you have ruined us all—the king, yourself
and me.”

At this cry from the soul of the frightened cardinal, Anne became
alarmed in her turn and would have recalled Comminges.

“It is too late,” said Mazarin, tearing his hair, “too late!”

The gale had given way. Hoarse shouts were heard from the excited mob.
D’Artagnan put his hand to his sword, motioning to Porthos to follow
his example.

“Save the queen!” cried Mazarin to the coadjutor.

Gondy sprang to the window and threw it open; he recognized Louvieres
at the head of a troop of about three or four thousand men.

“Not a step further,” he shouted, “the queen is signing!”

“What are you saying?” asked the queen.

“The truth, madame,” said Mazarin, placing a pen and a paper before
her, “you must;” then he added: “Sign, Anne, I implore you—I command
you.”

The queen fell into a chair, took the pen and signed.

The people, kept back by Louvieres, had not made another step forward;
but the awful murmuring, which indicates an angry people, continued.

The queen had written, “The keeper of the prison at Saint Germain will
set Councillor Broussel at liberty;” and she had signed it.

The coadjutor, whose eyes devoured her slightest movements, seized the
paper immediately the signature had been affixed to it, returned to the
window and waved it in his hand.

“This is the order,” he said.

All Paris seemed to shout with joy, and then the air resounded with the
cries of “Long live Broussel!” “Long live the coadjutor!”

“Long live the queen!” cried De Gondy; but the cries which replied to
his were poor and few, and perhaps he had but uttered it to make Anne
of Austria sensible of her weakness.

“And now that you have obtained what you want, go,” said she, “Monsieur
de Gondy.”

“Whenever her majesty has need of me,” replied the coadjutor, bowing,
“her majesty knows I am at her command.”

“Ah, cursed priest!” cried Anne, when he had retired, stretching out
her arm to the scarcely closed door, “one day I will make you drink the
dregs of the atrocious gall you have poured out on me to-day.”

Mazarin wished to approach her. “Leave me!” she exclaimed; “you are not
a man!” and she went out of the room.

“It is you who are not a woman,” muttered Mazarin.

Then, after a moment of reverie, he remembered where he had left
D’Artagnan and Porthos and that they must have overheard everything. He
knit his brows and went direct to the tapestry, which he pushed aside.
The closet was empty.

At the queen’s last word, D’Artagnan had dragged Porthos into the
gallery. Thither Mazarin went in his turn and found the two friends
walking up and down.

“Why did you leave the closet, Monsieur d’Artagnan?” asked the
cardinal.

“Because,” replied D’Artagnan, “the queen desired every one to leave
and I thought that this command was intended for us as well as for the
rest.”

“And you have been here since——”

“About a quarter of an hour,” said D’Artagnan, motioning to Porthos not
to contradict him.

Mazarin saw the sign and remained convinced that D’Artagnan had seen
and heard everything; but he was pleased with his falsehood.

“Decidedly, Monsieur d’Artagnan, you are the man I have been seeking.
You may reckon upon me and so may your friend.” Then bowing to the two
musketeers with his most gracious smile, he re-entered his closet more
calmly, for on the departure of De Gondy the uproar had ceased as
though by enchantment.




Chapter XLIX.
Misfortune refreshes the Memory.


Anne of Austria returned to her oratory, furious.

“What!” she cried, wringing her beautiful hands, “What! the people have
seen Monsieur de Condé, a prince of the blood royal, arrested by my
mother-in-law, Maria de Medicis; they saw my mother-in-law, their
former regent, expelled by the cardinal; they saw Monsieur de Vendome,
that is to say, the son of Henry IV., a prisoner at Vincennes; and
whilst these great personages were imprisoned, insulted and threatened,
they said nothing; and now for a Broussel—good God! what, then, is to
become of royalty?”

The queen unconsciously touched here upon the exciting question. The
people had made no demonstration for the princes, but they had risen
for Broussel; they were taking the part of a plebeian and in defending
Broussel they instinctively felt they were defending themselves.

During this time Mazarin walked up and down the study, glancing from
time to time at his beautiful Venetian mirror, starred in every
direction. “Ah!” he said, “it is sad, I know well, to be forced to
yield thus; but, pshaw! we shall have our revenge. What matters it
about Broussel—it is a name, not a thing.”

Mazarin, clever politician as he was, was for once mistaken; Broussel
was a thing, not a name.

The next morning, therefore, when Broussel made his entrance into Paris
in a large carriage, having his son Louvieres at his side and Friquet
behind the vehicle, the people threw themselves in his way and cries of
“Long live Broussel!” “Long live our father!” resounded from all parts
and was death to Mazarin’s ears; and the cardinal’s spies brought bad
news from every direction, which greatly agitated the minister, but was
calmly received by the queen. The latter seemed to be maturing in her
mind some great stroke, a fact which increased the uneasiness of the
cardinal, who knew the proud princess and dreaded much the
determination of Anne of Austria.

The coadjutor returned to parliament more a monarch than king, queen,
and cardinal, all three together. By his advice a decree from
parliament summoned the citizens to lay down their arms and demolish
the barricades. They now knew that it required but one hour to take up
arms again and one night to reconstruct the barricades.

Rochefort had returned to the Chevalier d’Humieres his fifty horsemen,
less two, missing at roll call. But the chevalier was himself at heart
a Frondist and would hear nothing said of compensation.

The mendicant had gone to his old place on the steps of Saint Eustache
and was again distributing holy water with one hand and asking alms
with the other. No one could suspect that those two hands had been
engaged with others in drawing out from the social edifice the keystone
of royalty.

Louvieres was proud and satisfied; he had taken revenge on Mazarin and
had aided in his father’s deliverance from prison. His name had been
mentioned as a name of terror at the Palais Royal. Laughingly he said
to the councillor, restored to his family:

“Do you think, father, that if now I should ask for a company the queen
would give it to me?”

D’Artagnan profited by this interval of calm to send away Raoul, whom
he had great difficulty in keeping shut up during the riot, and who
wished positively to strike a blow for one party or the other. Raoul
had offered some opposition at first; but D’Artagnan made use of the
Comte de la Fere’s name, and after paying a visit to Madame de
Chevreuse, Raoul started to rejoin the army.

Rochefort alone was dissatisfied with the termination of affairs. He
had written to the Duc de Beaufort to come and the duke was about to
arrive, and he would find Paris tranquil. He went to the coadjutor to
consult with him whether it would not be better to send word to the
duke to stop on the road, but Gondy reflected for a moment, and then
said:

“Let him continue his journey.”

“All is not then over?” asked Rochefort.

“My dear count, we have only just begun.”

“What induces you to think so?”

“The knowledge that I have of the queen’s heart; she will not rest
contented beaten.”

“Is she, then, preparing for a stroke?”

“I hope so.”

“Come, let us see what you know.”

“I know that she has written to the prince to return in haste from the
army.”

“Ah! ha!” said Rochefort, “you are right. We must let Monsieur de
Beaufort come.”

In fact, the evening after this conversation the report was circulated
that the Prince de Condé had arrived. It was a very simple, natural
circumstance and yet it created a profound sensation. It was said that
Madame de Longueville, for whom the prince had more than a brother’s
affection and in whom he had confided, had been indiscreet. His
confidence had unveiled the sinister project of the queen.

Even on the night of the prince’s return, some citizens, bolder than
the rest, such as the sheriffs, captains and the quartermaster, went
from house to house among their friends, saying:

“Why do we not take the king and place him in the Hotel de Ville? It is
a shame to leave him to be educated by our enemies, who will give him
evil counsel; whereas, brought up by the coadjutor, for instance, he
would imbibe national principles and love his people.”

That night the question was secretly agitated and on the morrow the
gray and black cloaks, the patrols of armed shop-people, and the bands
of mendicants reappeared.

The queen had passed the night in lonely conference with the prince,
who had entered the oratory at midnight and did not leave till five
o’clock in the morning.

At five o’clock Anne went to the cardinal’s room. If she had not yet
taken any repose, he at least was already up. Six days had already
passed out of the ten he had asked from Mordaunt; he was therefore
occupied in revising his reply to Cromwell, when some one knocked
gently at the door of communication with the queen’s apartments. Anne
of Austria alone was permitted to enter by that door. The cardinal
therefore rose to open it.

The queen was in a morning gown, but it became her still; for, like
Diana of Poictiers and Ninon, Anne of Austria enjoyed the privilege of
remaining ever beautiful; nevertheless, this morning she looked
handsomer than usual, for her eyes had all the sparkle inward
satisfaction adds to expression.

“What is the matter, madame?” said Mazarin, uneasily. “You seem
secretly elated.”

“Yes, Giulio,” she said, “proud and happy; for I have found the means
of strangling this hydra.”

“You are a great politician, my queen,” said Mazarin; “let us hear the
means.” And he hid what he had written by sliding the letter under a
folio of blank paper.

“You know,” said the queen, “that they want to take the king away from
me?”

“Alas! yes, and to hang me.”

“They shall not have the king.”

“Nor hang me.”

“Listen. I want to carry off my son from them, with yourself. I wish
that this event, which on the day it is known will completely change
the aspect of affairs, should be accomplished without the knowledge of
any others but yourself, myself, and a third person.”

“And who is this third person?”

“Monsieur le Prince.”

“He has come, then, as they told me?”

“Last evening.”

“And you have seen him?”

“He has just left me.”

“And will he aid this project?”

“The plan is his own.”

“And Paris?”

“He will starve it out and force it to surrender at discretion.”

“The plan is not wanting in grandeur; I see but one impediment.”

“What is it?”

“Impossibility.”

“A senseless word. Nothing is impossible.”

“On paper.”

“In execution. We have money?”

“A little,” said Mazarin, trembling, lest Anne should ask to draw upon
his purse.

“Troops?”

“Five or six thousand men.”

“Courage?”

“Plenty.”

“Then the thing is easy. Oh! do think of it, Giulio! Paris, this odious
Paris, waking up one morning without queen or king, surrounded,
besieged, famished—having for its sole resource its stupid parliament
and their coadjutor with crooked limbs!”

“Charming! charming!” said Mazarin. “I can imagine the effect, I do not
see the means.”

“I will find the means myself.”

“You are aware it will be war, civil war, furious, devouring,
implacable?”

“Oh! yes, yes, war,” said Anne of Austria. “Yes, I will reduce this
rebellious city to ashes. I will extinguish the fire with blood! I will
perpetuate the crime and punishment by making a frightful example.
Paris!; I—I detest, I loathe it!”

“Very fine, Anne. You are now sanguinary; but take care. We are not in
the time of Malatesta and Castruccio Castracani. You will get yourself
decapitated, my beautiful queen, and that would be a pity.”

“You laugh.”

“Faintly. It is dangerous to go to war with a nation. Look at your
brother monarch, Charles I. He is badly off, very badly.”

“We are in France, and I am Spanish.”

“So much the worse; I had much rather you were French and myself also;
they would hate us both less.”

“Nevertheless, you consent?”

“Yes, if the thing be possible.”

“It is; it is I who tell you so; make preparations for departure.”

“I! I am always prepared to go, only, as you know, I never do go, and
perhaps shall go this time as little as before.”

“In short, if I go, will you go too?”

“I will try.”

“You torment me, Giulio, with your fears; and what are you afraid of,
then?”

“Of many things.”

“What are they?”

Mazarin’s face, smiling as it was, became clouded.

“Anne,” said he, “you are but a woman and as a woman you may insult men
at your ease, knowing that you can do it with impunity. You accuse me
of fear; I have not so much as you have, since I do not fly as you do.
Against whom do they cry out? is it against you or against myself? Whom
would they hang, yourself or me? Well, I can weather the storm—I, whom,
notwithstanding, you tax with fear—not with bravado, that is not my
way; but I am firm. Imitate me. Make less hubbub and think more deeply.
You cry very loud, you end by doing nothing; you talk of flying——”

Mazarin shrugged his shoulders and taking the queen’s hand led her to
the window.

“Look!” he said.

“Well?” said the queen, blinded by her obstinacy.

“Well, what do you see from this window? If I am not mistaken those are
citizens, helmeted and mailed, armed with good muskets, as in the time
of the League, and whose eyes are so intently fixed on this window that
they will see you if you raise that curtain much; and now come to the
other side—what do you see? Creatures of the people, armed with
halberds, guarding your doors. You will see the same at every opening
from this palace to which I should lead you. Your doors are guarded,
the airholes of your cellars are guarded, and I could say to you, as
that good La Ramee said to me of the Duc de Beaufort, you must be
either bird or mouse to get out.”

“He did get out, nevertheless.”

“Do you think of escaping in the same way?”

“I am a prisoner, then?”

“Parbleu!” said Mazarin, “I have been proving it to you this last
hour.”

And he quietly resumed his dispatch at the place where he had been
interrupted.

Anne, trembling with anger and scarlet with humiliation, left the room,
shutting the door violently after her. Mazarin did not even turn
around. When once more in her own apartment Anne fell into a chair and
wept; then suddenly struck with an idea:

“I am saved!” she exclaimed, rising; “oh, yes! yes! I know a man who
will find the means of taking me from Paris, a man I have too long
forgotten.” Then falling into a reverie, she added, however, with an
expression of joy, “Ungrateful woman that I am, for twenty years I have
forgotten this man, whom I ought to have made a marechal of France. My
mother-in-law expended gold, caresses, dignities on Concini, who ruined
her; the king made Vitry marechal of France for an assassination: while
I have left in obscurity, in poverty, the noble D’Artagnan, who saved
me!”

And running to a table, on which were paper, pens and ink, she hastily
began to write.




Chapter L.
The Interview.


It had been D’Artagnan’s practice, ever since the riots, to sleep in
the same room as Porthos, and on this eventful morning he was still
there, sleeping, and dreaming that a yellow cloud had overspread the
sky and was raining gold pieces into his hat, which he held out till it
was overflowing with pistoles. As for Porthos, he dreamed that the
panels of his carriage were not capacious enough to contain the
armorial bearings he had ordered to be painted on them. They were both
aroused at seven o’clock by the entrance of an unliveried servant, who
brought a letter for D’Artagnan.

“From whom?” asked the Gascon.

“From the queen,” replied the servant.

“Ho!” said Porthos, raising himself in his bed; “what does she say?”

D’Artagnan requested the servant to wait in the next room and when the
door was closed he sprang up from his bed and read rapidly, whilst
Porthos looked at him with starting eyes, not daring to ask a single
question.

“Friend Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, handing the letter to him, “this
time, at least, you are sure of your title of baron, and I of my
captaincy. Read for yourself and judge.”

Porthos took the letter and with a trembling voice read the following
words:

“The queen wishes to speak to Monsieur d’Artagnan, who must follow the
bearer.”

“Well!” exclaimed Porthos; “I see nothing in that very extraordinary.”

“But I see much that is very extraordinary in it,” replied D’Artagnan.
“It is evident, by their sending for me, that matters are becoming
complicated. Just reflect a little what an agitation the queen’s mind
must be in for her to have remembered me after twenty years.”

“It is true,” said Porthos.

“Sharpen your sword, baron, load your pistols, and give some corn to
the horses, for I will answer for it, something lightning-like will
happen ere to-morrow.”

“But, stop; do you think it can be a trap that they are laying for us?”
suggested Porthos, incessantly thinking how his greatness must be
irksome to inferior people.

“If it is a snare,” replied D’Artagnan, “I shall scent it out, be
assured. If Mazarin is an Italian, I am a Gascon.”

And D’Artagnan dressed himself in an instant.

Whilst Porthos, still in bed, was hooking on his cloak for him, a
second knock at the door was heard.

“Come in,” exclaimed D’Artagnan; and another servant entered.

“From His Eminence, Cardinal Mazarin,” presenting a letter.

D’Artagnan looked at Porthos.

“A complicated affair,” said Porthos; “where will you begin?”

“It is arranged capitally; his eminence expects me in half an hour.”

“Good.”

“My friend,” said D’Artagnan, turning to the servant, “tell his
eminence that in half an hour I shall be at his command.”

“It is very fortunate,” resumed the Gascon, when the valet had retired,
“that he did not meet the other one.”

“Do you not think that they have sent for you, both for the same
thing?”

“I do not think it, I am certain of it.”

“Quick, quick, D’Artagnan. Remember that the queen awaits you, and
after the queen, the cardinal, and after the cardinal, myself.”

D’Artagnan summoned Anne of Austria’s servant and signified that he was
ready to follow him into the queen’s presence.

The servant conducted him by the Rue des Petits Champs and turning to
the left entered the little garden gate leading into the Rue Richelieu;
then they gained the private staircase and D’Artagnan was ushered into
the oratory. A certain emotion, for which he could not account, made
the lieutenant’s heart beat: he had no longer the assurance of youth;
experience had taught him the importance of past events. Formerly he
would have approached the queen as a young man who bends before a
woman; but now it was a different thing; he answered her summons as an
humble soldier obeys an illustrious general.

The silence of the oratory was at last disturbed by the slight rustling
of silk, and D’Artagnan started when he perceived the tapestry raised
by a white hand, which, by its form, its color and its beauty he
recognized as that royal hand which had one day been presented to him
to kiss. The queen entered.

“It is you, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” she said, fixing a gaze full of
melancholy interest on the countenance of the officer, “and I know you
well. Look at me well in your turn. I am the queen; do you recognize
me?”

“No, madame,” replied D’Artagnan.

“But are you no longer aware,” continued Anne, giving that sweet
expression to her voice which she could do at will, “that in former
days the queen had once need of a young, brave and devoted
cavalier—that she found this cavalier—and that, although he might have
thought that she had forgotten him, she had kept a place for him in the
depths of her heart?”

“No, madame, I was ignorant of that,” said the musketeer.

“So much the worse, sir,” said Anne of Austria; “so much the worse, at
least for the queen, for to-day she has need of the same courage and
the same devotion.”

“What!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, “does the queen, surrounded as she is by
such devoted servants, such wise counselors, men, in short, so great by
merit or position—does she deign to cast her eyes on an obscure
soldier?”

Anne understood this covert reproach and was more moved than irritated
by it. She had many a time felt humiliated by the self-sacrifice and
disinterestedness shown by the Gascon gentleman. She had allowed
herself to be exceeded in generosity.

“All that you tell me of those by whom I am surrounded, Monsieur
d’Artagnan, is doubtless true,” said the queen, “but I have confidence
in you alone. I know that you belong to the cardinal, but belong to me
as well, and I will take upon myself the making of your fortune. Come,
will you do to-day what formerly the gentleman you do not know did for
the queen?”

“I will do everything your majesty commands,” replied D’Artagnan.

The queen reflected for a moment and then, seeing the cautious demeanor
of the musketeer:

“Perhaps you like repose?” she said.

“I do not know, for I have never had it, madame.”

“Have you any friends?”

“I had three, two of whom have left Paris, to go I know not where. One
alone is left to me, but he is one of those known, I believe, to the
cavalier of whom your majesty did me the honor to speak.”

“Very good,” said the queen; “you and your friend are worth an army.”

“What am I to do, madame?”

“Return at five o’clock and I will tell you; but do not breathe to a
living soul, sir, the rendezvous which I give you.”

“No, madame.”

“Swear it upon the cross.”

“Madame, I have never been false to my word; when I say I will not do a
thing, I mean it.”

The queen, although astonished at this language, to which she was not
accustomed from her courtiers, argued from it a happy omen of the zeal
with which D’Artagnan would serve her in the accomplishment of her
project. It was one of the Gascon’s artifices to hide his deep cunning
occasionally under an appearance of rough loyalty.

“Has the queen any further commands for me now?” asked D’Artagnan.

“No, sir,” replied Anne of Austria, “and you may retire until the time
that I mentioned to you.”

D’Artagnan bowed and went out.

“Diable!” he exclaimed when the door was shut, “they seem to have the
greatest need of me just now.”

Then, as the half hour had already glided by, he crossed the gallery
and knocked at the cardinal’s door.

Bernouin introduced him.

“I come for your commands, my lord,” he said.

And according to his custom D’Artagnan glanced rapidly around and
remarked that Mazarin had a sealed letter before him. But it was so
placed on the desk that he could not see to whom it was addressed.

“You come from the queen?” said Mazarin, looking fixedly at D’Artagnan.

“I! my lord—who told you that?”

“Nobody, but I know it.”

“I regret infinitely to tell you, my lord, that you are mistaken,”
replied the Gascon, impudently, firm to the promise he had just made to
Anne of Austria.

“I opened the door of the ante-room myself and I saw you enter at the
end of the corridor.”

“Because I was shown up the private stairs.”

“How so?”

“I know not; it must have been a mistake.”

Mazarin was aware that it was not easy to make D’Artagnan reveal
anything he was desirous of hiding, so he gave up, for the time, the
discovery of the mystery the Gascon was concealing.

“Let us speak of my affairs,” said Mazarin, “since you will tell me
naught of yours. Are you fond of traveling?”

“My life has been passed on the high road.”

“Would anything retain you particularly in Paris?”

“Nothing but an order from a superior would retain me in Paris.”

“Very well. Here is a letter, which must be taken to its address.”

“To its address, my lord? But it has none.”

In fact, the side of the letter opposite the seal was blank.

“I must tell you,” resumed Mazarin, “that it is in a double envelope.”

“I understand; and I am to take off the first one when I have reached a
certain place?”

“Just so, take it and go. You have a friend, Monsieur du Vallon, whom I
like much; let him accompany you.”

“The devil!” said D’Artagnan to himself. “He knows that we overheard
his conversation yesterday and he wants to get us away from Paris.”

“Do you hesitate?” asked Mazarin.

“No, my lord, and I will set out at once. There is one thing only which
I must request.”

“What is it? Speak.”

“That your eminence will go at once to the queen.”

“What for?”

“Merely to say these words: ‘I am going to send Monsieur d’Artagnan
away and I wish him to set out directly.’”

“I told you,” said Mazarin, “that you had seen the queen.”

“I had the honor of saying to your eminence that there had been some
mistake.”

“What is the meaning of that?”

“May I venture to repeat my prayer to your eminence?”

“Very well; I will go. Wait here for me.” And looking attentively
around him, to see if he had left any of his keys in his closets,
Mazarin went out. Ten minutes elapsed, during which D’Artagnan made
every effort to read through the first envelope what was written on the
second. But he did not succeed.

Mazarin returned, pale, and evidently thoughtful. He seated himself at
his desk and D’Artagnan proceeded to examine his face, as he had just
examined the letter he held, but the envelope which covered his
countenance appeared as impenetrable as that which covered the letter.

“Ah!” thought the Gascon; “he looks displeased. Can it be with me? He
meditates. Is it about sending me to the Bastile? All very fine, my
lord, but at the very first hint you give of such a thing I will
strangle you and become Frondist. I should be carried home in triumph
like Monsieur Broussel and Athos would proclaim me the French Brutus.
It would be exceedingly droll.”

The Gascon, with his vivid imagination, had already seen the advantage
to be derived from his situation. Mazarin gave, however, no order of
the kind, but on the contrary began to be insinuating.

“You were right,” he said, “my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, and you cannot
set out yet. I beg you to return me that dispatch.”

D’Artagnan obeyed, and Mazarin ascertained that the seal was intact.

“I shall want you this evening,” he said “Return in two hours.”

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “I have an appointment in two hours which I
cannot miss.”

“Do not be uneasy,” said Mazarin; “it is the same.”

“Good!” thought D’Artagnan; “I fancied it was so.”

“Return, then, at five o’clock and bring that worthy Monsieur du Vallon
with you. Only, leave him in the ante-room, as I wish to speak to you
alone.”

D’Artagnan bowed, and thought: “Both at the same hour; both commands
alike; both at the Palais Royal. Monsieur de Gondy would pay a hundred
thousand francs for such a secret!”

“You are thoughtful,” said Mazarin, uneasily.

“Yes, I was thinking whether we ought to come armed or not.”

“Armed to the teeth!” replied Mazarin.

“Very well, my lord; it shall be so.”

D’Artagnan saluted, went out and hastened to repeat to his friend
Mazarin’s flattering promises, which gave Porthos an indescribable
happiness.




Chapter LI.
The Flight.


When D’Artagnan returned to the Palais Royal at five o’clock, it
presented, in spite of the excitement which reigned in the town, a
spectacle of the greatest rejoicing. Nor was that surprising. The queen
had restored Broussel and Blancmesnil to the people and had therefore
nothing to fear, since the people had nothing more just then to ask
for. The return, also, of the conqueror of Lens was the pretext for
giving a grand banquet. The princes and princesses were invited and
their carriages had crowded the court since noon; then after dinner the
queen was to have a play in her apartment. Anne of Austria had never
appeared more brilliant than on that day—radiant with grace and wit.
Mazarin disappeared as they rose from table. He found D’Artagnan
waiting for him already at his post in the ante-room.

The cardinal advanced to him with a smile and taking him by the hand
led him into his study.

“My dear M. d’Artagnan,” said the minister, sitting down, “I am about
to give you the greatest proof of confidence that a minister can give
an officer.”

“I hope,” said D’Artagnan, bowing, “that you give it, my lord, without
hesitation and with the conviction that I am worthy of it.”

“More worthy than any one in Paris my dear friend; therefore I apply to
you. We are about to leave this evening,” continued Mazarin. “My dear
M. d’Artagnan, the welfare of the state is deposited in your hands.” He
paused.

“Explain yourself, my lord, I am listening.”

“The queen has resolved to make a little excursion with the king to
Saint Germain.”

“Aha!” said D’Artagnan, “that is to say, the queen wishes to leave
Paris.”

“A woman’s caprice—you understand.”

“Yes, I understand perfectly,” said D’Artagnan.

“It was for this she summoned you this morning and that she told you to
return at five o’clock.”

“Was it worth while to wish me to swear this morning that I would
mention the appointment to no one?” muttered D’Artagnan. “Oh, women!
women! whether queens or not, they are always the same.”

“Do you disapprove of this journey, my dear M. d’Artagnan?” asked
Mazarin, anxiously.

“I, my lord?” said D’Artagnan; “why should I?”

“Because you shrug your shoulders.”

“It is a way I have of speaking to myself. I neither approve nor
disapprove, my lord; I merely await your commands.”

“Good; it is you, accordingly, that I have pitched upon to conduct the
king and the queen to Saint Germain.”

“Liar!” thought D’Artagnan.

“You see, therefore,” continued the cardinal, perceiving D’Artagnan’s
composure, “that, as I have told you, the welfare of the state is
placed in your hands.”

“Yes, my lord, and I feel the whole responsibility of such a charge.”

“You accept, however?”

“I always accept.”

“Do you think the thing possible?”

“Everything is possible.”

“Shall you be attacked on the road?”

“Probably.”

“And what will you do in that case?”

“I shall pass through those who attack me.”

“And suppose you cannot pass through them?”

“So much the worse for them; I shall pass over them.”

“And you will place the king and queen in safety also, at Saint
Germain?”

“Yes.”

“On your life?”

“On my life.”

“You are a hero, my friend,” said Mazarin, gazing at the musketeer with
admiration.

D’Artagnan smiled.

“And I?” asked Mazarin, after a moment’s silence.

“How? and you, my lord?”

“If I wish to leave?”

“That would be much more difficult.”

“Why so?”

“Your eminence might be recognized.”

“Even under this disguise?” asked Mazarin, raising a cloak which
covered an arm-chair, upon which lay a complete dress for an officer,
of pearl-gray and red, entirely embroidered with silver.

“If your eminence is disguised it will be almost easy.”

“Ah!” said Mazarin, breathing more freely.

“But it will be necessary for your eminence to do what the other day
you declared you should have done in our place—cry, ‘Down with
Mazarin!’”

“I will: ‘Down with Mazarin’”

“In French, in good French, my lord, take care of your accent; they
killed six thousand Angevins in Sicily because they pronounced Italian
badly. Take care that the French do not take their revenge on you for
the Sicilian vespers.”

“I will do my best.”

“The streets are full of armed men,” continued D’Artagnan. “Are you
sure that no one is aware of the queen’s project?”

Mazarin reflected.

“This affair would give a fine opportunity for a traitor, my lord; the
chance of being attacked would be an excuse for everything.”

Mazarin shuddered, but he reflected that a man who had the least
intention to betray would not warn first.

“And therefore,” added he, quietly, “I have not confidence in every
one; the proof of which is, that I have fixed upon you to escort me.”

“Shall you not go with the queen?”

“No,” replied Mazarin.

“Then you will start after the queen?”

“No,” said Mazarin again.

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan, who began to understand.

“Yes,” continued the cardinal. “I have my plan. With the queen I double
her risk; after the queen her departure would double mine; then, the
court once safe, I might be forgotten. The great are often ungrateful.”

“Very true,” said D’Artagnan, fixing his eyes, in spite of himself, on
the queen’s diamond, which Mazarin wore on his finger. Mazarin followed
the direction of his eyes and gently turned the hoop of the ring
inside.

“I wish,” he said, with his cunning smile, “to prevent them from being
ungrateful to me.”

“It is but Christian charity,” replied D’Artagnan, “not to lead one’s
neighbors into temptation.”

“It is exactly for that reason,” said Mazarin, “that I wish to start
before them.”

D’Artagnan smiled—he was just the man to understand the astute Italian.
Mazarin saw the smile and profited by the moment.

“You will begin, therefore, by taking me first out of Paris, will you
not, my dear M. d’Artagnan?”

“A difficult commission, my lord,” replied D’Artagnan, resuming his
serious manner.

“But,” said Mazarin, “you did not make so many difficulties with regard
to the king and queen.”

“The king and the queen are my king and queen,” replied the musketeer,
“my life is theirs and I must give it for them. If they ask it what
have I to say?”

“That is true,” murmured Mazarin, in a low tone, “but as thy life is
not mine I suppose I must buy it, must I not?” and sighing deeply he
began to turn the hoop of his ring outside again. D’Artagnan smiled.
These two men met at one point and that was, cunning; had they been
actuated equally by courage, the one would have done great things for
the other.

“But, also,” said Mazarin, “you must understand that if I ask this
service from you it is with the intention of being grateful.”

“Is it still only an intention, your eminence?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Stay,” said Mazarin, drawing the ring from his finger, “my dear
D’Artagnan, there is a diamond which belonged to you formerly, it is
but just it should return to you; take it, I pray.”

D’Artagnan spared Mazarin the trouble of insisting, and after looking
to see if the stone was the same and assuring himself of the purity of
its water, he took it and passed it on his finger with indescribable
pleasure.

“I valued it much,” said Mazarin, giving a last look at it;
“nevertheless, I give it to you with great pleasure.”

“And I, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, “accept it as it is given. Come, let
us speak of your little affairs. You wish to leave before everybody and
at what hour?”

“At ten o’clock.”

“And the queen, at what time is it her wish to start?”

“At midnight.”

“Then it is possible. I can get you out of Paris and leave you beyond
the barriere, and can return for her.”

“Capital; but how will you get me out of Paris?”

“Oh! as to that, you must leave it to me.”

“I give you absolute power, therefore; take as large an escort as you
like.”

D’Artagnan shook his head.

“It seems to me, however,” said Mazarin, “the safest method.”

“Yes, for you, my lord, but not for the queen; you must leave it to me
and give me the entire direction of the undertaking.”

“Nevertheless——”

“Or find some one else,” continued D’Artagnan, turning his back.

“Oh!” muttered Mazarin, “I do believe he is going off with the diamond!
M. d’Artagnan, my dear M. d’Artagnan,” he called out in a coaxing
voice, “will you answer for everything?”

“I will answer for nothing. I will do my best.”

“Well, then, let us go—I must trust to you.”

“It is very fortunate,” said D’Artagnan to himself.

“You will be here at half-past nine.”

“And I shall find your eminence ready?”

“Certainly, quite ready.”

“Well, then, it is a settled thing; and now, my lord, will you obtain
for me an audience with the queen?”

“For what purpose?”

“I wish to receive her majesty’s commands from her own lips.”

“She desired me to give them to you.”

“She may have forgotten something.”

“You really wish to see her?”

“It is indispensable, my lord.”

Mazarin hesitated for one instant, but D’Artagnan was firm.

“Come, then,” said the minister; “I will conduct you to her, but
remember, not one word of our conversation.”

“What has passed between us concerns ourselves alone, my lord,” replied
D’Artagnan.

“Swear to be mute.”

“I never swear, my lord, I say yes or no; and, as I am a gentleman, I
keep my word.”

“Come, then, I see that I must trust unreservedly to you.”

“Believe me, my lord, it will be your best plan.”

“Come,” said Mazarin, conducting D’Artagnan into the queen’s oratory
and desiring him to wait there. He did not wait long, for in five
minutes the queen entered in full gala costume. Thus dressed she
scarcely appeared thirty-five years of age. She was still exceedingly
handsome.

“It is you, Monsieur D’Artagnan,” she said, smiling graciously; “I
thank you for having insisted on seeing me.”

“I ought to ask your majesty’s pardon, but I wished to receive your
commands from your own mouth.”

“Do you accept the commission which I have intrusted to you?”

“With gratitude.”

“Very well, be here at midnight.”

“I will not fail.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued the queen, “I know your
disinterestedness too well to speak of my own gratitude at such a
moment, but I swear to you that I shall not forget this second service
as I forgot the first.”

“Your majesty is free to forget or to remember, as it pleases you; and
I know not what you mean,” said D’Artagnan, bowing.

“Go, sir,” said the queen, with her most bewitching smile, “go and
return at midnight.”

And D’Artagnan retired, but as he passed out he glanced at the curtain
through which the queen had entered and at the bottom of the tapestry
he remarked the tip of a velvet slipper.

“Good,” thought he; “Mazarin has been listening to discover whether I
betrayed him. In truth, that Italian puppet does not deserve the
services of an honest man.”

D’Artagnan was not less exact to his appointment and at half-past nine
o’clock he entered the ante-room.

He found the cardinal dressed as an officer, and he looked very well in
that costume, which, as we have already said, he wore elegantly; only
he was very pale and trembled slightly.

“Quite alone?” he asked.

“Yes, my lord.”

“And that worthy Monsieur du Vallon, are we not to enjoy his society?”

“Certainly, my lord; he is waiting in his carriage at the gate of the
garden of the Palais Royal.”

“And we start in his carriage, then?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“And with us no other escort but you two?”

“Is it not enough? One of us would suffice.”

“Really, my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal, “your
coolness startles me.”

“I should have thought, on the contrary, that it ought to have inspired
you with confidence.”

“And Bernouin—do I not take him with me?”

“There is no room for him, he will rejoin your eminence.”

“Let us go,” said Mazarin, “since everything must be done as you wish.”

“My lord, there is time to draw back,” said D’Artagnan, “and your
eminence is perfectly free.”

“Not at all, not at all,” said Mazarin; “let us be off.”

And so they descended the private stair, Mazarin leaning on the arm of
D’Artagnan a hand the musketeer felt trembling. At last, after crossing
the courts of the Palais Royal, where there still remained some of the
conveyances of late guests, they entered the garden and reached the
little gate. Mazarin attempted to open it by a key which he took from
his pocket, but with such shaking fingers that he could not find the
keyhole.

“Give it to me,” said D’Artagnan, who when the gate was open deposited
the key in his pocket, reckoning upon returning by that gate.

The steps were already down and the door open. Mousqueton stood at the
door and Porthos was inside the carriage.

“Mount, my lord,” said D’Artagnan to Mazarin, who sprang into the
carriage without waiting for a second bidding. D’Artagnan followed him,
and Mousqueton, having closed the door, mounted behind the carriage
with many groans. He had made some difficulties about going, under
pretext that he still suffered from his wound, but D’Artagnan had said
to him:

“Remain if you like, my dear Monsieur Mouston, but I warn you that
Paris will be burnt down to-night;” upon which Mousqueton had declared,
without asking anything further, that he was ready to follow his master
and Monsieur d’Artagnan to the end of the world.

The carriage started at a measured pace, without betraying by the
slightest sign that it contained people in a hurry. The cardinal wiped
his forehead with his handkerchief and looked around him. On his left
was Porthos, whilst D’Artagnan was on his right; each guarded a door
and served as a rampart to him on either side. Before him, on the front
seat, lay two pairs of pistols—one in front of Porthos and the other of
D’Artagnan. About a hundred paces from the Palais Royal a patrol
stopped the carriage.

“Who goes?” asked the captain.

“Mazarin!” replied D’Artagnan, bursting into a laugh. The cardinal’s
hair stood on end. But the joke appeared an excellent one to the
citizens, who, seeing the conveyance without escort and unarmed, would
never have believed in the possibility of so great an imprudence.

“A good journey to ye,” they cried, allowing it to pass.

“Hem!” said D’Artagnan, “what does my lord think of that reply?”

“Man of talent!” cried Mazarin.

“In truth,” said Porthos, “I understand; but now——”

About the middle of the Rue des Petits Champs they were stopped by a
second patrol.

“Who goes there?” inquired the captain of the patrol.

“Keep back, my lord,” said D’Artagnan. And Mazarin buried himself so
far behind the two friends that he disappeared, completely hidden
between them.

“Who goes there?” cried the same voice, impatiently whilst D’Artagnan
perceived that they had rushed to the horses’ heads. But putting his
head out of the carriage:

“Eh! Planchet,” said he.

The chief approached, and it was indeed Planchet; D’Artagnan had
recognized the voice of his old servant.

“How, sir!” said Planchet, “is it you?”

“Eh! mon Dieu! yes, my good friend, this worthy Porthos has just
received a sword wound and I am taking him to his country house at
Saint Cloud.”

“Oh! really,” said Planchet.

“Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “if you can still speak, say a word, my
dear Porthos, to this good Planchet.”

“Planchet, my friend,” said Porthos, in a melancholy voice, “I am very
ill; should you meet a doctor you will do me a favor by sending him to
me.”

“Oh! good Heaven,” said Planchet, “what a misfortune! and how did it
happen?”

“I will tell you all about it,” replied Mousqueton.

Porthos uttered a deep groan.

“Make way for us, Planchet,” said D’Artagnan in a whisper to him, “or
he will not arrive alive; the lungs are attacked, my friend.”

Planchet shook his head with the air of a man who says, “In that case
things look ill.” Then he exclaimed, turning to his men:

“Let them pass; they are friends.”

The carriage resumed its course, and Mazarin, who had held his breath,
ventured to breathe again.

“Bricconi!” muttered he.

A few steps in advance of the gate of Saint Honore they met a third
troop; this latter party was composed of ill-looking fellows, who
resembled bandits more than anything else; they were the men of the
beggar of Saint Eustache.

“Attention, Porthos!” cried D’Artagnan.

Porthos placed his hand on the pistols.

“What is it?” asked Mazarin.

“My lord, I think we are in bad company.”

A man advanced to the door with a kind of scythe in his hand. “Qui
vive?” he asked.

“Eh, rascal!” said D’Artagnan, “do you not recognize his highness the
prince’s carriage?”

“Prince or not,” said the man, “open. We are here to guard the gate,
and no one whom we do not know shall pass.”

“What is to be done?” said Porthos.

“Pardieu! pass,” replied D’Artagnan.

“But how?” asked Mazarin.

“Through or over; coachman, gallop on.”

The coachman raised his whip.

“Not a step further,” said the man, who appeared to be the captain, “or
I will hamstring your horses.”

“Peste!” said Porthos, “it would be a pity; animals which cost me a
hundred pistoles each.”

“I will pay you two hundred for them,” said Mazarin.

“Yes, but when once they are hamstrung, our necks will be strung next.”

“If one of them comes to my side,” asked Porthos, “must I kill him?”

“Yes, by a blow of your fist, if you can; we will not fire but at the
last extremity.”

“I can do it,” said Porthos.

“Come and open, then!” cried D’Artagnan to the man with the scythe,
taking one of the pistols up by the muzzle and preparing to strike with
the handle. And as the man approached, D’Artagnan, in order to have
more freedom for his actions, leaned half out of the door; his eyes
were fixed upon those of the mendicant, which were lighted up by a
lantern. Without doubt he recognized D’Artagnan, for he became deadly
pale; doubtless the musketeer knew him, for his hair stood up on his
head.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” he cried, falling back a step; “it is Monsieur
d’Artagnan! let him pass.”

D’Artagnan was perhaps about to reply, when a blow, similar to that of
a mallet falling on the head of an ox, was heard. The noise was caused
by Porthos, who had just knocked down his man.

D’Artagnan turned around and saw the unfortunate man upon his back
about four paces off.

“‘Sdeath!” cried he to the coachman. “Spur your horses! whip! get on!”

The coachman bestowed a heavy blow of the whip upon his horses; the
noble animals bounded forward; then cries of men who were knocked down
were heard; then a double concussion was felt, and two of the wheels
seemed to pass over a round and flexible body. There was a moment’s
silence, then the carriage cleared the gate.

“To Cours la Reine!” cried D’Artagnan to the coachman; then turning to
Mazarin he said, “Now, my lord, you can say five paters and five aves,
in thanks to Heaven for your deliverance. You are safe—you are free.”

Mazarin replied only by a groan; he could not believe in such a
miracle. Five minutes later the carriage stopped, having reached Cours
la Reine.

“Is my lord pleased with his escort?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Enchanted, monsieur,” said Mazarin, venturing his head out of one of
the windows; “and now do as much for the queen.”

“It will not be so difficult,” replied D’Artagnan, springing to the
ground. “Monsieur du Vallon, I commend his eminence to your care.”

“Be quite at ease,” said Porthos, holding out his hand, which
D’Artagnan took and shook in his.

“Oh!” cried Porthos, as if in pain.

D’Artagnan looked with surprise at his friend.

“What is the matter, then?” he asked.

“I think I have sprained my wrist,’ said Porthos.

“The devil! why, you strike like a blind or a deaf man.”

“It was necessary; my man was going to fire a pistol at me; but you—how
did you get rid of yours?”

“Oh, mine,” replied D’Artagnan, “was not a man.”

“What was it then?”

“It was an apparition.”

“And——”

“I charmed it away.”

Without further explanation D’Artagnan took the pistols which were upon
the front seat, placed them in his belt, wrapped himself in his cloak,
and not wishing to enter by the same gate as that through which they
had left, he took his way toward the Richelieu gate.




Chapter LII.
The Carriage of Monsieur le Coadjuteur.


Instead of returning, then, by the Saint Honore gate, D’Artagnan, who
had time before him, walked around and re-entered by the Porte
Richelieu. He was approached to be examined, and when it was discovered
by his plumed hat and his laced coat, that he was an officer of the
musketeers, he was surrounded, with the intention of making him cry,
“Down with Mazarin!” The demonstration did not fail to make him uneasy
at first; but when he discovered what it meant, he shouted it in such a
voice that even the most exacting were satisfied. He walked down the
Rue Richelieu, meditating how he should carry off the queen in her
turn, for to take her in a carriage bearing the arms of France was not
to be thought of, when he perceived an equipage standing at the door of
the hotel belonging to Madame de Guemenee.

He was struck by a sudden idea.

“Ah, pardieu!” he exclaimed; “that would be fair play.”

And approaching the carriage, he examined the arms on the panels and
the livery of the coachman on his box. This scrutiny was so much the
more easy, the coachman being sound asleep.

“It is, in truth, monsieur le coadjuteur’s carriage,” said D’Artagnan;
“upon my honor I begin to think that Heaven favors us.”

He mounted noiselessly into the chariot and pulled the silk cord which
was attached to the coachman’s little finger.

“To the Palais Royal,” he called out.

The coachman awoke with a start and drove off in the direction he was
desired, never doubting but that the order had come from his master.
The porter at the palace was about to close the gates, but seeing such
a handsome equipage he fancied that it was some visit of importance and
the carriage was allowed to pass and to stop beneath the porch. It was
then only the coachman perceived the grooms were not behind the
vehicle; he fancied monsieur le coadjuteur had sent them back, and
without dropping the reins he sprang from his box to open the door.
D’Artagnan, in his turn, sprang to the ground, and just at the moment
when the coachman, alarmed at not seeing his master, fell back a step,
he seized him by his collar with the left, whilst with the right hand
he placed the muzzle of a pistol at his breast.

“Pronounce one single word,” muttered D’Artagnan, “and you are a dead
man.”

The coachman perceived at once, by the expression of the man who thus
addressed him, that he had fallen into a trap, and he remained with his
mouth wide open and his eyes portentously staring.

Two musketeers were pacing the court, to whom D’Artagnan called by
their names.

“Monsieur de Belliere,” said he to one of them, “do me the favor to
take the reins from the hands of this worthy man, mount upon the box
and drive to the door of the private stair, and wait for me there; it
is an affair of importance on the service of the king.”

The musketeer, who knew that his lieutenant was incapable of jesting
with regard to the service, obeyed without a word, although he thought
the order strange. Then turning toward the second musketeer, D’Artagnan
said:

“Monsieur du Verger, help me to place this man in a place of safety.”

The musketeer, thinking that his lieutenant had just arrested some
prince in disguise, bowed, and drawing his sword, signified that he was
ready. D’Artagnan mounted the staircase, followed by his prisoner, who
in his turn was followed by the soldier, and entered Mazarin’s
ante-room. Bernouin was waiting there, impatient for news of his
master.

“Well, sir?” he said.

“Everything goes on capitally, my dear Monsieur Bernouin, but here is a
man whom I must beg you to put in a safe place.”

“Where, then, sir?”

“Where you like, provided that the place which you shall choose has
iron shutters secured by padlocks and a door that can be locked.”

“We have that, sir,” replied Bernouin; and the poor coachman was
conducted to a closet, the windows of which were barred and which
looked very much like a prison.

“And now, my good friend,” said D’Artagnan to him, “I must invite you
to deprive yourself, for my sake, of your hat and cloak.”

The coachman, as we can well understand, made no resistance; in fact,
he was so astonished at what had happened to him that he stammered and
reeled like a drunken man; D’Artagnan deposited his clothes under the
arm of one of the valets.

“And now, Monsieur du Verger,” he said, “shut yourself up with this man
until Monsieur Bernouin returns to open the door. The duty will be
tolerably long and not very amusing, I know; but,” added he, seriously,
“you understand, it is on the king’s service.”

“At your command, lieutenant,” replied the musketeer, who saw the
business was a serious one.

“By-the-bye,” continued D’Artagnan, “should this man attempt to fly or
to call out, pass your sword through his body.”

The musketeer signified by a nod that these commands should be obeyed
to the letter, and D’Artagnan went out, followed by Bernouin. Midnight
struck.

“Lead me into the queen’s oratory,” said D’Artagnan, “announce to her I
am here, and put this parcel, with a well-loaded musket, under the seat
of the carriage which is waiting at the foot of the private stair.”

Bernouin conducted D’Artagnan to the oratory, where he sat down
pensively. Everything had gone on as usual at the Palais Royal. As we
said before, by ten o’clock almost all the guests had dispersed; those
who were to fly with the court had the word of command and they were
each severally desired to be from twelve o’clock to one at Cours la
Reine.

At ten o’clock Anne of Austria had entered the king’s room. Monsieur
had just retired, and the youthful Louis, remaining the last, was
amusing himself by placing some lead soldiers in a line of battle, a
game which delighted him much. Two royal pages were playing with him.

“Laporte,” said the queen, “it is time for his majesty to go to bed.”

The king asked to remain up, having, he said, no wish to sleep; but the
queen was firm.

“Are you not going to-morrow morning at six o’clock, Louis, to bathe at
Conflans? I think you wished to do so of your own accord?”

“You are right, madame,” said the king, “and I am ready to retire to my
room when you have kissed me. Laporte, give the light to Monsieur the
Chevalier de Coislin.”

The queen touched with her lips the white, smooth brow the royal child
presented to her with a gravity which already partook of etiquette.

“Go to sleep soon, Louis,” said the queen, “for you must be awakened
very early.”

“I will do my best to obey you, madame,” said the youthful king, “but I
have no inclination to sleep.”

“Laporte,” said Anne of Austria, in an undertone, “find some very dull
book to read to his majesty, but do not undress yourself.”

The king went out, accompanied by the Chevalier de Coislin, bearing the
candlestick, and then the queen returned to her own apartment. Her
ladies—that is to say Madame de Bregy, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, Madame
de Motteville, and Socratine, her sister, so called on account of her
sense—had just brought into her dressing-room the remains of the
dinner, on which, according to her usual custom, she supped. The queen
then gave her orders, spoke of a banquet which the Marquis de
Villequier was to give to her on the day after the morrow, indicated
the persons she would admit to the honor of partaking of it, announced
another visit on the following day to Val-de-Grace, where she intended
to pay her devotions, and gave her commands to her senior valet to
accompany her. When the ladies had finished their supper the queen
feigned extreme fatigue and passed into her bedroom. Madame de
Motteville, who was on especial duty that evening, followed to aid and
undress her. The queen then began to read, and after conversing with
her affectionately for a few minutes, dismissed her.

It was at this moment D’Artagnan entered the courtyard of the palace,
in the coadjutor’s carriage, and a few seconds later the carriages of
the ladies-in-waiting drove out and the gates were shut after them.

A few minutes after twelve o’clock Bernouin knocked at the queen’s
bedroom door, having come by the cardinal’s secret corridor. Anne of
Austria opened the door to him herself. She was dressed, that is to
say, in dishabille, wrapped in a long, warm dressing-gown.

“It is you, Bernouin,” she said. “Is Monsieur d’Artagnan there?”

“Yes, madame, in your oratory. He is waiting till your majesty is
ready.”

“I am. Go and tell Laporte to wake and dress the king, and then pass on
to the Marechal de Villeroy and summon him to me.”

Bernouin bowed and retired.

The queen entered her oratory, which was lighted by a single lamp of
Venetian crystal, She saw D’Artagnan, who stood expecting her.

“Is it you?” she said.

“Yes, madame.”

“Are you ready?”

“I am.”

“And his eminence, the cardinal?”

“Has got off without any accident. He is awaiting your majesty at Cours
la Reine.”

“But in what carriage do we start?”

“I have provided for everything; a carriage below is waiting for your
majesty.”

“Let us go to the king.”

D’Artagnan bowed and followed the queen. The young Louis was already
dressed, with the exception of his shoes and doublet; he had allowed
himself to be dressed, in great astonishment, overwhelming Laporte with
questions, who replied only in these words, “Sire, it is by the queen’s
commands.”

The bedclothes were thrown back, exposing the king’s bed linen, which
was so worn that here and there holes could be seen. It was one of the
results of Mazarin’s niggardliness.

The queen entered and D’Artagnan remained at the door. As soon as the
child perceived the queen he escaped from Laporte and ran to meet her.
Anne then motioned to D’Artagnan to approach, and he obeyed.

“My son,” said Anne of Austria, pointing to the musketeer, calm,
standing uncovered, “here is Monsieur d’Artagnan, who is as brave as
one of those ancient heroes of whom you like so much to hear from my
women. Remember his name well and look at him well, that his face may
not be forgotten, for this evening he is going to render us a great
service.”

The young king looked at the officer with his large-formed eye, and
repeated:

“Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“That is it, my son.”

The young king slowly raised his little hand and held it out to the
musketeer; the latter bent on his knee and kissed it.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” repeated Louis; “very well, madame.”

At this moment they were startled by a noise as if a tumult were
approaching.

“What is that?” exclaimed the queen.

“Oh, oh!” replied D’Artagnan, straining both at the same time his quick
ear and his intelligent glance, “it is the murmur of the populace in
revolution.”

“We must fly,” said the queen.

“Your majesty has given me the control of this business; we had better
wait and see what they want.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!”

“I will answer for everything.”

Nothing is so catching as confidence. The queen, full of energy and
courage, was quickly alive to these two virtues in others.

“Do as you like,” she said, “I rely upon you.”

“Will your majesty permit me to give orders in your name throughout
this business?”

“Command, sir.”

“What do the people want this time?” demanded the king.

“We are about to ascertain, sire,” replied D’Artagnan, as he rapidly
left the room.

The tumult continued to increase and seemed to surround the Palais
Royal entirely. Cries were heard from the interior, of which they could
not comprehend the sense. It was evident that there was clamor and
sedition.

The king, half dressed, the queen and Laporte remained each in the same
state and almost in the same place, where they were listening and
waiting. Comminges, who was on guard that night at the Palais Royal,
ran in. He had about two hundred men in the courtyards and stables, and
he placed them at the queen’s disposal.

“Well,” asked Anne of Austria, when D’Artagnan reappeared, “what does
it mean?”

“It means, madame, that the report has spread that the queen has left
the Palais Royal, carrying off the king, and the people ask to have
proof to the contrary, or threaten to demolish the Palais Royal.”

“Oh, this time it is too much!” exclaimed the queen, “and I will prove
to them I have not left.”

D’Artagnan saw from the expression of the queen’s face that she was
about to issue some violent command. He approached her and said in a
low voice:

“Has your majesty still confidence in me?”

This voice startled her. “Yes, sir,” she replied, “every confidence;
speak.”

“Will the queen deign to follow my advice?”

“Speak.”

“Let your majesty dismiss M. de Comminges and desire him to shut
himself up with his men in the guardhouse and in the stables.”

Comminges glanced at D’Artagnan with the envious look with which every
courtier sees a new favorite spring up.

“You hear, Comminges?” said the queen.

D’Artagnan went up to him; with his usual quickness he caught the
anxious glance.

“Monsieur de Comminges,” he said, “pardon me; we both are servants of
the queen, are we not? It is my turn to be of use to her; do not envy
me this happiness.”

Comminges bowed and left.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan to himself, “I have got one more enemy.”

“And now,” said the queen, addressing D’Artagnan, “what is to be done?
for you hear that, instead of becoming calmer, the noise increases.”

“Madame,” said D’Artagnan, “the people want to see the king and they
must see him.”

“What! must see him! Where—on the balcony?”

“Not at all, madame, but here, sleeping in his bed.”

“Oh, your majesty,” exclaimed Laporte, “Monsieur d’Artagnan is right.”

The queen became thoughtful and smiled, like a woman to whom duplicity
is no stranger.

“Without doubt,” she murmured.

“Monsieur Laporte,” said D’Artagnan, “go and announce to the people
through the grating that they are going to be satisfied and that in
five minutes they shall not only see the king, but they shall see him
in bed; add that the king sleeps and that the queen begs that they will
keep silence, so as not to awaken him.”

“But not every one; a deputation of two or four people.”

“Every one, madame.”

“But reflect, they will keep us here till daybreak.”

“It shall take but a quarter of an hour, I answer for everything,
madame; believe me, I know the people; they are like a great child, who
only wants humoring. Before the sleeping king they will be mute, gentle
and timid as lambs.”

“Go, Laporte,” said the queen.

The young king approached his mother and said, “Why do as these people
ask?”

“It must be so, my son,” said Anne of Austria.

“But if they say, ‘it must be’ to me, am I no longer king?”

The queen remained silent.

“Sire,” said D’Artagnan, “will your majesty permit me to ask you a
question?”

Louis XIV. turned around, astonished that any one should dare to
address him. But the queen pressed the child’s hand.

“Yes, sir.” he said.

“Does your majesty remember, when playing in the park of Fontainebleau,
or in the palace courts at Versailles, ever to have seen the sky grow
suddenly dark and heard the sound of thunder?”

“Yes, certainly.”

“Well, then, this noise of thunder, however much your majesty may have
wished to continue playing, has said, ‘go in, sire. You must do so.’”

“Certainly, sir; but they tell me that the noise of thunder is the
voice of God.”

“Well then, sire,” continued D’Artagnan, “listen to the noise of the
people; you will perceive that it resembles that of thunder.”

In truth at that moment a terrible murmur was wafted to them by the
night breeze; then all at once it ceased.

“Hold, sire,” said D’Artagnan, “they have just told the people that you
are asleep; you see, you still are king.”

The queen looked with surprise at this strange man, whose brilliant
courage made him the equal of the bravest, and who was, by his fine and
quick intelligence, the equal of the most astute.

Laporte entered.

“Well, Laporte?” asked the queen.

“Madame,” he replied, “Monsieur d’Artagnan’s prediction has been
accomplished; they are calm, as if by enchantment. The doors are about
to be opened and in five minutes they will be here.”

“Laporte,” said the queen, “suppose you put one of your sons in the
king’s place; we might be off during the time.”

“If your majesty desires it,” said Laporte, “my sons, like myself, are
at the queen’s service.”

“Not at all,” said D’Artagnan; “should one of them know his majesty and
discover but a substitute, all would be lost.”

“You are right, sir, always right,” said Anne of Austria. “Laporte,
place the king in bed.”

Laporte placed the king, dressed as he was, in the bed and then covered
him as far as the shoulders with the sheet. The queen bent over him and
kissed his brow.

“Pretend to sleep, Louis,” said she.

“Yes,” said the king, “but I do not wish to be touched by any of those
men.”

“Sire, I am here,” said D’Artagnan, “and I give you my word, that if a
single man has the audacity, his life shall pay for it.”

“And now what is to be done?” asked the queen, “for I hear them.”

“Monsieur Laporte, go to them and again recommend silence. Madame, wait
at the door, whilst I shall be at the head of the king’s bed, ready to
die for him.”

Laporte went out; the queen remained standing near the hangings, whilst
D’Artagnan glided behind the curtains.

Then the heavy and collected steps of a multitude of men were heard,
and the queen herself raised the tapestry hangings and put her finger
on her lips.

On seeing the queen, the men stopped short, respectfully.

“Enter, gentlemen, enter,” said the queen.

There was then amongst that crowd a moment’s hesitation, which looked
like shame. They had expected resistance, they had expected to be
thwarted, to have to force the gates, to overturn the guards. The gates
had opened of themselves, and the king, ostensibly at least, had no
other guard at his bed-head but his mother. The foremost of them
stammered and attempted to fall back.

“Enter, gentlemen,” said Laporte, “since the queen desires you so to
do.”

Then one more bold than the rest ventured to pass the door and to
advance on tiptoe. This example was imitated by the rest, until the
room filled silently, as if these men had been the humblest, most
devoted courtiers. Far beyond the door the heads of those who were not
able to enter could be seen, all craning to their utmost height to try
and see.

D’Artagnan saw it all through an opening he had made in the curtain,
and in the very first man who entered he recognized Planchet.

“Sir,” said the queen to him, thinking he was the leader of the band,
“you wished to see the king and therefore I determined to show him to
you myself. Approach and look at him and say if we have the appearance
of people who wish to run away.”

“No, certainly,” replied Planchet, rather astonished at the unexpected
honor conferred upon him.

“You will say, then, to my good and faithful Parisians,” continued
Anne, with a smile, the expression of which did not deceive D’Artagnan,
“that you have seen the king in bed, asleep, and the queen also ready
to retire.”

“I shall tell them, madame, and those who accompany me will say the
same thing; but——”

“But what?” asked Anne of Austria.

“Will your majesty pardon me,” said Planchet, “but is it really the
king who is lying there?”

Anne of Austria started. “If,” she said, “there is one among you who
knows the king, let him approach and say whether it is really his
majesty lying there.”

A man wrapped in a cloak, in the folds of which his face was hidden,
approached and leaned over the bed and looked.

For one second, D’Artagnan thought the man had some evil design and he
put his hand to his sword; but in the movement made by the man in
stooping a portion of his face was uncovered and D’Artagnan recognized
the coadjutor.

“It is certainly the king,” said the man, rising again. “God bless his
majesty!”

“Yes,” repeated the leader in a whisper, “God bless his majesty!” and
all these men, who had entered enraged, passed from anger to pity and
blessed the royal infant in their turn.

“Now,” said Planchet, “let us thank the queen. My friends, retire.”

They all bowed, and retired by degrees as noiselessly as they had
entered. Planchet, who had been the first to enter, was the last to
leave. The queen stopped him.

“What is your name, my friend?” she said.

Planchet, much surprised at the inquiry, turned back.

“Yes,” continued the queen, “I think myself as much honored to have
received you this evening as if you had been a prince, and I wish to
know your name.”

“Yes,” thought Planchet, “to treat me as a prince. No, thank you.”

D’Artagnan trembled lest Planchet, seduced, like the crow in the fable,
should tell his name, and that the queen, knowing his name, would
discover that Planchet had belonged to him.

“Madame,” replied Planchet, respectfully, “I am called Dulaurier, at
your service.”

“Thank you, Monsieur Dulaurier,” said the queen; “and what is your
business?”

“Madame, I am a clothier in the Rue Bourdonnais.”

“That is all I wished to know,” said the queen. “Much obliged to you,
Monsieur Dulaurier. You will hear again from me.”

“Come, come,” thought D’Artagnan, emerging from behind the curtain,
“decidedly Monsieur Planchet is no fool; it is evident he has been
brought up in a good school.”

The different actors in this strange scene remained facing one another,
without uttering a single word; the queen standing near the door,
D’Artagnan half out of his hiding place, the king raised on his elbow,
ready to fall down on his bed again at the slightest sound that would
indicate the return of the multitude, but instead of approaching, the
noise became more and more distant and very soon it died entirely away.

The queen breathed more freely. D’Artagnan wiped his damp forehead and
the king slid off his bed, saying, “Let us go.”

At this moment Laporte reappeared.

“Well?” asked the queen

“Well, madame,” replied the valet, “I followed them as far as the
gates. They announced to all their comrades that they had seen the king
and that the queen had spoken to them; and, in fact, they went away
quite proud and happy.”

“Oh, the miserable wretches!” murmured the queen, “they shall pay
dearly for their boldness, and it is I who promise this.”

Then turning to D’Artagnan, she said:

“Sir, you have given me this evening the best advice I have ever
received. Continue, and say what we must do now.”

“Monsieur Laporte,” said D’Artagnan, “finish dressing his majesty.”

“We may go, then?” asked the queen.

“Whenever your majesty pleases. You have only to descend by the private
stairs and you will find me at the door.”

“Go, sir,” said the queen; “I will follow you.”

D’Artagnan went down and found the carriage at its post and the
musketeer on the box. D’Artagnan took out the parcel which he had
desired Bernouin to place under the seat. It may be remembered that it
was the hat and cloak belonging to Monsieur de Gondy’s coachman.

He placed the cloak on his shoulders and the hat on his head, whilst
the musketeer got off the box.

“Sir,” said D’Artagnan, “you will go and release your companion, who is
guarding the coachman. You must mount your horse and proceed to the Rue
Tiquetonne, Hotel de la Chevrette, whence you will take my horse and
that of Monsieur du Vallon, which you must saddle and equip as if for
war, and then you will leave Paris, bringing them with you to Cours la
Reine. If, when you arrive at Cours la Reine, you find no one, you must
go on to Saint Germain. On the king’s service.”

The musketeer touched his cap and went away to execute the orders thus
received.

D’Artagnan mounted the box, having a pair of pistols in his belt, a
musket under his feet and a naked sword behind him.

The queen appeared, and was followed by the king and the Duke d’Anjou,
his brother.

“Monsieur the coadjutor’s carriage!” she exclaimed, falling back.

“Yes, madame,” said D’Artagnan; “but get in fearlessly, for I myself
will drive you.”

The queen uttered a cry of surprise and entered the carriage, and the
king and monsieur took their places at her side.

“Come, Laporte,” said the queen.

“How, madame!” said the valet, “in the same carriage as your
majesties?”

“It is not a matter of royal etiquette this evening, but of the king’s
safety. Get in, Laporte.”

Laporte obeyed.

“Pull down the blinds,” said D’Artagnan.

“But will that not excite suspicion, sir?” asked the queen.

“Your majesty’s mind may be quite at ease,” replied the officer; “I
have my answer ready.”

The blinds were pulled down and they started at a gallop by the Rue
Richelieu. On reaching the gate the captain of the post advanced at the
head of a dozen men, holding a lantern in his hand.

D’Artagnan signed to them to draw near.

“Do you recognize the carriage?” he asked the sergeant.

“No,” replied the latter.

“Look at the arms.”

The sergeant put the lantern near the panel.

“They are those of monsieur le coadjuteur,” he said.

“Hush; he is enjoying a ride with Madame de Guemenee.”

The sergeant began to laugh.

“Open the gate,” he cried. “I know who it is!” Then putting his face to
the lowered blinds, he said:

“I wish you joy, my lord!”

“Impudent fellow!” cried D’Artagnan, “you will get me turned off.”

The gate groaned on its hinges, and D’Artagnan, seeing the way clear,
whipped his horses, who started at a canter, and five minutes later
they had rejoined the cardinal.

“Mousqueton!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, “draw up the blinds of his
majesty’s carriage.”

“It is he!” cried Porthos.

“Disguised as a coachman!” exclaimed Mazarin.

“And driving the coadjutor’s carriage!” said the queen.

“Corpo di Dio! Monsieur d’Artagnan!” said Mazarin, “you are worth your
weight in gold.”




Chapter LIII.
How D’Artagnan and Porthos earned by selling Straw.


Mazarin was desirous of setting out instantly for Saint Germain, but
the queen declared that she should wait for the people whom she had
appointed to meet her. However, she offered the cardinal Laporte’s
place, which he accepted and went from one carriage to the other.

It was not without foundation that a report of the king’s intention to
leave Paris by night had been circulated. Ten or twelve persons had
been in the secret since six o’clock, and howsoever great their
prudence might be, they could not issue the necessary orders for the
departure without suspicion being generated. Besides, each individual
had one or two others for whom he was interested; and as there could be
no doubt but that the queen was leaving Paris full of terrible projects
of vengeance, every one had warned parents and friends of what was
about to transpire; so that the news of the approaching exit ran like a
train of lighted gunpowder along the streets.

The first carriage which arrived after that of the queen was that of
the Prince de Condé, with the princess and dowager princess. Both these
ladies had been awakened in the middle of the night and did not know
what it all was about. The second contained the Duke and Duchess of
Orleans, the tall young Mademoiselle and the Abbé de la Riviere; and
the third, the Duke de Longueville and the Prince de Conti, brother and
brother-in-law of Condé. They all alighted and hastened to pay their
respects to the king and queen in their coach. The queen fixed her eyes
upon the carriage they had left, and seeing that it was empty, she
said:

“But where is Madame de Longueville?”

“Ah, yes, where is my sister?” asked the prince.

“Madame de Longueville is ill,” said the duke, “and she desired me to
excuse her to your majesty.”

Anne gave a quick glance to Mazarin, who answered by an almost
imperceptible shake of his head.

“What do you say of this?” asked the queen.

“I say that she is a hostage for the Parisians,” answered the cardinal.

“Why is she not come?” asked the prince in a low voice, addressing his
brother.

“Silence,” whispered the duke, “she has her reasons.”

“She will ruin us!” returned the prince.

“She will save us,” said Conti.

Carriages now arrived in crowds; those of the Marechal de Villeroy,
Guitant, Villequier and Comminges came into the line. The two
musketeers arrived in their turn, holding the horses of D’Artagnan and
Porthos in their hands. These two instantly mounted, the coachman of
the latter replacing D’Artagnan on the coach-box of the royal coach.
Mousqueton took the place of the coachman, and drove standing, for
reasons known to himself, like Automedon of antiquity.

The queen, though occupied by a thousand details, tried to catch the
Gascon’s eye; but he, with his wonted prudence, had mingled with the
crowd.

“Let us be the avant guard,” said he to Porthos, “and find good
quarters at Saint Germain; nobody will think of us, and for my part I
am greatly fatigued.”

“As for me,” replied Porthos, “I am falling asleep, which is strange,
considering we have not had any fighting; truly the Parisians are
idiots.”

“Or rather, we are very clever,” said D’Artagnan.

“Perhaps.”

“And how is your wrist?”

“Better; but do you think that we’ve got them this time?”

“Got what?”

“You your command, and I my title?”

“I’faith! yes—I should expect so; besides, if they forget, I shall take
the liberty of reminding them.”

“The queen’s voice! she is speaking,” said Porthos; “I think she wants
to ride on horseback.”

“Oh, she would like it, but——”

“But what?”

“The cardinal won’t allow it. Gentlemen,” he said, addressing the two
musketeers, “accompany the royal carriage, we are going forward to look
for lodgings.”

D’Artagnan started off for Saint Germain, followed by Porthos.

“We will go on, gentlemen,” said the queen.

And the royal carriage drove on, followed by the other coaches and
about fifty horsemen.

They reached Saint German without any accident; on descending, the
queen found the prince awaiting her, bare-headed, to offer her his
hand.

“What an awakening for the Parisians!” said the queen, radiant.

“It is war,” said the prince.

“Well, then, let it be war! Have we not on our side the conqueror of
Rocroy, of Nordlingen, of Lens?”

The prince bowed low.

It was then three o’clock in the morning. The queen walked first, every
one followed her. About two hundred persons had accompanied her in her
flight.

“Gentlemen,” said the queen, laughing, “pray take up your abode in the
chateau; it is large, and there will be no want of room for you all;
but, as we never thought of coming here, I am informed that there are,
in all, only three beds in the whole establishment, one for the king,
one for me——”

“And one for the cardinal,” muttered the prince.

“Am I—am I, then, to sleep on the floor?” asked Gaston d’Orleans, with
a forced smile.

“No, my prince,” replied Mazarin, “the third bed is intended for your
highness.”

“But your eminence?” replied the prince.

“I,” answered Mazarin, “I shall not sleep at all; I have work to do.”

Gaston desired that he should be shown into the room wherein he was to
sleep, without in the least concerning himself as to where his wife and
daughter were to repose.

“Well, for my part, I shall go to bed,” said D’Artagnan; “come,
Porthos.”

Porthos followed the lieutenant with that profound confidence he ever
had in the wisdom of his friend. They walked from one end of the
chateau to the other, Porthos looking with wondering eyes at
D’Artagnan, who was counting on his fingers.

“Four hundred, at a pistole each, four hundred pistoles.”

“Yes,” interposed Porthos, “four hundred pistoles; but who is to make
four hundred pistoles?”

“A pistole is not enough,” said D’Artagnan, “’tis worth a louis.”

“What is worth a louis?”

“Four hundred, at a louis each, make four hundred louis.”

“Four hundred?” said Porthos.

“Yes, there are two hundred of them, and each of them will need two,
which will make four hundred.”

“But four hundred what?”

“Listen!” cried D’Artagnan.

But as there were all kinds of people about, who were in a state of
stupefaction at the unexpected arrival of the court, he whispered in
his friend’s ear.

“I understand,” answered Porthos, “I understand you perfectly, on my
honor; two hundred louis, each of us, would be making a pretty thing of
it; but what will people say?”

“Let them say what they will; besides, how will they know that we are
doing it?”

“But who will distribute these things?” asked Porthos.

“Isn’t Mousqueton there?”

“But he wears my livery; my livery will be known,” replied Porthos.

“He can turn his coat inside out.”

“You are always in the right, my dear friend,” cried Porthos; “but
where the devil do you discover all the notions you put into practice?”

D’Artagnan smiled. The two friends turned down the first street they
came to. Porthos knocked at the door of a house to the right, whilst
D’Artagnan knocked at the door of a house to the left.

“Some straw,” they said.

“Sir, we don’t keep any,” was the reply of the people who opened the
doors; “but please ask at the hay dealer’s.”

“Where is the hay dealer’s?”

“At the last large door in the street.”

“Are there any other people in Saint Germain who sell straw?”

“Yes; there’s the landlord of the Lamb, and Gros-Louis the farmer; they
both live in the Rue des Ursulines.”

“Very well.”

D’Artagnan went instantly to the hay dealer and bargained with him for
a hundred and fifty trusses of straw, which he obtained, at the rate of
three pistoles each. He went afterward to the innkeeper and bought from
him two hundred trusses at the same price. Finally, Farmer Louis sold
them eighty trusses, making in all four hundred and thirty.

There was no more to be had in Saint Germain. This foraging did not
occupy more than half an hour. Mousqueton, duly instructed, was put at
the head of this sudden and new business. He was cautioned not to let a
bit of straw out of his hands under a louis the truss, and they
intrusted to him straw to the amount of four hundred and thirty louis.
D’Artagnan, taking with him three trusses of straw, returned to the
chateau, where everybody, freezing with cold and more than half asleep,
envied the king, the queen, and the Duke of Orleans, on their camp
beds. The lieutenant’s entrance produced a burst of laughter in the
great drawing-room; but he did not appear to notice that he was the
object of general attention, but began to arrange, with so much
cleverness, nicety and gayety, his straw bed, that the mouths of all
these poor creatures, who could not go to sleep, began to water.

“Straw!” they all cried out, “straw! where is there any to be found?”

“I can show you,” answered the Gascon.

And he conducted them to Mousqueton, who freely distributed the trusses
at the rate of a louis apiece. It was thought rather dear, but people
wanted to sleep, and who would not give even two or three louis for a
few hours of sound sleep?

D’Artagnan gave up his bed to any one who wanted it, making it over
about a dozen times; and since he was supposed to have paid, like the
others, a louis for his truss of straw, he pocketed in that way thirty
louis in less than half an hour. At five o’clock in the morning the
straw was worth eighty francs a truss and there was no more to be had.

D’Artagnan had taken the precaution to set apart four trusses for his
own use. He put in his pocket the key of the room where he had hidden
them, and accompanied by Porthos returned to settle with Mousqueton,
who, naively, and like the worthy steward that he was, handed them four
hundred and thirty louis and kept one hundred for himself.

Mousqueton, who knew nothing of what was going on in the chateau,
wondered that the idea had not occurred to him sooner. D’Artagnan put
the gold in his hat, and in going back to the chateau settled the
reckoning with Porthos, each of them had cleared two hundred and
fifteen louis.

Porthos, however, found that he had no straw left for himself. He
returned to Mousqueton, but the steward had sold the last wisp. He then
repaired to D’Artagnan, who, thanks to his four trusses of straw, was
in the act of making up and tasting, by anticipation, the luxury of a
bed so soft, so well stuffed at the head, so well covered at the foot,
that it would have excited the envy of the king himself, if his majesty
had not been fast asleep in his own. D’Artagnan could on no account
consent to pull his bed to pieces again for Porthos, but for a
consideration of four louis that the latter paid him for it, he
consented that Porthos should share his couch with him. He laid his
sword at the head, his pistols by his side, stretched his cloak over
his feet, placed his felt hat on the top of his cloak and extended
himself luxuriously on the straw, which rustled under him. He was
already enjoying the sweet dream engendered by the possession of two
hundred and nineteen louis, made in a quarter of an hour, when a voice
was heard at the door of the hall, which made him stir.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” it cried.

“Here!” cried Porthos, “here!”

Porthos foresaw that if D’Artagnan was called away he should remain the
sole possessor of the bed. An officer approached.

“I am come to fetch you, Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“From whom?”

“His eminence sent me.”

“Tell my lord that I’m going to sleep, and I advise him, as a friend,
to do the same.”

“His eminence is not gone to bed and will not go to bed, and wants you
instantly.”

“The devil take Mazarin, who does not know when to sleep at the proper
time. What does he want with me? Is it to make me a captain? In that
case I will forgive him.”

And the musketeer rose, grumbling, took his sword, hat, pistols, and
cloak, and followed the officer, whilst Porthos, alone and sole
possessor of the bed, endeavored to follow the good example of falling
asleep, which his predecessor had set him.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the cardinal, on perceiving him, “I have
not forgotten with what zeal you have served me. I am going to prove to
you that I have not.”

“Good,” thought the Gascon, “this is a promising beginning.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” he resumed, “do you wish to become a captain?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“And your friend still longs to be made a baron?”

“At this very moment, my lord, he no doubt dreams that he is one
already.”

“Then,” said Mazarin, taking from his portfolio the letter which he had
already shown D’Artagnan, “take this dispatch and carry it to England.”

D’Artagnan looked at the envelope; there was no address on it.

“Am I not to know to whom to present it?”

“You will know when you reach London; at London you may tear off the
outer envelope.”

“And what are my instructions?”

“To obey in every particular the man to whom this letter is addressed.
You must set out for Boulogne. At the Royal Arms of England you will
find a young gentleman named Mordaunt.”

“Yes, my lord; and what am I to do with this young gentleman?”

“Follow wherever he leads you.”

D’Artagnan looked at the cardinal with a stupefied air.

“There are your instructions,” said Mazarin; “go!”

“Go! ’tis easy to say so, but that requires money, and I haven’t any.”

“Ah!” replied Mazarin, “so you have no money?”

“None, my lord.”

“But the diamond I gave you yesterday?”

“I wish to keep it in remembrance of your eminence.”

Mazarin sighed.

“’Tis very dear living in England, my lord, especially as envoy
extraordinary.”

“Zounds!” replied Mazarin, “the people there are very sedate, and their
habits, since the revolution, simple; but no matter.”

He opened a drawer and took out a purse.

“What do you say to a thousand crowns?”

D’Artagnan pouted out his lower lip in a most extraordinary manner.

“I reply, my lord, ’tis but little, as certainly I shall not go alone.”

“I suppose not. Monsieur du Vallon, that worthy gentleman, for, with
the exception of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, there’s not a man in
France that I esteem and love so much as him——”

“Then, my lord,” replied D’Artagnan, pointing to the purse which
Mazarin still held, “if you love and esteem him so much, you—understand
me?”

“Be it so! on his account I add two hundred crowns.”

“Scoundrel!” muttered D’Artagnan. “But on our return,” he said aloud,
“may we, that is, my friend and I, depend on having, he his barony, and
I my promotion?”

“On the honor of Mazarin.”

“I should like another sort of oath better,” said D’Artagnan to
himself; then aloud, “May I not offer my duty to her majesty the
queen?”

“Her majesty is asleep and you must set off directly,” replied Mazarin;
“go, pray, sir——”

“One word more, my lord; if there’s any fighting where I’m going, must
I fight?”

“You are to obey the commands of the personage to whom I have addressed
the inclosed letter.”

“’Tis well,” said D’Artagnan, holding out his hand to receive the
money. “I offer my best respects and services to you, my lord.”

D’Artagnan then, returning to the officer, said:

“Sir, have the kindness also to awaken Monsieur du Vallon and to say
’tis by his eminence’s order, and that I shall await him at the
stables.”

The officer went off with an eagerness that showed the Gascon that he
had some personal interest in the matter.

Porthos was snoring most musically when some one touched him on the
shoulder.

“I come from the cardinal,” said the officer.

“Heigho!” said Porthos, opening his large eyes; “what have you got to
say?”

“That his eminence has ordered you to England and that Monsieur
d’Artagnan is waiting for you in the stables.”

Porthos sighed heavily, arose, took his hat, his pistols, and his
cloak, and departed, casting a look of regret upon the couch where he
had hoped to sleep so well.

No sooner had he turned his back than the officer laid himself down in
it, and he had scarcely crossed the threshold before his successor, in
his turn, was snoring immoderately. It was very natural, he being the
only person in the whole assemblage, except the king, the queen, and
the Duke of Orleans, who slept gratuitously.




Chapter LIV.
In which we hear Tidings of Aramis.


D’Artagnan went straight to the stables; day was just dawning. He found
his horse and that of Porthos fastened to the manger, but to an empty
manger. He took pity on these poor animals and went to a corner of the
stable, where he saw a little straw, but in doing so he struck his foot
against a human body, which uttered a cry and arose on its knees,
rubbing its eyes. It was Mousqueton, who, having no straw to lie upon,
had helped himself to that of the horses.

“Mousqueton,” cried D’Artagnan, “let us be off! Let us set off.”

Mousqueton, recognizing the voice of his master’s friend, got up
suddenly, and in doing so let fall some louis which he had appropriated
to himself illegally during the night.

“Ho! ho!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, picking up a louis and displaying it;
“here’s a louis that smells confoundedly of straw.”

Mousqueton blushed so confusedly that the Gascon began to laugh at him
and said:

“Porthos would be angry, my dear Monsieur Mousqueton, but I pardon you,
only let us remember that this gold must serve us as a joke, so be
gay—come along.”

Mousqueton instantly assumed a jovial countenance, saddled the horses
quickly and mounted his own without making faces over it.

Whilst this went on, Porthos arrived with a very cross look on his
face, and was astonished to find the lieutenant resigned and Mousqueton
almost merry.

“Ah, that’s it!” he cried, “you have your promotion and I my barony.”

“We are going to fetch our brevets,” said D’Artagnan, “and when we come
back, Master Mazarin will sign them.”

“And where are we going?” asked Porthos.

“To Paris first; I have affairs to settle.”

And they both set out for Paris.

On arriving at its gates they were astounded to see the threatening
aspect of the capital. Around a broken-down carriage the people were
uttering imprecations, whilst the persons who had attempted to escape
were made prisoners—that is to say, an old man and two women. On the
other hand, as the two friends approached to enter, they showed them
every kind of civility, thinking them deserters from the royal party
and wishing to bind them to their own.

“What is the king doing?” they asked.

“He is asleep.”

“And the Spanish woman?”

“Dreaming.”

“And the cursed Italian?”

“He is awake, so keep on the watch, as they are gone away; it’s for
some purpose, rely on it. But as you are the strongest, after all,”
continued D’Artagnan, “don’t be furious with old men and women, and
keep your wrath for more appropriate occasions.”

The people listened to these words and let go the ladies, who thanked
D’Artagnan with an eloquent look.

“Now! onward!” cried the Gascon.

And they continued their way, crossing the barricades, getting the
chains about their legs, pushed about, questioning and questioned.

In the place of the Palais Royal D’Artagnan saw a sergeant, who was
drilling six or seven hundred citizens. It was Planchet, who brought
into play profitably the recollections of the regiment of Piedmont.

In passing before D’Artagnan he recognized his former master.

“Good-day, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Planchet proudly.

“Good-day, Monsieur Dulaurier,” replied D’Artagnan.

Planchet stopped short, staring at D’Artagnan. The first row, seeing
their sergeant stop, stopped in their turn, and so on to the very last.

“These citizens are dreadfully ridiculous,” observed D’Artagnan to
Porthos and went on his way.

Five minutes afterward he entered the hotel of La Chevrette, where
pretty Madeleine, the hostess, came to him.

“My dear Mistress Turquaine,” said the Gascon, “if you happen to have
any money, lock it up quickly; if you happen to have any jewels, hide
them directly; if you happen to have any debtors, make them pay you, or
any creditors, don’t pay them.”

“Why, prithee?” asked Madeleine.

“Because Paris is going to be reduced to dust and ashes like Babylon,
of which you have no doubt heard tell.”

“And are you going to leave me at such a time?”

“This very instant.”

“And where are you going?”

“Ah, if you could tell me that, you would be doing me a service.”

“Ah, me! ah, me!

“Have you any letters for me?” inquired D’Artagnan, wishing to signify
to the hostess that her lamentations were superfluous and that
therefore she had better spare him demonstrations of her grief.

“There’s one just arrived,” and she handed the letter to D’Artagnan.

“From Athos!” cried D’Artagnan, recognizing the handwriting.

“Ah!” said Porthos, “let us hear what he says.”

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

“Dear D’Artagnan, dear Du Vallon, my good friends, perhaps this may be
the last time that you will ever hear from me. Aramis and I are very
unhappy; but God, our courage, and the remembrance of our friendship
sustain us. Think often of Raoul. I intrust to you certain papers which
are at Blois; and in two months and a half, if you do not hear of us,
take possession of them.

“Embrace, with all your heart, the vicomte, for your devoted, friend,

 “ATHOS.”


“I believe, by Heaven,” said D’Artagnan, “that I shall embrace him,
since he’s upon our road; and if he is so unfortunate as to lose our
dear Athos, from that very day he becomes my son.”

“And I,” said Porthos, “shall make him my sole heir.”

“Let us see, what more does Athos say?”

“Should you meet on your journey a certain Monsieur Mordaunt, distrust
him, in a letter I cannot say more.”

“Monsieur Mordaunt!” exclaimed the Gascon, surprised.

“Monsieur Mordaunt! ’tis well,” said Porthos, “we shall remember that;
but see, there is a postscript from Aramis.”

“So there is,” said D’Artagnan, and he read:

“We conceal the place where we are, dear friends, knowing your
brotherly affection and that you would come and die with us were we to
reveal it.”

“Confound it,” interrupted Porthos, with an explosion of passion which
sent Mousqueton to the other end of the room; “are they in danger of
dying?”

D’Artagnan continued:

“Athos bequeaths to you Raoul, and I bequeath to you my revenge. If by
any good luck you lay your hand on a certain man named Mordaunt, tell
Porthos to take him into a corner and to wring his neck. I dare not say
more in a letter.

 “ARAMIS.”


“If that is all, it is easily done,” said Porthos.

“On the contrary,” observed D’Artagnan, with a vexed look; “it would be
impossible.”

“How so?”

“It is precisely this Monsieur Mordaunt whom we are going to join at
Boulogne and with whom we cross to England.”

“Well, suppose instead of joining this Monsieur Mordaunt we were to go
and join our friends?” said Porthos, with a gesture fierce enough to
have frightened an army.

“I did think of it, but this letter has neither date nor postmark.”

“True,” said Porthos. And he began to wander about the room like a man
beside himself, gesticulating and half drawing his sword out of the
scabbard.

As to D’Artagnan, he remained standing like a man in consternation,
with the deepest affliction depicted on his face.

“Ah, this is not right; Athos insults us; he wishes to die alone; it is
bad, bad, bad.”

Mousqueton, witnessing this despair, melted into tears in a corner of
the room.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, “all this leads to nothing. Let us go on. We
will embrace Raoul, and perhaps he will have news of Athos.”

“Stop—an idea!” cried Porthos; “indeed, my dear D’Artagnan, I don’t
know how you manage, but you are always full of ideas; let us go and
embrace Raoul.”

“Woe to that man who should happen to contradict my master at this
moment,” said Mousqueton to himself; “I wouldn’t give a farthing for
his life.”

They set out. On arriving at the Rue Saint Denis, the friends found a
vast concourse of people. It was the Duc de Beaufort, who was coming
from the Vendomois and whom the coadjutor was showing to the Parisians,
intoxicated with joy. With the duke’s aid they already considered
themselves invincible.

The two friends turned off into a side street to avoid meeting the
prince, and so reached the Saint Denis gate.

“Is it true,” said the guard to the two cavaliers, “that the Duc de
Beaufort has arrived in Paris?”

“Nothing more certain; and the best proof of it is,” said D’Artagnan,
“that he has dispatched us to meet the Duc de Vendome, his father, who
is coming in his turn.”

“Long live De Beaufort!” cried the guards, and they drew back
respectfully to let the two friends pass. Once across the barriers
these two knew neither fatigue nor fear. Their horses flew, and they
never ceased speaking of Athos and Aramis.

The camp had entered Saint Omer; the friends made a little detour and
went to the camp, and gave the army an exact account of the flight of
the king and queen. They found Raoul near his tent, reclining on a
truss of hay, of which his horse stole some mouthfuls; the young man’s
eyes were red and he seemed dejected. The Marechal de Grammont and the
Comte de Guiche had returned to Paris and he was quite lonely. And as
soon as he saw the two cavaliers he ran to them with open arms.

“Oh, is it you, dear friends? Did you come here to fetch me? Will you
take me away with you? Do you bring me tidings of my guardian?”

“Have you not received any?” said D’Artagnan to the youth.

“Alas! sir, no, and I do not know what has become of him; so that I am
really so unhappy that I weep.”

In fact, tears rolled down his cheeks.

Porthos turned aside, in order not to show by his honest round face
what was passing in his mind.

“Deuce take it!” cried D’Artagnan, more moved than he had been for a
long time, “don’t despair, my friend, if you have not received any
letters from the count, we have received one.”

“Oh, really!” cried Raoul.

“And a comforting one, too,” added D’Artagnan, seeing the delight that
his intelligence gave the young man.

“Have you it?” asked Raoul

“Yes—that is, I had it,” repined the Gascon, making believe to find it.
“Wait, it ought to be there in my pocket; it speaks of his return, does
it not, Porthos?”

All Gascon as he was, D’Artagnan could not bear alone the weight of
that falsehood.

“Yes,” replied Porthos, coughing.

“Eh, give it to me!” said the young man.

“Eh! I read it a little while since. Can I have lost it? Ah! confound
it! yes, my pocket has a hole in it.”

“Oh, yes, Monsieur Raoul!” said Mousqueton, “the letter was very
consoling. These gentlemen read it to me and I wept for joy.”

“But at any rate, you know where he is, Monsieur d’Artagnan?” asked
Raoul, somewhat comforted.

“Ah! that’s the thing!” replied the Gascon. “Undoubtedly I know it, but
it is a mystery.”

“Not to me, I hope?”

“No, not to you, so I am going to tell you where he is.”

Porthos devoured D’Artagnan with wondering eyes.

“Where the devil shall I say that he is, so that he cannot try to
rejoin him?” thought D’Artagnan.

“Well, where is he, sir?” asked Raoul, in a soft and coaxing voice.

“He is at Constantinople.”

“Among the Turks!” exclaimed Raoul, alarmed. “Good heavens! how can you
tell me that?”

“Does that alarm you?” cried D’Artagnan. “Pooh! what are the Turks to
such men as the Comte de la Fere and the Abbé d’Herblay?”

“Ah, his friend is with him?” said Raoul. “That comforts me a little.”

“Has he wit or not—this demon D’Artagnan?” said Porthos, astonished at
his friend’s deception.

“Now, sir,” said D’Artagnan, wishing to change the conversation, “here
are fifty pistoles that the count has sent you by the same courier. I
suppose you have no more money and that they will be welcome.”

“I have still twenty pistoles, sir.”

“Well, take them; that makes seventy.”

“And if you wish for more,” said Porthos, putting his hand to his
pocket——

“Thank you, sir,” replied Raoul, blushing; “thank you a thousand
times.”

At this moment Olivain appeared. “Apropos,” said D’Artagnan, loud
enough for the servant to hear him, “are you satisfied with Olivain?”

“Yes, in some respects, tolerably well.”

Olivain pretended to have heard nothing and entered the tent.

“What fault do you find with the fellow?”

“He is a glutton.”

“Oh, sir!” cried Olivain, reappearing at this accusation.

“And a little bit of a thief.”

“Oh, sir! oh!”

“And, more especially, a notorious coward.”

“Oh, oh! sir! you really vilify me!” cried Olivain.

“The deuce!” cried D’Artagnan. “Pray learn, Monsieur Olivain, that
people like us are not to be served by cowards. Rob your master, eat
his sweetmeats, and drink his wine; but, by Jove! don’t be a coward, or
I shall cut off your ears. Look at Monsieur Mouston, see the honorable
wounds he has received, observe how his habitual valor has given
dignity to his countenance.”

Mousqueton was in the third heaven and would have embraced D’Artagnan
had he dared; meanwhile he resolved to sacrifice his life for him on
the next occasion that presented itself.

“Send away that fellow, Raoul,” said the Gascon; “for if he’s a coward
he will disgrace thee some day.”

“Monsieur says I am coward,” cried Olivain, “because he wanted the
other day to fight a cornet in Grammont’s regiment and I refused to
accompany him.”

“Monsieur Olivain, a lackey ought never to disobey,” said D’Artagnan,
sternly; then taking him aside, he whispered to him: “Thou hast done
right; thy master was in the wrong; here’s a crown for thee, but should
he ever be insulted and thou dost not let thyself be cut in quarters
for him, I will cut out thy tongue. Remember that.”

Olivain bowed and slipped the crown into his pocket.

“And now, Raoul,” said the Gascon, “Monsieur du Vallon and I are going
away as ambassadors, where, I know not; but should you want anything,
write to Madame Turquaine, at La Chevrette, Rue Tiquetonne and draw
upon her purse as on a banker—with economy; for it is not so well
filled as that of Monsieur d’Emery.”

And having, meantime, embraced his ward, he passed him into the robust
arms of Porthos, who lifted him up from the ground and held him a
moment suspended near the noble heart of the formidable giant.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, “let us go.”

And they set out for Boulogne, where toward evening they arrived, their
horses flecked with foam and dark with perspiration.

At ten steps from the place where they halted was a young man in black,
who seemed waiting for some one, and who, from the moment he saw them
enter the town, never took his eyes off them.

D’Artagnan approached him, and seeing him stare so fixedly, said:

“Well, friend! I don’t like people to quiz me!”

“Sir,” said the young man, “do you not come from Paris, if you please?”

D’Artagnan thought it was some gossip who wanted news from the capital.

“Yes, sir,” he said, in a softened tone.

“Are you not going to put up at the ‘Arms of England’?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Are you not charged with a mission from his eminence, Cardinal
Mazarin?”

“Yes, sir.”

“In that case, I am the man you have to do with. I am M. Mordaunt.”

“Ah!” thought D’Artagnan, “the man I am warned against by Athos.”

“Ah!” thought Porthos, “the man Aramis wants me to strangle.”

They both looked searchingly at the young man, who misunderstood the
meaning of that inquisition.

“Do you doubt my word?” he said. “In that case I can give you proofs.”

“No, sir,” said D’Artagnan; “and we place ourselves at your orders.”

“Well, gentlemen,” resumed Mordaunt, “we must set out without delay,
to-day is the last day granted me by the cardinal. My ship is ready,
and had you not come I must have set off without you, for General
Cromwell expects my return impatiently.”

“So!” thought the lieutenant, “’tis to General Cromwell that our
dispatches are addressed.”

“Have you no letter for him?” asked the young man.

“I have one, the seal of which I am not to break till I reach London;
but since you tell me to whom it is addressed, ’tis useless to wait
till then.”

D’Artagnan tore open the envelope of the letter. It was directed to
“Monsieur Oliver Cromwell, General of the Army of the English Nation.”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan; “a singular commission.”

“Who is this Monsieur Oliver Cromwell?” inquired Porthos.

“Formerly a brewer,” replied the Gascon.

“Perhaps Mazarin wishes to make a speculation in beer, as we did in
straw,” said Porthos.

“Come, come, gentlemen,” said Mordaunt, impatiently, “let us depart.”

“What!” exclaimed Porthos “without supper? Cannot Monsieur Cromwell
wait a little?”

“Yes, but I?” said Mordaunt.

“Well, you,” said Porthos, “what then?”

“I cannot wait.”

“Oh! as to you, that is not my concern, and I shall sup either with or
without your permission.”

The young man’s eyes kindled in secret, but he restrained himself.

“Monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, “you must excuse famished travelers.
Besides, our supper can’t delay you much. We will hasten on to the inn;
you will meanwhile proceed on foot to the harbor. We will take a bite
and shall be there as soon as you are.”

“Just as you please, gentlemen, provided we set sail,” he said.

“The name of your ship?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“The Standard.”

“Very well; in half an hour we shall be on board.”

And the friends, spurring on their horses, rode to the hotel, the “Arms
of England.”

“What do you say of that young man?” asked D’Artagnan, as they hurried
along.

“I say that he doesn’t suit me at all,” said Porthos, “and that I feel
a strong itching to follow Aramis’s advice.”

“By no means, my dear Porthos; that man is a messenger of General
Cromwell; it would insure for us a poor reception, I imagine, should it
be announced to him that we had twisted the neck of his confidant.”

“Nevertheless,” said Porthos, “I have always noticed that Aramis gives
good advice.”

“Listen,” returned D’Artagnan, “when our embassy is finished——”

“Well?”

“If it brings us back to France——”

“Well?”

“Well, we shall see.”

At that moment the two friends reached the hotel, “Arms of England,”
where they supped with hearty appetite and then at once proceeded to
the port.

There they found a brig ready to set sail, upon the deck of which they
recognized Mordaunt walking up and down impatiently.

“It is singular,” said D’Artagnan, whilst the boat was taking them to
the Standard, “it is astonishing how that young man resembles some one
I must have known, but who it was I cannot yet remember.”

A few minutes later they were on board, but the embarkation of the
horses was a longer matter than that of the men, and it was eight
o’clock before they raised anchor.

The young man stamped impatiently and ordered all sail to be spread.

Porthos, completely used up by three nights without sleep and a journey
of seventy leagues on horseback, retired to his cabin and went to
sleep.

D’Artagnan, overcoming his repugnance to Mordaunt, walked with him upon
the deck and invented a hundred stories to make him talk.

Mousqueton was seasick.




Chapter LV.
The Scotchman.


And now our readers must leave the Standard to sail peaceably, not
toward London, where D’Artagnan and Porthos believed they were going,
but to Durham, whither Mordaunt had been ordered to repair by the
letter he had received during his sojourn at Boulogne, and accompany us
to the royalist camp, on this side of the Tyne, near Newcastle.

There, placed between two rivers on the borders of Scotland, but still
on English soil, the tents of a little army extended. It was midnight.
Some Highlanders were listlessly keeping watch. The moon, which was
partially obscured by heavy clouds, now and then lit up the muskets of
the sentinels, or silvered the walls, the roofs, and the spires of the
town that Charles I. had just surrendered to the parliamentary troops,
whilst Oxford and Newark still held out for him in the hopes of coming
to some arrangement.

At one of the extremities of the camp, near an immense tent, in which
the Scottish officers were holding a kind of council, presided over by
Lord Leven, their commander, a man attired as a cavalier lay sleeping
on the turf, his right hand extended over his sword.

About fifty paces off, another man, also appareled as a cavalier, was
talking to a Scotch sentinel, and, though a foreigner, he seemed to
understand without much difficulty the answers given in the broad
Perthshire dialect.

As the town clock of Newcastle struck one the sleeper awoke, and with
all the gestures of a man rousing himself out of deep sleep he looked
attentively about him; perceiving that he was alone he rose and making
a little circuit passed close to the cavalier who was speaking to the
sentinel. The former had no doubt finished his questions, for a moment
later he said good-night and carelessly followed the same path taken by
the first cavalier.

In the shadow of a tent the former was awaiting him.

“Well, my dear friend?” said he, in as pure French as has ever been
uttered between Rouen and Tours.

“Well, my friend, there is not a moment to lose; we must let the king
know immediately.”

“Why, what is the matter?”

“It would take too long to tell you, besides, you will hear it all
directly and the least word dropped here might ruin all. We must go and
find Lord Winter.”

They both set off to the other end of the camp, but as it did not cover
more than a surface of five hundred feet they quickly arrived at the
tent they were looking for.

“Tony, is your master sleeping?” said one of the two cavaliers to a
servant who was lying in the outer compartment, which served as a kind
of ante-room.

“No, monsieur le comte,” answered the servant, “I think not; or at
least he has not long been so, for he was pacing up and down for more
than two hours after he left the king, and the sound of his footsteps
has only ceased during the last ten minutes. However, you may look and
see,” added the lackey, raising the curtained entrance of the tent.

Lord Winter was seated near an aperture, arranged as a window to let in
the night air, his eyes mechanically following the course of the moon,
intermittently veiled, as we before observed, by heavy clouds. The two
friends approached Winter, who, with his head on his hands, was gazing
at the heavens; he did not hear them enter and remained in the same
attitude till he felt a hand upon his shoulder.

He turned around, recognized Athos and Aramis and held out his hand to
them.

“Have you observed,” said he to them, “what a blood-red color the moon
has to-night?”

“No,” replied Athos; “I thought it looked much the same as usual.”

“Look, again, chevalier,” returned Lord Winter.

“I must own,” said Aramis, “I am like the Comte de la Fere—I can see
nothing remarkable about it.”

“My lord,” said Athos, “in a position so precarious as ours we must
examine the earth and not the heavens. Have you studied our Scotch
troops and have you confidence in them?”

“The Scotch?” inquired Winter. “What Scotch?”

“Ours, egad!” exclaimed Athos. “Those in whom the king has
confided—Lord Leven’s Highlanders.”

“No,” said Winter, then he paused; “but tell me, can you not perceive
the russet tint which marks the heavens?”

“Not the least in the world,” said Aramis and Athos at once.

“Tell me,” continued Winter, always possessed by the same idea, “is
there not a tradition in France that Henry IV., the evening before the
day he was assassinated, when he was playing at chess with M. de
Bassompiere, saw clots of blood upon the chessboard?”

“Yes,” said Athos, “and the marechal has often told me so himself.”

“Then it was so,” murmured Winter, “and the next day Henry IV. was
killed.”

“But what has this vision of Henry IV. to do with you, my lord?”
inquired Aramis.

“Nothing; and indeed I am mad to trouble you with such things, when
your coming to my tent at such an hour announces that you are the
bearers of important news.”

“Yes, my lord,” said Athos, “I wish to speak to the king.”

“To the king! but the king is asleep.”

“I have something important to reveal to him.”

“Can it not be put off till to-morrow?”

“He must know it this moment, and perhaps it is already too late.”

“Come, then,” said Lord Winter.

Lord Winter’s tent was pitched by the side of the royal marquee, a kind
of corridor communicating between the two. This corridor was guarded,
not by a sentinel, but by a confidential servant, through whom, in case
of urgency, Charles could communicate instantly with his faithful
subject.

“These gentlemen are with me,” said Winter.

The lackey bowed and let them pass. As he had said, on a camp bed,
dressed in his black doublet, booted, unbelted, with his felt hat
beside him, lay the king, overcome by sleep and fatigue. They advanced,
and Athos, who was the first to enter, gazed a moment in silence on
that pale and noble face, framed in its long and now untidy, matted
hair, the blue veins showing through the transparent temples, his eyes
seemingly swollen by tears.

Athos sighed deeply; the sigh woke the king, so lightly did he sleep.

He opened his eyes.

“Ah!” said he, raising himself on his elbow, “is it you, Comte de la
Fere?”

“Yes, sire,” replied Athos.

“You watch while I sleep and you have come to bring me some news?”

“Alas, sire,” answered Athos, “your majesty has guessed aright.”

“It is bad news?”

“Yes, sire.”

“Never mind; the messenger is welcome. You never come to me without
conferring pleasure. You whose devotion recognizes neither country nor
misfortune, you who are sent to me by Henrietta; whatever news you
bring, speak out.”

“Sire, Cromwell has arrived this night at Newcastle.”

“Ah!” exclaimed the king, “to fight?”

“No, sire, but to buy your majesty.”

“What did you say?”

“I said, sire, that four hundred thousand pounds are owing to the
Scottish army.”

“For unpaid wages; yes, I know it. For the last year my faithful
Highlanders have fought for honor alone.”

Athos smiled.

“Well, sir, though honor is a fine thing, they are tired of fighting
for it, and to-night they have sold you for two hundred thousand
pounds—that is to say, for half what is owing them.”

“Impossible!” cried the king, “the Scotch sell their king for two
hundred thousand pounds! And who is the Judas who has concluded this
infamous bargain?”

“Lord Leven.”

“Are you certain of it, sir?”

“I heard it with my own ears.”

The king sighed deeply, as if his heart would break, and then buried
his face in his hands.

“Oh! the Scotch,” he exclaimed, “the Scotch I called ‘my faithful,’ to
whom I trusted myself when I could have fled to Oxford! the Scotch, my
brothers! But are you well assured, sir?”

“Lying behind the tent of Lord Leven, I raised it and saw all, heard
all!”

“And when is this to be consummated?”

“To-day—this morning; so your majesty must perceive there is no time to
lose!”

“To do what? since you say I am sold.”

“To cross the Tyne, reach Scotland and rejoin Lord Montrose, who will
not sell you.”

“And what shall I do in Scotland? A war of partisans, unworthy of a
king.”

“The example of Robert Bruce will absolve you, sire.”

“No, no! I have fought too long; they have sold me, they shall give me
up, and the eternal shame of treble treason shall fall on their heads.”

“Sire,” said Athos, “perhaps a king should act thus, but not a husband
and a father. I have come in the name of your wife and daughter and of
the children you have still in London, and I say to you, ‘Live,
sire,’—it is the will of Heaven.”

The king raised himself, buckled on his belt, and passing his
handkerchief over his moist forehead, said:

“Well, what is to be done?”

“Sire, have you in the army one regiment on which you can implicitly
rely?”

“Winter,” said the king, “do you believe in the fidelity of yours?”

“Sire, they are but men, and men are become both weak and wicked. I
will not answer for them. I would confide my life to them, but I should
hesitate ere I trusted them with your majesty’s.”

“Well!” said Athos, “since you have not a regiment, we are three
devoted men. It is enough. Let your majesty mount on horseback and
place yourself in the midst of us; we will cross the Tyne, reach
Scotland, and you will be saved.”

“Is this your counsel also, Winter?” inquired the king.

“Yes, sire.”

“And yours, Monsieur d’Herblay?”

“Yes, sire.”

“As you wish, then. Winter, give the necessary orders.”

Winter then left the tent; in the meantime the king finished his
toilet. The first rays of daybreak penetrated the aperture of the tent
as Winter re-entered it.

“All is ready, sire,” said he.

“For us, also?” inquired Athos.

“Grimaud and Blaisois are holding your horses, ready saddled.”

“In that case,” exclaimed Athos, “let us not lose an instant, but set
off.”

“Come,” added the king.

“Sire,” said Aramis, “will not your majesty acquaint some of your
friends of this?”

“Friends!” answered Charles, sadly, “I have but three—one of twenty
years, who has never forgotten me, and two of a week’s standing, whom I
shall never forget. Come, gentlemen, come!”

The king quitted his tent and found his horse ready waiting for him. It
was a chestnut that the king had ridden for three years and of which he
was very fond.

The horse neighed with pleasure at seeing him.

“Ah!” said the king, “I was unjust; here is a creature that loves me.
You at least will be faithful to me, Arthur.”

The horse, as if it understood these words, bent its red nostrils
toward the king’s face, and parting his lips displayed all its teeth,
as if with pleasure.

“Yes, yes,” said the king, caressing it with his hand, “yes, my Arthur,
thou art a fond and faithful creature.”

After this little scene Charles threw himself into the saddle, and
turning to Athos, Aramis and Winter, said:

“Now, gentlemen, I am at your service.”

But Athos was standing with his eyes fixed on a black line which
bordered the banks of the Tyne and seemed to extend double the length
of the camp.

“What is that line?” cried Athos, whose vision was still rather
obscured by the uncertain shades and demi-tints of daybreak. “What is
that line? I did not observe it yesterday.”

“It must be the fog rising from the river,” said the king.

“Sire, it is something more opaque than the fog.”

“Indeed!” said Winter, “it appears to me like a bar of red color.”

“It is the enemy, who have made a sortie from Newcastle and are
surrounding us!” exclaimed Athos.

“The enemy!” cried the king.

“Yes, the enemy. It is too late. Stop a moment; does not that sunbeam
yonder, just by the side of the town, glitter on the Ironsides?”

This was the name given the cuirassiers, whom Cromwell had made his
body-guard.

“Ah!” said the king, “we shall soon see whether my Highlanders have
betrayed me or not.”

“What are you going to do?” exclaimed Athos.

“To give them the order to charge, and run down these miserable
rebels.”

And the king, putting spurs to his horse, set off to the tent of Lord
Leven.

“Follow him,” said Athos.

“Come!” exclaimed Aramis.

“Is the king wounded?” cried Lord Winter. “I see spots of blood on the
ground.” And he set off to follow the two friends.

He was stopped by Athos.

“Go and call out your regiment,” said he; “I can foresee that we shall
have need of it directly.”

Winter turned his horse and the two friends rode on. It had taken but
two minutes for the king to reach the tent of the Scottish commander;
he dismounted and entered.

The general was there, surrounded by the more prominent chiefs.

“The king!” they exclaimed, as all rose in bewilderment.

Charles was indeed in the midst of them, his hat on his head, his brows
bent, striking his boot with his riding whip.

“Yes, gentlemen, the king in person, the king who has come to ask for
some account of what has happened.”

“What is the matter, sire?” exclaimed Lord Leven.

“It is this, sir,” said the king, angrily, “that General Cromwell has
reached Newcastle; that you knew it and I was not informed of it; that
the enemy have left the town and are now closing the passages of the
Tyne against us; that our sentinels have seen this movement and I have
been left unacquainted with it; that, by an infamous treaty you have
sold me for two hundred thousand pounds to Parliament. Of this treaty,
at least, I have been warned. This is the matter, gentlemen; answer and
exculpate yourselves, for I stand here to accuse you.”

“Sire,” said Lord Leven, with hesitation, “sire, your majesty has been
deceived by false reports.”

“My own eyes have seen the enemy extend itself between myself and
Scotland; and I can almost say that with my own ears I have heard the
clauses of the treaty debated.”

The Scotch chieftains looked at each other in their turn with frowning
brows.

“Sire,” murmured Lord Leven, crushed by shame, “sire, we are ready to
give you every proof of our fidelity.”

“I ask but one,” said the king; “put the army in battle array and face
the enemy.”

“That cannot be, sire,” said the earl.

“How, cannot be? What hinders it?” exclaimed the king.

“Your majesty is well aware that there is a truce between us and the
English army.”

“And if there is a truce the English army has broken it by quitting the
town, contrary to the agreement which kept it there. Now, I tell you,
you must pass with me through this army across to Scotland, and if you
refuse you may choose betwixt two names, which the contempt of all
honest men will brand you with—you are either cowards or traitors!”

The eyes of the Scotch flashed fire; and, as often happens on such
occasions, from shame they passed to effrontery and two heads of clans
advanced upon the king.

“Yes,” said they, “we have promised to deliver Scotland and England
from him who for the last five-and-twenty years has sucked the blood
and gold of Scotland and England. We have promised and we will keep our
promise. Charles Stuart, you are our prisoner.”

And both extended their hands as if to seize the king, but before they
could touch him with the tips of their fingers, both had fallen, one
dead, the other stunned.

Aramis had passed his sword through the body of the first and Athos had
knocked down the other with the butt end of his pistol.

Then, as Lord Leven and the other chieftains recoiled before this
unexpected rescue, which seemed to come from Heaven for the prince they
already thought was their prisoner, Athos and Aramis dragged the king
from the perjured assembly into which he had so imprudently ventured,
and throwing themselves on horseback all three returned at full gallop
to the royal tent.

On their road they perceived Lord Winter marching at the head of his
regiment. The king motioned him to accompany them.




Chapter LVI.
The Avenger.


They all four entered the tent; they had no plan ready—they must think
of one.

The king threw himself into an arm-chair. “I am lost,” said he.

“No, sire,” replied Athos. “You are only betrayed.”

The king sighed deeply.

“Betrayed! yes betrayed by the Scotch, amongst whom I was born, whom I
have always loved better than the English. Oh, traitors that ye are!”

“Sire,” said Athos, “this is not a moment for recrimination, but a time
to show yourself a king and a gentleman. Up, sire! up! for you have
here at least three men who will not betray you. Ah! if we had been
five!” murmured Athos, thinking of D’Artagnan and Porthos.

“What do you say?” inquired Charles, rising.

“I say, sire, that there is now but one way open. Lord Winter answers
for his regiment, or at least very nearly so—we will not split straws
about words—let him place himself at the head of his men, we will place
ourselves at the side of your majesty, and we will mow a swath through
Cromwell’s army and reach Scotland.”

“There is another method,” said Aramis. “Let one of us put on the dress
and mount the king’s horse. Whilst they pursue him the king might
escape.”

“It is good advice,” said Athos, “and if the king will do one of us the
honor we shall be truly grateful to him.”

“What do you think of this counsel, Winter?” asked the king, looking
with admiration at these two men, whose chief idea seemed to be how
they could take on their shoulders all the dangers that assailed him.

“I think the only chance of saving your majesty has just been proposed
by Monsieur d’Herblay. I humbly entreat your majesty to choose quickly,
for we have not an instant to lose.”

“But if I accept, it is death, or at least imprisonment, for him who
takes my place.”

“He will have had the glory of having saved his king,” cried Winter.

The king looked at his old friend with tears in his eyes; undid the
Order of the Saint Esprit which he wore, to honor the two Frenchmen who
were with him, and passed it around Winter’s neck, who received on his
knees this striking proof of his sovereign’s confidence and friendship.

“It is right,” said Athos; “he has served your majesty longer than we
have.”

The king overheard these words and turned around with tears in his
eyes.

“Wait a moment, sir,” said he; “I have an order for each of you also.”

He turned to a closet where his own orders were locked up, and took out
two ribbons of the Order of the Garter.

“These cannot be for us,” said Athos.

“Why not, sir?” asked Charles.

“Such are for royalty, and we are simple commoners.”

“Speak not of crowns. I shall not find amongst them such great hearts
as yours. No, no, you do yourselves injustice; but I am here to do you
justice. On your knees, count.”

Athos knelt down and the king passed the ribbon down from left to right
as usual, raised his sword, and instead of pronouncing the customary
formula, “I make you a knight. Be brave, faithful and loyal,” he said,
“You are brave, faithful and loyal. I knight you, monsieur le comte.”

Then turning to Aramis, he said:

“It is now your turn, monsieur le chevalier.”

The same ceremony recommenced, with the same words, whilst Winter
unlaced his leather cuirass, that he might disguise himself like the
king. Charles, having proceeded with Aramis as with Athos, embraced
them both.

“Sire,” said Winter, who in this trying emergency felt all his strength
and energy fire up, “we are ready.”

The king looked at the three gentlemen. “Then we must fly!” said he.

“Flying through an army, sire,” said Athos, “in all countries in the
world is called charging.”

“Then I shall die, sword in hand,” said Charles. “Monsieur le comte,
monsieur le chevalier, if ever I am king——”

“Sire, you have already done us more honor than simple gentlemen could
ever aspire to, therefore gratitude is on our side. But we must not
lose time. We have already wasted too much.”

The king again shook hands with all three, exchanged hats with Winter
and went out.

Winter’s regiment was ranged on some high ground above the camp. The
king, followed by the three friends, turned his steps that way. The
Scotch camp seemed as if at last awakened; the soldiers had come out of
their tents and taken up their station in battle array.

“Do you see that?” said the king. “Perhaps they are penitent and
preparing to march.”

“If they are penitent,” said Athos, “let them follow us.”

“Well!” said the king, “what shall we do?”

“Let us examine the enemy’s army.”

At the same instant the eyes of the little group were fixed on the same
line which at daybreak they had mistaken for fog and which the morning
sun now plainly showed was an army in order of battle. The air was soft
and clear, as it generally is at that early hour of the morning. The
regiments, the standards, and even the colors of the horses and
uniforms were now clearly distinct.

On the summit of a rising ground, a little in advance of the enemy,
appeared a short and heavy looking man; this man was surrounded by
officers. He turned a spyglass toward the little group amongst which
the king stood.

“Does this man know your majesty personally?” inquired Aramis.

Charles smiled.

“That man is Cromwell,” said he.

“Then draw down your hat, sire, that he may not discover the
substitution.”

“Ah!” said Athos, “how much time we have lost.”

“Now,” said the king, “give the word and let us start.”

“Will you not give it, sire?” asked Athos.

“No; I make you my lieutenant-general,” said the king.

“Listen, then, Lord Winter. Proceed, sire, I beg. What we are going to
say does not concern your majesty.”

The king, smiling, turned a few steps back.

“This is what I propose to do,” said Athos. “We will divide our
regiments into two squadrons. You will put yourself at the head of the
first. We and his majesty will lead the second. If no obstacle occurs
we will both charge together, force the enemy’s line and throw
ourselves into the Tyne, which we must cross, either by fording or
swimming; if, on the contrary, any repulse should take place, you and
your men must fight to the last man, whilst we and the king proceed on
our road. Once arrived at the brink of the river, should we even find
them three ranks deep, as long as you and your regiment do your duty,
we will look to the rest.”

“To horse!” said Lord Winter.

“To horse!” re-echoed Athos; “everything is arranged and decided.”

“Now, gentlemen,” cried the king, “forward! and rally to the old cry of
France, ‘Montjoy and St. Denis!’ The war cry of England is too often in
the mouths of traitors.”

They mounted—the king on Winter’s horse and Winter on that of the king;
then Winter took his place at the head of the first squadron, and the
king, with Athos on his right and Aramis on his left, at the head of
the second.

The Scotch army stood motionless and silent, seized with shame at sight
of these preparations.

Some of the chieftains left the ranks and broke their swords in two.

“There,” said the king, “that consoles me; they are not all traitors.”

At this moment Winter’s voice was raised with the cry of “Forward!”

The first squadron moved off; the second followed, and descended from
the plateau. A regiment of cuirassiers, nearly equal as to numbers,
issued from behind the hill and came full gallop toward it.

The king pointed this out.

“Sire,” said Athos, “we foresaw this; and if Lord Winter’s men but do
their duty, we are saved, instead of lost.”

At this moment they heard above all the galloping and neighing of the
horses Winter’s voice crying out:

“Sword in hand!”

At these words every sword was drawn, and glittered in the air like
lightning.

“Now, gentlemen,” said the king in his turn, excited by this sight,
“come, gentlemen, sword in hand!”

But Aramis and Athos were the only ones to obey this command and the
king’s example.

“We are betrayed,” said the king in a low voice.

“Wait a moment,” said Athos, “perhaps they do not recognize your
majesty’s voice, and await the order of their captain.”

“Have they not heard that of their colonel? But look! look!” cried the
king, drawing up his horse with a sudden jerk, which threw it on its
haunches, and seizing the bridle of Athos’s horse.

“Ah, cowards! traitors!” screamed Lord Winter, whose voice they heard,
whilst his men, quitting their ranks, dispersed all over the plain.

About fifteen men were ranged around him and awaited the charge of
Cromwell’s cuirassiers.

“Let us go and die with them!” said the king.

“Let us go,” said Athos and Aramis.

“All faithful hearts with me!” cried out Winter.

This voice was heard by the two friends, who set off, full gallop.

“No quarter!” cried a voice in French, answering to that of Winter,
which made them tremble.

As for Winter, at the sound of that voice he turned pale, and was, as
it were, petrified.

It was the voice of a cavalier mounted on a magnificent black horse,
who was charging at the head of the English regiment, of which, in his
ardor, he was ten steps in advance.

“’Tis he!” murmured Winter, his eyes glazed and he allowed his sword to
fall to his side.

“The king! the king!” cried out several voices, deceived by the blue
ribbon and chestnut horse of Winter; “take him alive.”

“No! it is not the king!” exclaimed the cavalier. “Lord Winter, you are
not the king; you are my uncle.”

At the same moment Mordaunt, for it was he, leveled his pistol at
Winter; it went off and the ball entered the heart of the old cavalier,
who with one bound on his saddle fell back into the arms of Athos,
murmuring: “He is avenged!”

“Think of my mother!” shouted Mordaunt, as his horse plunged and darted
off at full gallop.

“Wretch!” exclaimed Aramis, raising his pistol as he passed by him; but
the powder flashed in the pan and it did not go off.

At this moment the whole regiment came up and they fell upon the few
men who had held out, surrounding the two Frenchmen. Athos, after
making sure that Lord Winter was really dead, let fall the corpse and
said:

“Come, Aramis, now for the honor of France!” and the two Englishmen who
were nearest to them fell, mortally wounded.

At the same moment a fearful “hurrah!” rent the air and thirty blades
glittered about their heads.

Suddenly a man sprang out of the English ranks, fell upon Athos, twined
arms of steel around him, and tearing his sword from him, said in his
ear:

“Silence! yield—you yield to me, do you not?”

A giant had seized also Aramis’s two wrists, who struggled in vain to
release himself from this formidable grasp.

“D’Art——” exclaimed Athos, whilst the Gascon covered his mouth with his
hand.

“I am your prisoner,” said Aramis, giving up his sword to Porthos.

“Fire, fire!” cried Mordaunt, returning to the group surrounding the
two friends.

“And wherefore fire?” said the colonel; “every one has yielded.”

“It is the son of Milady,” said Athos to D’Artagnan.

“I recognize him.”

“It is the monk,” whispered Porthos to Aramis.

“I know it.”

And now the ranks began to open. D’Artagnan held the bridle of Athos’s
horse and Porthos that of Aramis. Both of them attempted to lead his
prisoner off the battle-field.

This movement revealed the spot where Winter’s body had fallen.
Mordaunt had found it out and was gazing on his dead relative with an
expression of malignant hatred.

Athos, though now cool and collected, put his hand to his belt, where
his loaded pistols yet remained.

“What are you about?” said D’Artagnan.

“Let me kill him.”

“We are all four lost, if by the least gesture you discover that you
recognize him.”

Then turning to the young man he exclaimed:

“A fine prize! a fine prize, friend Mordaunt; we have both myself and
Monsieur du Vallon, taken two Knights of the Garter, nothing less.”

“But,” said Mordaunt, looking at Athos and Aramis with bloodshot eyes,
“these are Frenchmen, I imagine.”

“I’faith, I don’t know. Are you French, sir?” said he to Athos.

“I am,” replied the latter, gravely.

“Very well, my dear sir, you are the prisoner of a fellow countryman.”

“But the king—where is the king?” exclaimed Athos, anxiously.

D’Artagnan vigorously seized his prisoner’s hand, saying:

“Eh! the king? We have secured him.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “through an infamous act of treason.”

Porthos pressed his friend’s hand and said to him:

“Yes, sir, all is fair in war, stratagem as well as force; look
yonder!”

At this instant the squadron, that ought to have protected Charles’s
retreat, was advancing to meet the English regiments. The king, who was
entirely surrounded, walked alone in a great empty space. He appeared
calm, but it was evidently not without a mighty effort. Drops of
perspiration trickled down his face, and from time to time he put a
handkerchief to his mouth to wipe away the blood that rilled from it.

“Behold Nebuchadnezzar!” exclaimed an old Puritan soldier, whose eyes
flashed at the sight of the man they called the tyrant.

“Do you call him Nebuchadnezzar?” said Mordaunt, with a terrible smile;
“no, it is Charles the First, the king, the good King Charles, who
despoils his subjects to enrich himself.”

Charles glanced a moment at the insolent creature who uttered this, but
did not recognize him. Nevertheless, the calm religious dignity of his
countenance abashed Mordaunt.

“Bon jour, messieurs!” said the king to the two gentlemen who were held
by D’Artagnan and Porthos. “The day has been unfortunate, but it is not
your fault, thank God! But where is my old friend Winter?”

The two gentlemen turned away their heads in silence.

“In Strafford’s company,” said Mordaunt, tauntingly.

Charles shuddered. The demon had known how to wound him. The
remembrance of Strafford was a source of lasting remorse to him, the
shadow that haunted him by day and night. The king looked around him.
He saw a corpse at his feet. It was Winter’s. He uttered not a word,
nor shed a tear, but a deadly pallor spread over his face; he knelt
down on the ground, raised Winter’s head, and unfastening the Order of
the Saint Esprit, placed it on his own breast.

“Lord Winter is killed, then?” inquired D’Artagnan, fixing his eyes on
the corpse.

“Yes,” said Athos, “by his own nephew.”

“Come, he was the first of us to go; peace be to him! he was an honest
man,” said D’Artagnan.

“Charles Stuart,” said the colonel of the English regiment, approaching
the king, who had just put on the insignia of royalty, “do you yield
yourself a prisoner?”

“Colonel Tomlison,” said Charles, “kings cannot yield; the man alone
submits to force.”

“Your sword.”

The king drew his sword and broke it on his knee.

At this moment a horse without a rider, covered with foam, his nostrils
extended and eyes all fire, galloped up, and recognizing his master,
stopped and neighed with pleasure; it was Arthur.

The king smiled, patted it with his hand and jumped lightly into the
saddle.

“Now, gentlemen,” said he, “conduct me where you will.”

Turning back again, he said, “I thought I saw Winter move; if he still
lives, by all you hold most sacred, do not abandon him.”

“Never fear, King Charles,” said Mordaunt, “the bullet pierced his
heart.”

“Do not breathe a word nor make the least sign to me or Porthos,” said
D’Artagnan to Athos and Aramis, “that you recognize this man, for
Milady is not dead; her soul lives in the body of this demon.”

The detachment now moved toward the town with the royal captive; but on
the road an aide-de-camp, from Cromwell, sent orders that Colonel
Tomlison should conduct him to Holdenby Castle.

At the same time couriers started in every direction over England and
Europe to announce that Charles Stuart was the prisoner of Oliver
Cromwell.




Chapter LVII. Oliver Cromwell.


Have you been to the general?” said Mordaunt to D’Artagnan and Porthos;
“you know he sent for you after the action.”

“We want first to put our prisoners in a place of safety,” replied
D’Artagnan. “Do you know, sir, these gentlemen are each of them worth
fifteen hundred pounds?”

“Oh, be assured,” said Mordaunt, looking at them with an expression he
vainly endeavoured to soften, “my soldiers will guard them, and guard
them well, I promise you.”

“I shall take better care of them myself,” answered D’Artagnan;
“besides, all they require is a good room, with sentinels, or their
simple parole that they will not attempt escape. I will go and see
about that, and then we shall have the honor of presenting ourselves to
the general and receiving his commands for his eminence.”

“You think of starting at once, then?” inquired Mordaunt.

“Our mission is ended, and there is nothing more to detain us now but
the good pleasure of the great man to whom we were sent.”

The young man bit his lips and whispered to his sergeant:

“You will follow these men and not lose sight of them; when you have
discovered where they lodge, come and await me at the town gate.”

The sergeant made a sign of comprehension.

Instead of following the knot of prisoners that were being taken into
the town, Mordaunt turned his steps toward the rising ground from
whence Cromwell had witnessed the battle and on which he had just had
his tent pitched.

Cromwell had given orders that no one was to be allowed admission; but
the sentinel, who knew that Mordaunt was one of the most confidential
friends of the general, thought the order did not extend to the young
man. Mordaunt, therefore, raised the canvas, and saw Cromwell seated
before a table, his head buried in his hands, his back being turned.

Whether he heard Mordaunt or not as he entered, Cromwell did not move.
Mordaunt remained standing near the door. At last, after a few moments,
Cromwell raised his head, and, as if he divined that some one was
there, turned slowly around.

“I said I wished to be alone,” he exclaimed, on seeing the young man.

“They thought this order did not concern me, sir; nevertheless, if you
wish it, I am ready to go.”

“Ah! is it you, Mordaunt?” said Cromwell, the cloud passing away from
his face; “since you are here, it is well; you may remain.”

“I come to congratulate you.”

“To congratulate me—what for?”

“On the capture of Charles Stuart. You are now master of England.”

“I was much more really so two hours ago.”

“How so, general?”

“Because England had need of me to take the tyrant, and now the tyrant
is taken. Have you seen him?”

“Yes, sir.” said Mordaunt.

“What is his bearing?”

Mordaunt hesitated; but it seemed as though he was constrained to tell
the truth.

“Calm and dignified,” said he.

“What did he say?”

“Some parting words to his friends.”

“His friends!” murmured Cromwell. “Has he any friends?” Then he added
aloud, “Did he make any resistance?”

“No, sir, with the exception of two or three friends every one deserted
him; he had no means of resistance.”

“To whom did he give up his sword?”

“He did not give it up; he broke it.”

“He did well; but instead of breaking it, he might have used it to
still more advantage.”

There was a momentary pause.

“I heard that the colonel of the regiment that escorted Charles was
killed,” said Cromwell, staring very fixedly at Mordaunt.

“Yes, sir.”

“By whom?” inquired Cromwell.

“By me.”

“What was his name?”

“Lord Winter.”

“Your uncle?” exclaimed Cromwell.

“My uncle,” answered Mordaunt; “but traitors to England are no longer
members of my family.”

Cromwell observed the young man a moment in silence, then, with that
profound melancholy Shakespeare describes so well:

“Mordaunt,” he said, “you are a terrible servant.”

“When the Lord commands,” said Mordaunt, “His commands are not to be
disputed. Abraham raised the knife against Isaac, and Isaac was his
son.”

“Yes,” said Cromwell, “but the Lord did not suffer that sacrifice to be
accomplished.”

“I have looked around me,” said Mordaunt, “and I have seen neither goat
nor kid caught among the bushes of the plain.”

Cromwell bowed. “You are strong among the strong, Mordaunt,” he said;
“and the Frenchmen, how did they behave?”

“Most fearlessly.”

“Yes, yes,” murmured Cromwell; “the French fight well; and if my glass
was good and I mistake not, they were foremost in the fight.”

“They were,” replied Mordaunt.

“After you, however,” said Cromwell.

“It was the fault of their horses, not theirs.”

Another pause.

“And the Scotch?”

“They kept their word and never stirred,” said Mordaunt.

“Wretched men!”

“Their officers wish to see you, sir.”

“I have no time to see them. Are they paid?”

“Yes, to-night.”

“Let them be off and return to their own country, there to hide their
shame, if its hills are high enough; I have nothing more to do with
them nor they with me. And now go, Mordaunt.”

“Before I go,” said Mordaunt, “I have some questions and a favor to ask
you, sir.”

“A favor from me?”

Mordaunt bowed.

“I come to you, my leader, my head, my father, and I ask you, master,
are you contented with me?”

Cromwell looked at him with astonishment. The young man remained
immovable.

“Yes,” said Cromwell; “you have done, since I knew you, not only your
duty, but more than your duty; you have been a faithful friend, a
cautious negotiator, a brave soldier.”

“Do you remember, sir it was my idea, the Scotch treaty, for giving up
the king?”

“Yes, the idea was yours. I had no such contempt for men before.”

“Was I not a good ambassador in France?”

“Yes, for Mazarin has granted what I desire.”

“Have I not always fought for your glory and interests?”

“Too ardently, perhaps; it is what I have just reproached you for. But
what is the meaning of all these questions?”

“To tell you, my lord, that the moment has now arrived when, with a
single word, you may recompense all these services.”

“Oh!” said Oliver, with a slight curl of his lip, “I forgot that every
service merits some reward and that up to this moment you have not been
paid.”

“Sir, I can take my pay at this moment, to the full extent of my
wishes.”

“How is that?”

“I have the payment under my hand; I almost possess it.”

“What is it? Have they offered you money? Do you wish a step, or some
place in the government?”

“Sir, will you grant me my request?”

“Let us hear what it is, first.”

“Sir, when you have told me to obey an order did I ever answer, ‘Let me
see that order’?”

“If, however, your wish should be one impossible to fulfill?”

“When you have cherished a wish and have charged me with its
fulfillment, have I ever replied, ‘It is impossible’?”

“But a request preferred with so much preparation——”

“Ah, do not fear, sir,” said Mordaunt, with apparent simplicity: “it
will not ruin you.”

“Well, then,” said Cromwell, “I promise, as far as lies in my power, to
grant your request; proceed.”

“Sir, two prisoners were taken this morning, will you let me have
them?”

“For their ransom? have they then offered a large one?” inquired
Cromwell.

“On the contrary, I think they are poor, sir.”

“They are friends of yours, then?”

“Yes, sir,” exclaimed Mordaunt, “they are friends, dear friends of
mine, and I would lay down my life for them.”

“Very well, Mordaunt,” exclaimed Cromwell, pleased at having his
opinion of the young man raised once more; “I will give them to you; I
will not even ask who they are; do as you like with them.”

“Thank you, sir!” exclaimed Mordaunt, “thank you; my life is always at
your service, and should I lose it I should still owe you something;
thank you; you have indeed repaid me munificently for my services.”

He threw himself at the feet of Cromwell, and in spite of the efforts
of the Puritan general, who did not like this almost kingly homage, he
took his hand and kissed it.

“What!” said Cromwell, arresting him for a moment as he arose; “is
there nothing more you wish? neither gold nor rank?”

“You have given me all you can give me, and from to-day your debt is
paid.”

And Mordaunt darted out of the general’s tent, his heart beating and
his eyes sparkling with joy.

Cromwell gazed a moment after him.

“He has slain his uncle!” he murmured. “Alas! what are my servants?
Possibly this one, who asks nothing or seems to ask nothing, has asked
more in the eyes of Heaven than those who tax the country and steal the
bread of the poor. Nobody serves me for nothing. Charles, who is my
prisoner, may still have friends, but I have none!”

And with a deep sigh he again sank into the reverie that had been
interrupted by Mordaunt.




Chapter LVIII.
Jesus Seigneur.


Whilst Mordaunt was making his way to Cromwell’s tent, D’Artagnan and
Porthos had brought their prisoners to the house which had been
assigned to them as their dwelling at Newcastle.

The order given by Mordaunt to the sergeant had been heard by
D’Artagnan, who accordingly, by an expressive glance, warned Athos and
Aramis to exercise extreme caution. The prisoners, therefore, had
remained silent as they marched along in company with their
conquerors—which they could do with the less difficulty since each of
them had occupation enough in answering his own thoughts.

It would be impossible to describe Mousqueton’s astonishment when from
the threshold of the door he saw the four friends approaching, followed
by a sergeant with a dozen men. He rubbed his eyes, doubting if he
really saw before him Athos and Aramis; and forced at last to yield to
evidence, he was on the point of breaking forth in exclamations when he
encountered a glance from the eyes of Porthos, the repressive force of
which he was not inclined to dispute.

Mousqueton remained glued to the door, awaiting the explanation of this
strange occurrence. What upset him completely was that the four friends
seemed to have no acquaintance with one another.

The house to which D’Artagnan and Porthos conducted Athos and Aramis
was the one assigned to them by General Cromwell and of which they had
taken possession on the previous evening. It was at the corner of two
streets and had in the rear, bordering on the side street, stables and
a sort of garden. The windows on the ground floor, according to a
custom in provincial villages, were barred, so that they strongly
resembled the windows of a prison.

The two friends made the prisoners enter the house first, whilst they
stood at the door, desiring Mousqueton to take the four horses to the
stable.

“Why don’t we go in with them?” asked Porthos.

“We must first see what the sergeant wishes us to do,” replied
D’Artagnan.

The sergeant and his men took possession of the little garden.

D’Artagnan asked them what they wished and why they had taken that
position.

“We have had orders,” answered the man, “to help you in taking care of
your prisoners.”

There could be no fault to find with this arrangement; on the contrary,
it seemed to be a delicate attention, to be gratefully received;
D’Artagnan, therefore, thanked the man and gave him a crown piece to
drink to General Cromwell’s health.

The sergeant answered that Puritans never drank, and put the crown
piece in his pocket.

“Ah!” said Porthos, “what a fearful day, my dear D’Artagnan!”

“What! a fearful day, when to-day we find our friends?”

“Yes; but under what circumstances?”

“’Tis true that our position is an awkward one; but let us go in and
see more clearly what is to be done.”

“Things look black enough,” replied Porthos; “I understand now why
Aramis advised me to strangle that horrible Mordaunt.”

“Silence!” cried the Gascon; “do not utter that name.”

“But,” argued Porthos, “I speak French and they are all English.”

D’Artagnan looked at Porthos with that air of wonder which a cunning
man cannot help feeling at displays of crass stupidity.

But as Porthos on his side could not comprehend his astonishment, he
merely pushed him indoors, saying, “Let us go in.”

They found Athos in profound despondency; Aramis looked first at
Porthos and then at D’Artagnan, without speaking, but the latter
understood his meaningful look.

“You want to know how we came here? ’Tis easily guessed. Mazarin sent
us with a letter to General Cromwell.”

“But how came you to fall into company with Mordaunt, whom I bade you
distrust?” asked Athos.

“And whom I advised you to strangle, Porthos,” said Aramis.

“Mazarin again. Cromwell had sent him to Mazarin. Mazarin sent us to
Cromwell. There is a certain fatality in it.”

“Yes, you are right, D’Artagnan, a fatality that will separate and ruin
us! So, my dear Aramis, say no more about it and let us prepare to
submit to destiny.”

“Zounds! on the contrary, let us speak about it; for it was agreed
among us, once for all, that we should always hold together, though
engaged on opposing sides.”

“Yes,” added Athos, “I now ask you, D’Artagnan, what side you are on?
Ah! behold for what end the wretched Mazarin has made use of you. Do
you know in what crime you are to-day engaged? In the capture of a
king, his degradation and his murder.”

“Oh! oh!” cried Porthos, “do you think so?”

“You are exaggerating, Athos; we are not so far gone as that,” replied
the lieutenant.

“Good heavens! we are on the very eve of it. I say, why is the king
taken prisoner? Those who wish to respect him as a master would not buy
him as a slave. Do you think it is to replace him on the throne that
Cromwell has paid for him two hundred thousand pounds sterling? They
will kill him, you may be sure of it.”

“I don’t maintain the contrary,” said D’Artagnan. “But what’s that to
us? I am here because I am a soldier and have to obey orders—I have
taken an oath to obey, and I do obey; but you who have taken no such
oath, why are you here and what cause do you represent?”

“That most sacred in the world,” said Athos; “the cause of misfortune,
of religion, royalty. A friend, a wife, a daughter, have done us the
honor to call us to their aid. We have served them to the best of our
poor means, and God will recompense the will, forgive the want of
power. You may see matters differently, D’Artagnan, and think
otherwise. I will not attempt to argue with you, but I blame you.”

“Heyday!” cried D’Artagnan, “what matters it to me, after all, if
Cromwell, who’s an Englishman, revolts against his king, who is a
Scotchman? I am myself a Frenchman. I have nothing to do with these
things—why hold me responsible?”

“Yes,” said Porthos.

“Because all gentlemen are brothers, because you are a gentleman,
because the kings of all countries are the first among gentlemen,
because the blind populace, ungrateful and brutal, always takes
pleasure in pulling down what is above them. And you, you, D’Artagnan,
a man sprung from the ancient nobility of France, bearing an honorable
name, carrying a good sword, have helped to give up a king to
beersellers, shopkeepers, and wagoners. Ah! D’Artagnan! perhaps you
have done your duty as a soldier, but as a gentleman, I say that you
are very culpable.”

D’Artagnan was chewing the stalk of a flower, unable to reply and
thoroughly uncomfortable; for when turned from the eyes of Athos he
encountered those of Aramis.

“And you, Porthos,” continued the count, as if in consideration for
D’Artagnan’s embarrassment, “you, the best heart, the best friend, the
best soldier that I know—you, with a soul that makes you worthy of a
birth on the steps of a throne, and who, sooner or later, must receive
your reward from an intelligent king—you, my dear Porthos, you, a
gentleman in manners, in tastes and in courage, you are as culpable as
D’Artagnan.”

Porthos blushed, but with pleasure rather than with confusion; and yet,
bowing his head, as if humiliated, he said:

“Yes, yes, my dear count, I feel that you are right.”

Athos arose.

“Come,” he said, stretching out his hand to D’Artagnan, “come, don’t be
sullen, my dear son, for I have said all this to you, if not in the
tone, at least with the feelings of a father. It would have been easier
to me merely to have thanked you for preserving my life and not to have
uttered a word of all this.”

“Doubtless, doubtless, Athos. But here it is: you have sentiments, the
devil knows what, such as every one can’t entertain. Who could suppose
that a sensible man could leave his house, France, his ward—a charming
youth, for we saw him in the camp—to fly to the aid of a rotten,
worm-eaten royalty, which is going to crumble one of these days like an
old hovel. The sentiments you air are certainly fine, so fine that they
are superhuman.”

“However that may be, D’Artagnan,” replied Athos, without falling into
the snare which his Gascon friend had prepared for him by an appeal to
his parental love, “however that may be, you know in the bottom of your
heart that it is true; but I am wrong to dispute with my master.
D’Artagnan, I am your prisoner—treat me as such.”

“Ah! pardieu!” said D’Artagnan, “you know you will not be my prisoner
very long.”

“No,” said Aramis, “they will doubtless treat us like the prisoners of
the Philipghauts.”

“And how were they treated?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Why,” said Aramis, “one-half were hanged and the other half were
shot.”

“Well, I,” said D’Artagnan “I answer that while there remains a drop of
blood in my veins you will be neither hanged nor shot. Sang Diou! let
them come on! Besides—do you see that door, Athos?”

“Yes; what then?”

“Well, you can go out by that door whenever you please; for from this
moment you are free as the air.”

“I recognize you there, my brave D’Artagnan,” replied Athos; “but you
are no longer our masters. That door is guarded, D’Artagnan; you know
that.”

“Very well, you will force it,” said Porthos. “There are only a dozen
men at the most.”

“That would be nothing for us four; it is too much for us two. No,
divided as we now are, we must perish. See the fatal example: on the
Vendomois road, D’Artagnan, you so brave, and you, Porthos, so valiant
and so strong—you were beaten; to-day Aramis and I are beaten in our
turn. Now that never happened to us when we were four together. Let us
die, then, as De Winter has died; as for me, I will fly only on
condition that we all fly together.”

“Impossible,” said D’Artagnan; “we are under Mazarin’s orders.”

“I know it and I have nothing more to say; my arguments lead to
nothing; doubtless they are bad, since they have not determined minds
so just as yours.”

“Besides,” said Aramis, “had they taken effect it would be still better
not to compromise two excellent friends like D’Artagnan and Porthos. Be
assured, gentlemen, we shall do you honor in our dying. As for myself,
I shall be proud to face the bullets, or even the rope, in company with
you, Athos; for you have never seemed to me so grand as you are
to-day.”

D’Artagnan said nothing, but, after having gnawed the flower stalk, he
began to bite his nails. At last:

“Do you imagine,” he resumed, “that they mean to kill you? And
wherefore should they do so? What interest have they in your death?
Moreover, you are our prisoners.”

“Fool!” cried Aramis; “knowest thou not, then, Mordaunt? I have but
exchanged with him one look, yet that look convinced me that we were
doomed.”

“The truth is, I’m very sorry that I did not strangle him as you
advised me,” said Porthos.

“Eh! I make no account of the harm Mordaunt can do!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Cap de Diou! if he troubles me too much I will crush him, the insect!
Do not fly, then. It is useless; for I swear to you that you are as
safe here as you were twenty years, ago—you, Athos, in the Rue Ferou,
and you, Aramis, in the Rue de Vaugirard.”

“Stop,” cried Athos, extending his hand to one of the grated windows by
which the room was lighted; “you will soon know what to expect, for
here he is.”

“Who?”

“Mordaunt.”

In fact, looking at the place to which Athos pointed, D’Artagnan saw a
cavalier coming toward the house at full gallop.

It was Mordaunt.

D’Artagnan rushed out of the room.

Porthos wanted to follow him.

“Stay,” said D’Artagnan, “and do not come till you hear me drum my
fingers on the door.”

When Mordaunt arrived opposite the house he saw D’Artagnan on the
threshold and the soldiers lying on the grass here and there, with
their arms.

“Halloo!” he cried, “are the prisoners still there?”

“Yes, sir,” answered the sergeant, uncovering.

“’Tis well; order four men to conduct them to my lodging.”

Four men prepared to do so.

“What is it?” said D’Artagnan, with that jeering manner which our
readers have so often observed in him since they made his acquaintance.
“What is the matter, if you please?”

“Sir,” replied Mordaunt, “I have ordered the two prisoners we made this
morning to be conducted to my lodging.”

“Wherefore, sir? Excuse curiosity, but I wish to be enlightened on the
subject.”

“Because these prisoners, sir, are at my disposal and I choose to
dispose of them as I like.”

“Allow me—allow me, sir,” said D’Artagnan, “to observe you are in
error. The prisoners belong to those who take them and not to those who
only saw them taken. You might have taken Lord Winter—who, ’tis said,
was your uncle—prisoner, but you preferred killing him; ’tis well; we,
that is, Monsieur du Vallon and I, could have killed our prisoners—we
preferred taking them.”

Mordaunt’s very lips grew white with rage.

D’Artagnan now saw that affairs were growing worse and he beat the
guard’s march upon the door. At the first beat Porthos rushed out and
stood on the other side of the door.

This movement was observed by Mordaunt.

“Sir!” he thus addressed D’Artagnan, “your resistance is useless; these
prisoners have just been given me by my illustrious patron, Oliver
Cromwell.”

These words struck D’Artagnan like a thunderbolt. The blood mounted to
his temples, his eyes became dim; he saw from what fountainhead the
ferocious hopes of the young man arose, and he put his hand to the hilt
of his sword.

As for Porthos, he looked inquiringly at D’Artagnan.

This look of Porthos’s made the Gascon regret that he had summoned the
brute force of his friend to aid him in an affair which seemed to
require chiefly cunning.

“Violence,” he said to himself, “would spoil all; D’Artagnan, my
friend, prove to this young serpent that thou art not only stronger,
but more subtle than he is.”

“Ah!” he said, making a low bow, “why did you not begin by saying that,
Monsieur Mordaunt? What! are you sent by General Oliver Cromwell, the
most illustrious captain of the age?”

“I have this instant left him,” replied Mordaunt, alighting, in order
to give his horse to a soldier to hold.

“Why did you not say so at once, my dear sir! all England is with
Cromwell; and since you ask for my prisoners, I bend, sir, to your
wishes. They are yours; take them.”

Mordaunt, delighted, advanced, Porthos looking at D’Artagnan with
open-mouthed astonishment. Then D’Artagnan trod on his foot and Porthos
began to understand that this was merely acting.

Mordaunt put his foot on the first step of the door and, with his hat
in hand, prepared to pass by the two friends, motioning to the four men
to follow him.

“But, pardon,” said D’Artagnan, with the most charming smile and
putting his hand on the young man’s shoulder, “if the illustrious
General Oliver Cromwell has disposed of our prisoners in your favour,
he has, of course, made that act of donation in writing.”

Mordaunt stopped short.

“He has given you some little writing for me—the least bit of paper
which may show that you come in his name. Be pleased to give me that
scrap of paper so that I may justify, by a pretext at least, my
abandoning my countrymen. Otherwise, you see, although I am sure that
General Oliver Cromwell can intend them no harm, it would have a bad
appearance.”

Mordaunt recoiled; he felt the blow and discharged a terrible look at
D’Artagnan, who responded by the most amiable expression that ever
graced a human countenance.

“When I tell you a thing, sir,” said Mordaunt, “you insult me by
doubting it.”

“I!” cried D’Artagnan, “I doubt what you say! God keep me from it, my
dear Monsieur Mordaunt! On the contrary, I take you to be a worthy and
accomplished gentleman. And then, sir, do you wish me to speak freely
to you?” continued D’Artagnan, with his frank expression.

“Speak out, sir,” said Mordaunt.

“Monsieur du Vallon, yonder, is rich and has forty thousand francs
yearly, so he does not care about money. I do not speak for him, but
for myself.”

“Well, sir? What more?”

“Well—I—I’m not rich. In Gascony ’tis no dishonor, sir, nobody is rich;
and Henry IV., of glorious memory, who was the king of the Gascons, as
His Majesty Philip IV. is the king of the Spaniards, never had a penny
in his pocket.”

“Go on, sir, I see what you wish to get at; and if it is simply what I
think that stops you, I can obviate the difficulty.”

“Ah, I knew well,” said the Gascon, “that you were a man of talent.
Well, here’s the case, here’s where the saddle hurts me, as we French
say. I am an officer of fortune, nothing else; I have nothing but what
my sword brings me in—that is to say, more blows than banknotes. Now,
on taking prisoners, this morning, two Frenchmen, who seemed to me of
high birth—in short, two knights of the Garter—I said to myself, my
fortune is made. I say two, because in such circumstances, Monsieur du
Vallon, who is rich, always gives me his prisoners.”

Mordaunt, completely deceived by the wordy civility of D’Artagnan,
smiled like a man who understands perfectly the reasons given him, and
said:

“I shall have the order signed directly, sir, and with it two thousand
pistoles; meanwhile, let me take these men away.”

“No,” replied D’Artagnan; “what signifies a delay of half an hour? I am
a man of order, sir; let us do things in order.”

“Nevertheless,” replied Mordaunt, “I could compel you; I command here.”

“Ah, sir!” said D’Artagnan, “I see that although we have had the honor
of traveling in your company you do not know us. We are gentlemen; we
are, both of us, able to kill you and your eight men—we two only. For
Heaven’s sake don’t be obstinate, for when others are obstinate I am
obstinate likewise, and then I become ferocious and headstrong, and
there’s my friend, who is even more headstrong and ferocious than
myself. Besides, we are sent here by Cardinal Mazarin, and at this
moment represent both the king and the cardinal, and are, therefore, as
ambassadors, able to act with impunity, a thing that General Oliver
Cromwell, who is assuredly as great a politician as he is a general, is
quite the man to understand. Ask him then, for the written order. What
will that cost you my dear Monsieur Mordaunt?”

“Yes, the written order,” said Porthos, who now began to comprehend
what D’Artagnan was aiming at, “we ask only for that.”

However inclined Mordaunt was to have recourse to violence, he
understood the reasons D’Artagnan had given him; besides, completely
ignorant of the friendship which existed between the four Frenchmen,
all his uneasiness disappeared when he heard of the plausible motive of
the ransom. He decided, therefore, not only to fetch the order, but the
two thousand pistoles, at which he estimated the prisoners. He
therefore mounted his horse and disappeared.

“Good!” thought D’Artagnan; “a quarter of an hour to go to the tent, a
quarter of an hour to return; it is more than we need.” Then turning,
without the least change of countenance, to Porthos, he said, looking
him full in the face: “Friend Porthos, listen to this; first, not a
syllable to either of our friends of what you have heard; it is
unnecessary for them to know the service we are going to render them.”

“Very well; I understand.”

“Go to the stable; you will find Mousqueton there; saddle your horses,
put your pistols in your saddle-bags, take out the horses and lead them
to the street below this, so that there will be nothing to do but mount
them; all the rest is my business.”

Porthos made no remark, but obeyed, with the sublime confidence he had
in his friend.

“I go,” he said, “only, shall I enter the chamber where those gentlemen
are?”

“No, it is not worth while.”

“Well, do me the kindness to take my purse, which I left on the
mantelpiece.”

“All right.”

He then proceeded, with his usual calm gait, to the stable and went
into the very midst of the soldiery, who, foreigner as he was, could
not help admiring his height and the enormous strength of his great
limbs.

At the corner of the street he met Mousqueton and took him with him.

D’Artagnan, meantime, went into the house, whistling a tune which he
had begun before Porthos went away.

“My dear Athos, I have reflected on your arguments and I am convinced.
I am sorry to have had anything to do with this matter. As you say,
Mazarin is a knave. I have resolved to fly with you, not a word—be
ready. Your swords are in the corner; do not forget them, they are in
many circumstances very useful; there is Porthos’s purse, too.”

He put it into his pocket. The two friends were perfectly stupefied.

“Well, pray, is there anything to be so surprised at?” he said. “I was
blind; Athos has made me see, that’s all; come here.”

The two friends went near him.

“Do you see that street? There are the horses. Go out by the door, turn
to the right, jump into your saddles, all will be right; don’t be
uneasy at anything except mistaking the signal. That will be the signal
when I call out—Jesus Seigneur!”

“But give us your word that you will come too, D’Artagnan,” said Athos.

“I swear I will, by Heaven.”

“’Tis settled,” said Aramis; “at the cry ‘Jesus Seigneur’ we go out,
upset all that stands in our way, run to our horses, jump into our
saddles, spur them; is that all?”

“Exactly.”

“See, Aramis, as I have told you, D’Artagnan is first amongst us all,”
said Athos.

“Very true,” replied the Gascon, “but I always run away from
compliments. Don’t forget the signal: ‘Jesus Seigneur!’” and he went
out as he came in, whistling the self-same air.

The soldiers were playing or sleeping; two of them were singing in a
corner, out of tune, the psalm: “On the rivers of Babylon.”

D’Artagnan called the sergeant. “My dear friend, General Cromwell has
sent Monsieur Mordaunt to fetch me. Guard the prisoners well, I beg of
you.”

The sergeant made a sign, as much as to say he did not understand
French, and D’Artagnan tried to make him comprehend by signs and
gestures. Then he went into the stable; he found the five horses
saddled, his own amongst the rest.

“Each of you take a horse by the bridle,” he said to Porthos and
Mousqueton; “turn to the left, so that Athos and Aramis may see you
clearly from the window.”

“They are coming, then?” said Porthos.

“In a moment.”

“You didn’t forget my purse?”

“No; be easy.”

“Good.”

Porthos and Mousqueton each took a horse by the bridle and proceeded to
their post.

Then D’Artagnan, being alone, struck a light and lighted a small bit of
tinder, mounted his horse and stopped at the door in the midst of the
soldiers. There, caressing as he pretended, the animal with his hand,
he put this bit of burning tinder in his ear. It was necessary to be as
good a horseman as he was to risk such a scheme, for no sooner had the
animal felt the burning tinder than he uttered a cry of pain and reared
and jumped as if he had been mad.

The soldiers, whom he was nearly trampling, ran away.

“Help! help!” cried D’Artagnan; “stop—my horse has the staggers.”

In an instant the horse’s eyes grew bloodshot and he was white with
foam.

“Help!” cried D’Artagnan. “What! will you let me be killed? Jesus
Seigneur!”

No sooner had he uttered this cry than the door opened and Athos and
Aramis rushed out. The coast, owing to the Gascon’s stratagem, was
clear.

“The prisoners are escaping! the prisoners are escaping!” cried the
sergeant.

“Stop! stop!” cried D’Artagnan, giving rein to his famous steed, who,
darting forth, overturned several men.

“Stop! stop!” cried the soldiers, and ran for their arms.

But the prisoners were in their saddles and lost no time hastening to
the nearest gate.

In the middle of the street they saw Grimaud and Blaisois, who were
coming to find their masters. With one wave of his hand Athos made
Grimaud, who followed the little troop, understand everything, and they
passed on like a whirlwind, D’Artagnan still directing them from behind
with his voice.

They passed through the gate like apparitions, without the guards
thinking of detaining them, and reached the open country.

All this time the soldiers were calling out, “Stop! stop!” and the
sergeant, who began to see that he was the victim of an artifice, was
almost in a frenzy of despair. Whilst all this was going on, a cavalier
in full gallop was seen approaching. It was Mordaunt with the order in
his hand.

“The prisoners!” he exclaimed, jumping off his horse.

The sergeant had not the courage to reply; he showed him the open door,
the empty room. Mordaunt darted to the steps, understood all, uttered a
cry, as if his very heart was pierced, and fell fainting on the stone
steps.




Chapter LIX.
Noble Natures never lose Courage, nor good Stomachs their Appetites.


The little troop, without looking behind them or exchanging a word,
fled at a rapid gallop, fording a little stream, of which none of them
knew the name, and leaving on their left a town which Athos declared to
be Durham. At last they came in sight of a small wood, and spurring
their horses afresh, rode in its direction.

As soon as they had disappeared behind a green curtain sufficiently
thick to conceal them from the sight of any one who might be in pursuit
they drew up to hold a council together. The two grooms held the
horses, that they might take a little rest without being unsaddled, and
Grimaud was posted as sentinel.

“Come, first of all,” said Athos to D’Artagnan, “my friend, that I may
shake hands with you—you, our rescuer—you, the true hero of us all.”

“Athos is right—you have my adoration,” said Aramis, in his turn
pressing his hand. “To what are you not equal, with your superior
intelligence, infallible eye, your arm of iron and your enterprising
mind!”

“Now,” said the Gascon, “that is all well, I accept for Porthos and
myself everything—thanks and compliments; we have plenty of time to
spare.”

The two friends, recalled by D’Artagnan to what was also due to
Porthos, pressed his hand in their turn.

“And now,” said Athos, “it is not our plan to run anywhere and like
madmen, but we must map up our campaign. What shall we do?”

“What are we going to do, i’faith? It is not very difficult to say.”

“Tell us, then, D’Artagnan.”

“We are going to reach the nearest seaport, unite our little resources,
hire a vessel and return to France. As for me I will give my last sou
for it. Life is the greatest treasure, and speaking candidly, ours
hangs by a thread.”

“What do you say to this, Du Vallon?”

“I,” said Porthos, “I am entirely of D’Artagnan’s opinion; this is a
‘beastly’ country, this England.”

“You are quite decided, then, to leave it?” asked Athos of D’Artagnan.

“Egad! I don’t see what is to keep me here.”

A glance was exchanged between Athos and Aramis.

“Go, then, my friends,” said the former, sighing.

“How, go then?” exclaimed D’Artagnan. “Let us go, you mean?”

“No, my friend,” said Athos, “you must leave us.”

“Leave you!” cried D’Artagnan, quite bewildered at this unexpected
announcement.

“Bah!” said Porthos, “why separate, since we are all together?”

“Because you can and ought to return to France; your mission is
accomplished, but ours is not.”

“Your mission is not accomplished?” exclaimed D’Artagnan, looking in
astonishment at Athos.

“No, my friend,” replied Athos, in his gentle but decided voice, “we
came here to defend King Charles; we have but ill defended him—it
remains for us to save him!”

“To save the king?” said D’Artagnan, looking at Aramis as he had looked
at Athos.

Aramis contented himself by making a sign with his head.

D’Artagnan’s countenance took an expression of the deepest compassion;
he began to think he had to do with madmen.

“You cannot be speaking seriously, Athos!” said he; “the king is
surrounded by an army, which is conducting him to London. This army is
commanded by a butcher, or the son of a butcher—it matters
little—Colonel Harrison. His majesty, I can assure you, will be tried
on his arrival in London; I have heard enough from the lips of Oliver
Cromwell to know what to expect.”

A second look was exchanged between Athos and Aramis.

“And when the trial is ended there will be no delay in putting the
sentence into execution,” continued D’Artagnan.

“And to what penalty do you think the king will be condemned?” asked
Athos.

“The penalty of death, I greatly fear; they have gone too far for him
to pardon them, and there is nothing left to them but one thing, and
that is to kill him. Have you never heard what Oliver Cromwell said
when he came to Paris and was shown the dungeon at Vincennes where
Monsieur de Vendome was imprisoned?”

“What did he say?” asked Porthos.

“‘Princes must be knocked on the head.’”

“I remember it,” said Athos.

“And you fancy he will not put his maxim into execution, now that he
has got hold of the king?”

“On the contrary, I am certain he will do so. But then that is all the
more reason why we should not abandon the august head so threatened.”

“Athos, you are becoming mad.”

“No, my friend,” Athos gently replied, “but De Winter sought us out in
France and introduced us, Monsieur d’Herblay and myself, to Madame
Henrietta. Her majesty did us the honor to ask our aid for her husband.
We engaged our word; our word included everything. It was our strength,
our intelligence, our life, in short, that we promised. It remains now
for us to keep our word. Is that your opinion, D’Herblay?”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “we have promised.”

“Then,” continued Athos, “we have another reason; it is this—listen: In
France at this moment everything is poor and paltry. We have a king ten
years old, who doesn’t yet know what he wants; we have a queen blinded
by a belated passion; we have a minister who governs France as he would
govern a great farm—that is to say, intent only on turning out all the
gold he can by the exercise of Italian cunning and invention; we have
princes who set up a personal and egotistic opposition, who will draw
from Mazarin’s hands only a few ingots of gold or some shreds of power
granted as bribes. I have served them without enthusiasm—God knows that
I estimated them at their real value, and that they are not high in my
esteem—but on principle. To-day I am engaged in a different affair. I
have encountered misfortune in a high place, a royal misfortune, a
European misfortune; I attach myself to it. If we can succeed in saving
the king it will be good; if we die for him it will be grand.”

“So you know beforehand you must perish!” said D’Artagnan.

“We fear so, and our only regret is to die so far from both of you.”

“What will you do in a foreign land, an enemy’s country?”

“I traveled in England when I was young, I speak English like an
Englishman, and Aramis, too, knows something of the language. Ah! if we
had you, my friends! With you, D’Artagnan, with you, Porthos—all four
reunited for the first time for twenty years—we would dare not only
England, but the three kingdoms put together!”

“And did you promise the queen,” resumed D’Artagnan, petulantly, “to
storm the Tower of London, to kill a hundred thousand soldiers, to
fight victoriously against the wishes of the nation and the ambition of
a man, and when that man is Cromwell? Do not exaggerate your duty. In
Heaven’s name, my dear Athos, do not make a useless sacrifice. When I
see you merely, you look like a reasonable being; when you speak, I
seem to have to do with a madman. Come, Porthos, join me; say frankly,
what do you think of this business?”

“Nothing good,” replied Porthos.

“Come,” continued D’Artagnan, who, irritated that instead of listening
to him Athos seemed to be attending to his own thoughts, “you have
never found yourself the worse for my advice. Well, then, believe me,
Athos, your mission is ended, and ended nobly; return to France with
us.”

“Friend,” said Athos, “our resolution is irrevocable.”

“Then you have some other motive unknown to us?”

Athos smiled and D’Artagnan struck his hands together in anger and
muttered the most convincing reasons that he could discover; but to all
these reasons Athos contented himself by replying with a calm, sweet
smile and Aramis by nodding his head.

“Very well,” cried D’Artagnan, at last, furious, “very well, since you
wish it, let us leave our bones in this beggarly land, where it is
always cold, where fine weather is a fog, fog is rain, and rain a
deluge; where the sun represents the moon and the moon a cream cheese;
in truth, whether we die here or elsewhere matters little, since we
must die.”

“Only reflect, my good fellow,” said Athos, “it is but dying rather
sooner.”

“Pooh! a little sooner or a little later, it isn’t worth quarreling
over.”

“If I am astonished at anything,” remarked Porthos, sententiously, “it
is that it has not already happened.”

“Oh, it will happen, you may be sure,” said D’Artagnan. “So it is
agreed, and if Porthos makes no objection——”

“I,” said Porthos, “I will do whatever you please; and besides, I think
what the Comte de la Fere said just now is very good.”

“But your future career, D’Artagnan—your ambition, Porthos?”

“Our future, our ambition!” replied D’Artagnan, with feverish
volubility. “Need we think of that since we are to save the king? The
king saved—we shall assemble our friends together—we will head the
Puritans—reconquer England; we shall re-enter London—place him securely
on his throne——”

“And he will make us dukes and peers,” said Porthos, whose eyes
sparkled with joy at this imaginary prospect.

“Or he will forget us,” added D’Artagnan.

“Oh!” said Porthos.

“Well, that has happened, friend Porthos. It seems to me that we once
rendered Anne of Austria a service not much less than that which to-day
we are trying to perform for Charles I.; but, none the less, Anne of
Austria has forgotten us for twenty years.”

“Well, in spite of that, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, “you are not sorry
that you were useful to her?”

“No, indeed,” said D’Artagnan; “I admit even that in my darkest moments
I find consolation in that remembrance.”

“You see, then, D’Artagnan, though princes often are ungrateful, God
never is.”

“Athos,” said D’Artagnan, “I believe that were you to fall in with the
devil, you would conduct yourself so well that you would take him with
you to Heaven.”

“So, then?” said Athos, offering his hand to D’Artagnan.

“’Tis settled,” replied D’Artagnan. “I find England a charming country,
and I stay—but on one condition only.”

“What is it?”

“That I am not forced to learn English.”

“Well, now,” said Athos, triumphantly, “I swear to you, my friend, by
the God who hears us—I believe that there is a power watching over us,
and that we shall all four see France again.”

“So be it!” said D’Artagnan, “but I—I confess I have a contrary
conviction.”

“Our good D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “represents among us the opposition
in parliament, which always says no, and always does aye.”

“But in the meantime saves the country,” added Athos.

“Well, now that everything is decided,” cried Porthos, rubbing his
hands, “suppose we think of dinner! It seems to me that in the most
critical positions of our lives we have always dined.”

“Oh! yes, speak of dinner in a country where for a feast they eat
boiled mutton, and as a treat drink beer. What the devil did you come
to such a country for, Athos? But I forgot,” added the Gascon, smiling,
“pardon, I forgot you are no longer Athos; but never mind, let us hear
your plan for dinner, Porthos.”

“My plan!”

“Yes, have you a plan?”

“No! I am hungry, that is all.”

“Pardieu, if that is all, I am hungry, too; but it is not everything to
be hungry, one must find something to eat, unless we browse on the
grass, like our horses——”

“Ah!” exclaimed Aramis, who was not quite so indifferent to the good
things of the earth as Athos, “do you remember, when we were at
Parpaillot, the beautiful oysters that we ate?”

“And the legs of mutton of the salt marshes,” said Porthos, smacking
his lips.

“But,” suggested D’Artagnan, “have we not our friend Mousqueton, who
managed for us so well at Chantilly, Porthos?”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “we have Mousqueton, but since he has been
steward, he has become very heavy; never mind, let us call him, and to
make sure that he will reply agreeably——

“Here! Mouston,” cried Porthos.

Mouston appeared, with a most piteous face.

“What is the matter, my dear M. Mouston?” asked D’Artagnan. “Are you
ill?”

“Sir, I am very hungry,” replied Mouston.

“Well, it is just for that reason that we have called you, my good M.
Mouston. Could you not procure us a few of those nice little rabbits,
and some of those delicious partridges, of which you used to make
fricassees at the hotel——? ‘Faith, I do not remember the name of the
hotel.”

“At the hotel of——,” said Porthos; “by my faith—nor do I remember it
either.”

“It does not matter; and a few of those bottles of old Burgundy wine,
which cured your master so quickly of his sprain!”

“Alas! sir,” said Mousqueton, “I much fear that what you ask for are
very rare things in this detestable and barren country, and I think we
should do better to go and seek hospitality from the owner of a little
house we see on the fringe of the forest.”

“How! is there a house in the neighborhood?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Yes, sir,” replied Mousqueton.

“Well, let us, as you say, go and ask a dinner from the master of that
house. What is your opinion, gentlemen, and does not M. Mouston’s
suggestion appear to you full of sense?”

“Oh!” said Aramis, “suppose the master is a Puritan?”

“So much the better, mordioux!” replied D’Artagnan; “if he is a Puritan
we will inform him of the capture of the king, and in honor of the news
he will kill for us his fatted hens.”

“But if he should be a cavalier?” said Porthos.

“In that case we will put on an air of mourning and he will pluck for
us his black fowls.”

“You are very happy,” exclaimed Athos, laughing, in spite of himself,
at the sally of the irresistible Gascon; “for you see the bright side
of everything.”

“What would you have?” said D’Artagnan. “I come from a land where there
is not a cloud in the sky.”

“It is not like this, then,” said Porthos stretching out his hand to
assure himself whether a chill sensation he felt on his cheek was not
really caused by a drop of rain.

“Come, come,” said D’Artagnan, “more reason why we should start on our
journey. Halloo, Grimaud!”

Grimaud appeared.

“Well, Grimaud, my friend, have you seen anything?” asked the Gascon.

“Nothing!” replied Grimaud.

“Those idiots!” cried Porthos, “they have not even pursued us. Oh! if
we had been in their place!”

“Yes, they are wrong,” said D’Artagnan. “I would willingly have said
two words to Mordaunt in this little desert. It is an excellent spot
for bringing down a man in proper style.”

“I think, decidedly,” observed Aramis, “gentlemen, that the son hasn’t
his mother’s energy.”

“What, my good fellow!” replied Athos, “wait awhile; we have scarcely
left him two hours ago—he does not know yet in what direction we came
nor where we are. We may say that he is not equal to his mother when we
put foot in France, if we are not poisoned or killed before then.”

“Meanwhile, let us dine,” suggested Porthos.

“I’faith, yes,” said Athos, “for I am hungry.”

“Look out for the black fowls!” cried Aramis.

And the four friends, guided by Mousqueton, took up the way toward the
house, already almost restored to their former gayety; for they were
now, as Athos had said, all four once more united and of single mind.




Chapter LX.
Respect to Fallen Majesty.


As our fugitives approached the house, they found the ground cut up, as
if a considerable body of horsemen had preceded them. Before the door
the traces were yet more apparent; these horsemen, whoever they might
be, had halted there.

“Egad!” cried D’Artagnan, “it’s quite clear that the king and his
escort have been by here.”

“The devil!” said Porthos; “in that case they have eaten everything.”

“Bah!” said D’Artagnan, “they will have left a chicken, at least.” He
dismounted and knocked on the door. There was no response.

He pushed open the door and found the first room empty and deserted.

“Well?” cried Porthos.

“I can see nobody,” said D’Artagnan. “Aha!”

“What?”

“Blood!”

At this word the three friends leaped from their horses and entered.
D’Artagnan had already opened the door of the second room, and from the
expression of his face it was clear that he there beheld some
extraordinary object.

The three friends drew near and discovered a young man stretched on the
ground, bathed in a pool of blood. It was evident that he had attempted
to regain his bed, but had not had sufficient strength to do so.

Athos, who imagined that he saw him move, was the first to go up to
him.

“Well?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“Well, if he is dead,” said Athos, “he has not been so long, for he is
still warm. But no, his heart is beating. Ho, there, my friend!”

The wounded man heaved a sigh. D’Artagnan took some water in the hollow
of his hand and threw it upon his face. The man opened his eyes, made
an effort to raise his head, and fell back again. The wound was in the
top of his skull and blood was flawing copiously.

Aramis dipped a cloth into some water and applied it to the gash. Again
the wounded man opened his eyes and looked in astonishment at these
strangers, who appeared to pity him.

“You are among friends,” said Athos, in English; “so cheer up, and tell
us, if you have the strength to do so, what has happened?”

“The king,” muttered the wounded man, “the king is a prisoner.”

“You have seen him?” asked Aramis, in the same language.

The man made no reply.

“Make your mind easy,” resumed Athos, “we are all faithful servants of
his majesty.”

“Is what you tell me true?” asked the wounded man.

“On our honor as gentlemen.”

“Then I may tell you all. I am brother to Parry, his majesty’s lackey.”

Athos and Aramis remembered that this was the name by which De Winter
had called the man they had found in the passage of the king’s tent.

“We know him,” said Athos, “he never left the king.”

“Yes, that is he. Well, he thought of me, when he saw the king was
taken, and as they were passing before the house he begged in the
king’s name that they would stop, as the king was hungry. They brought
him into this room and placed sentinels at the doors and windows. Parry
knew this room, as he had often been to see me when the king was at
Newcastle. He knew that there was a trap-door communicating with a
cellar, from which one could get into the orchard. He made a sign,
which I understood, but the king’s guards must have noticed it and held
themselves on guard. I went out as if to fetch wood, passed through the
subterranean passage into the cellar, and whilst Parry was gently
bolting the door, pushed up the board and beckoned to the king to
follow me. Alas! he would not. But Parry clasped his hands and implored
him, and at last he agreed. I went on first, fortunately. The king was
a few steps behind me, when suddenly I saw something rise up in front
of me like a huge shadow. I wanted to cry out to warn the king, but
that very moment I felt a blow as if the house was falling on my head,
and fell insensible. When I came to myself again, I was stretched in
the same place. I dragged myself as far as the yard. The king and his
escort were no longer there. I spent perhaps an hour in coming from the
yard to this place; then my strength gave out and I fainted again.”

“And now how are you feeling?”

“Very ill,” replied the wounded man.

“Can we do anything for you?” asked Athos.

“Help to put me on the bed; I think I shall feel better there.”

“Have you any one to depend on for assistance?”

“My wife is at Durham and may return at any moment. But you—is there
nothing that you want?”

“We came here with the intention of asking for something to eat.”

“Alas, they have taken everything; there isn’t a morsel of bread in the
house.”

“You hear, D’Artagnan?” said Athos; “we shall have to look elsewhere
for our dinner.”

“It is all one to me now,” said D’Artagnan; “I am no longer hungry.”

“Faith! neither am I,” said Porthos.

They carried the man to his bed and called Grimaud to dress the wound.
In the service of the four friends Grimaud had had so frequent occasion
to make lint and bandages that he had become something of a surgeon.

In the meantime the fugitives had returned to the first room, where
they took counsel together.

“Now,” said Aramis, “we know how the matter stands. The king and his
escort have gone this way; we had better take the opposite direction,
eh?”

Athos did not reply; he reflected.

“Yes,” said Porthos, “let us take the opposite direction; if we follow
the escort we shall find everything devoured and die of hunger. What a
confounded country this England is! This is the first time I have gone
without my dinner for ten years, and it is generally my best meal.”

“What do you think, D’Artagnan?” asked Athos. “Do you agree with
Aramis?”

“Not at all,” said D’Artagnan; “I am precisely of the contrary
opinion.”

“What! you would follow the escort?” exclaimed Porthos, in dismay.

“No, I would join the escort.”

Athos’s eyes shone with joy.

“Join the escort!” cried Aramis.

“Let D’Artagnan speak,” said Athos; “you know he always has wise advice
to give.”

“Clearly,” said D’Artagnan, “we must go where they will not look for
us. Now, they will be far from looking for us among the Puritans;
therefore, with the Puritans we must go.”

“Good, my friend, good!” said Athos. “It is excellent advice. I was
about to give it when you anticipated me.”

“That, then, is your opinion?” asked Aramis.

“Yes. They will think we are trying to leave England and will search
for us at the ports; meanwhile we shall reach London with the king.
Once in London we shall be hard to find—without considering,” continued
Athos, throwing a glance at Aramis, “the chances that may come to us on
the way.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “I understand.”

“I, however, do not understand,” said Porthos. “But no matter; since it
is at the same time the opinion of D’Artagnan and of Athos, it must be
the best.”

“But,” said Aramis, “shall we not be suspected by Colonel Harrison?”

“Egad!” cried D’Artagnan, “he’s just the man I count upon. Colonel
Harrison is one of our friends. We have met him twice at General
Cromwell’s. He knows that we were sent from France by Monsieur Mazarin;
he will consider us as brothers. Besides, is he not a butcher’s son?
Well, then, Porthos shall show him how to knock down an ox with a blow
of the fist, and I how to trip up a bull by taking him by the horns.
That will insure his confidence.”

Athos smiled. “You are the best companion that I know, D’Artagnan,” he
said, offering his hand to the Gascon; “and I am very happy in having
found you again, my dear son.”

This was, as we have seen, the term which Athos applied to D’Artagnan
in his more expansive moods.

At this moment Grimaud came in. He had stanched the wound and the man
was better.

The four friends took leave of him and asked if they could deliver any
message for him to his brother.

“Tell him,” answered the brave man, “to let the king know that they
have not killed me outright. However insignificant I am, I am sure that
his majesty is concerned for me and blames himself for my death.”

“Be easy,” said D’Artagnan, “he will know all before night.”

The little troop recommenced their march, and at the end of two hours
perceived a considerable body of horsemen about half a league ahead.

“My dear friends,” said D’Artagnan, “give your swords to Monsieur
Mouston, who will return them to you at the proper time and place, and
do not forget you are our prisoners.”

It was not long before they joined the escort. The king was riding in
front, surrounded by troopers, and when he saw Athos and Aramis a glow
of pleasure lighted his pale cheeks.

D’Artagnan passed to the head of the column, and leaving his friends
under the guard of Porthos, went straight to Harrison, who recognized
him as having met him at Cromwell’s and received him as politely as a
man of his breeding and disposition could. It turned out as D’Artagnan
had foreseen. The colonel neither had nor could have any suspicion.

They halted for the king to dine. This time, however, due precautions
were taken to prevent any attempt at escape. In the large room of the
hotel a small table was placed for him and a large one for the
officers.

“Will you dine with me?” asked Harrison of D’Artagnan.

“Gad, I should be very happy, but I have my companion, Monsieur du
Vallon, and the two prisoners, whom I cannot leave. Let us manage it
better. Have a table set for us in a corner and send us whatever you
like from yours.”

“Good,” answered Harrison.

The matter was arranged as D’Artagnan had suggested, and when he
returned he found the king already seated at his little table, where
Parry waited on him, Harrison and his officers sitting together at
another table, and, in a corner, places reserved for himself and his
companions.

The table at which the Puritan officers were seated was round, and
whether by chance or coarse intention, Harrison sat with his back to
the king.

The king saw the four gentlemen come in, but appeared to take no notice
of them.

They sat down in such a manner as to turn their backs on nobody. The
officers, table and that of the king were opposite to them.

“I’faith, colonel,” said D’Artagnan, “we are very grateful for your
gracious invitation; for without you we ran the risk of going without
dinner, as we have without breakfast. My friend here, Monsieur du
Vallon, shares my gratitude, for he was particularly hungry.”

“And I am so still,” said Porthos bowing to Harrison.

“And how,” said Harrison, laughing, “did this serious calamity of going
without breakfast happen to you?”

“In a very simple manner, colonel,” said D’Artagnan. “I was in a hurry
to join you and took the road you had already gone by. You can
understand our disappointment when, arriving at a pretty little house
on the skirts of a wood, which at a distance had quite a gay
appearance, with its red roof and green shutters, we found nothing but
a poor wretch bathed—Ah! colonel, pay my respects to the officer of
yours who struck that blow.”

“Yes,” said Harrison, laughing, and looking over at one of the officers
seated at his table. “When Groslow undertakes this kind of thing
there’s no need to go over the ground a second time.”

“Ah! it was this gentleman?” said D’Artagnan, bowing to the officer. “I
am sorry he does not speak French, that I might tender him my
compliments.”

“I am ready to receive and return them, sir,” said the officer, in
pretty good French, “for I resided three years in Paris.”

“Then, sir, allow me to assure you that your blow was so well directed
that you have nearly killed your man.”

“Nearly? I thought I had quite,” said Groslow.

“No. It was a very near thing, but he is not dead.”

As he said this, D’Artagnan gave a glance at Parry, who was standing in
front of the king, to show him that the news was meant for him.

The king, too, who had listened in the greatest agony, now breathed
again.

“Hang it,” said Groslow, “I thought I had succeeded better. If it were
not so far from here to the house I would return and finish him.”

“And you would do well, if you are afraid of his recovering; for you
know, if a wound in the head does not kill at once, it is cured in a
week.”

And D’Artagnan threw a second glance toward Parry, on whose face such
an expression of joy was manifested that Charles stretched out his hand
to him, smiling.

Parry bent over his master’s hand and kissed it respectfully.

“I’ve a great desire to drink the king’s health,” said Athos.

“Let me propose it, then,” said D’Artagnan.

“Do,” said Aramis.

Porthos looked at D’Artagnan, quite amazed at the resources with which
his companion’s Gascon sharpness continually supplied him. D’Artagnan
took up his camp tin cup, filled it with wine and arose.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “let us drink to him who presides at the repast.
Here’s to our colonel, and let him know that we are always at his
commands as far as London and farther.”

And as D’Artagnan, as he spoke, looked at Harrison, the colonel
imagined the toast was for himself. He arose and bowed to the four
friends, whose eyes were fixed on Charles, while Harrison emptied his
glass without the slightest misgiving.

The king, in return, looked at the four gentlemen and drank with a
smile full of nobility and gratitude.

“Come, gentlemen,” cried Harrison, regardless of his illustrious
captive, “let us be off.”

“Where do we sleep, colonel?”

“At Thirsk,” replied Harrison.

“Parry,” said the king, rising too, “my horse; I desire to go to
Thirsk.”

“Egad!” said D’Artagnan to Athos, “your king has thoroughly taken me,
and I am quite at his service.”

“If what you say is sincere,” replied Athos, “he will never reach
London.”

“How so?”

“Because before then we shall have carried him off.”

“Well, this time, Athos,” said D’Artagnan, “upon my word, you are mad.”

“Have you some plan in your head then?” asked Aramis.

“Ay!” said Porthos, “the thing would not be impossible with a good
plan.”

“I have none,” said Athos; “but D’Artagnan will discover one.”

D’Artagnan shrugged his shoulders and they proceeded.




Chapter LXI.
D’Artagnan hits on a Plan.


As night closed in they arrived at Thirsk. The four friends appeared to
be entire strangers to one another and indifferent to the precautions
taken for guarding the king. They withdrew to a private house, and as
they had reason every moment to fear for their safety, they occupied
but one room and provided an exit, which might be useful in case of an
attack. The lackeys were sent to their several posts, except that
Grimaud lay on a truss of straw across the doorway.

D’Artagnan was thoughtful and seemed for the moment to have lost his
usual loquacity. Porthos, who could never see anything that was not
self-evident, talked to him as usual. He replied in monosyllables and
Athos and Aramis looked significantly at one another.

Next morning D’Artagnan was the first to rise. He had been down to the
stables, already taken a look at the horses and given the necessary
orders for the day, whilst Athos and Aramis were still in bed and
Porthos snoring.

At eight o’clock the march was resumed in the same order as the night
before, except that D’Artagnan left his friends and began to renew the
acquaintance which he had already struck up with Monsieur Groslow.

Groslow, whom D’Artagnan’s praises had greatly pleased, welcomed him
with a gracious smile.

“Really, sir,” D’Artagnan said to him, “I am pleased to find one with
whom to talk in my own poor tongue. My friend, Monsieur du Vallon, is
of a very melancholy disposition, so much so, that one can scarcely get
three words out of him all day. As for our two prisoners, you can
imagine that they are but little in the vein for conversation.”

“They are hot royalists,” said Groslow.

“The more reason they should be sulky with us for having captured the
Stuart, for whom, I hope, you’re preparing a pretty trial.”

“Why,” said Groslow, “that is just what we are taking him to London
for.”

“And you never by any chance lose sight of him, I presume?”

“I should think not, indeed. You see he has a truly royal escort.”

“Ay, there’s no fear in the daytime; but at night?”

“We redouble our precautions.”

“And what method of surveillance do you employ?”

“Eight men remain constantly in his room.”

“The deuce, he is well guarded, then. But besides these eight men, you
doubtless place some guard outside?”

“Oh, no! Just think. What would you have two men without arms do
against eight armed men?”

“Two men—how do you mean?”

“Yes, the king and his lackey.”

“Oh! then they allow the lackey to remain with him?”

“Yes; Stuart begged this favor and Harrison consented. Under pretense
that he’s a king it appears he cannot dress or undress without
assistance.”

“Really, captain,” said D’Artagnan, determined to continue on the
laudatory tack on which he had commenced, “the more I listen to you the
more surprised I am at the easy and elegant manner in which you speak
French. You have lived three years in Paris? May I ask what you were
doing there?”

“My father, who is a merchant, placed me with his correspondent, who in
turn sent his son to join our house in London.”

“Were you pleased with Paris, sir?”

“Yes, but you are much in want of a revolution like our own—not against
your king, who is a mere child, but against that lazar of an Italian,
the queen’s favorite.”

“Ah! I am quite of your opinion, sir, and we should soon make an end of
Mazarin if we had only a dozen officers like yourself, without
prejudices, vigilant and incorruptible.”

“But,” said the officer, “I thought you were in his service and that it
was he who sent you to General Cromwell.”

“That is to say I am in the king’s service, and that knowing he wanted
to send some one to England, I solicited the appointment, so great was
my desire to know the man of genius who now governs the three kingdoms.
So that when he proposed to us to draw our swords in honor of old
England you see how we snapped up the proposition.”

“Yes, I know that you charged by the side of Mordaunt.”

“On his right and left, sir. Ah! there’s another brave and excellent
young man.”

“Do you know him?” asked the officer.

“Yes, very well. Monsieur du Vallon and myself came from France with
him.”

“It appears, too, you kept him waiting a long time at Boulogne.”

“What would you have? I was like you, and had a king in keeping.”

“Aha!” said Groslow; “what king?”

“Our own, to be sure, the little one—Louis XIV.”

“And how long had you to take care of him?”

“Three nights; and, by my troth, I shall always remember those three
nights with a certain pleasure.”

“How do you mean?”

“I mean that my friends, officers in the guards and mousquetaires, came
to keep me company and we passed the night in feasting, drinking,
dicing.”

“Ah true,” said the Englishman, with a sigh; “you Frenchmen are born
boon companions.”

“And don’t you play, too, when you are on guard?”

“Never,” said the Englishman.

“In that case you must be horribly bored, and have my sympathy.”

“The fact is, I look to my turn for keeping guard with horror. It’s
tiresome work to keep awake a whole night.”

“Yes, but with a jovial partner and dice, and guineas clinking on the
cloth, the night passes like a dream. You don’t like playing, then?”

“On the contrary, I do.”

“Lansquenet, for instance?”

“Devoted to it. I used to play almost every night in France.”

“And since your return to England?”

“I have not handled a card or dice-box.”

“I sincerely pity you,” said D’Artagnan, with an air of profound
compassion.

“Look here,” said the Englishman.

“Well?”

“To-morrow I am on guard.”

“In Stuart’s room?”

“Yes; come and pass the night with me.”

“Impossible!”

“Impossible! why so?”

“I play with Monsieur du Vallon every night. Sometimes we don’t go to
bed at all!”

“Well, what of that?”

“Why, he would be annoyed if I did not play with him.”

“Does he play well?”

“I have seen him lose as much as two thousand pistoles, laughing all
the while till the tears rolled down.”

“Bring him with you, then.”

“But how about our prisoners?”

“Let your servants guard them.”

“Yes, and give them a chance of escaping,” said D’Artagnan. “Why, one
of them is a rich lord from Touraine and the other a knight of Malta,
of noble family. We have arranged the ransom of each of them—2,000 on
arriving in France. We are reluctant to leave for a single moment men
whom our lackeys know to be millionaires. It is true we plundered them
a little when we took them, and I will even confess that it is their
purse that Monsieur du Vallon and I draw on in our nightly play. Still,
they may have concealed some precious stone, some valuable diamond; so
that we are like those misers who are unable to absent themselves from
their treasures. We have made ourselves the constant guardians of our
men, and while I sleep Monsieur du Vallon watches.”

“Ah! ah!” said Groslow.

“You see, then, why I must decline your polite invitation, which is
especially attractive to me, because nothing is so wearisome as to play
night after night with the same person; the chances always balance and
at the month’s end nothing is gained or lost.”

“Ah!” said Groslow, sighing; “there is something still more wearisome,
and that is not to play at all.”

“I can understand that,” said D’Artagnan.

“But, come,” resumed the Englishman, “are these men of yours
dangerous?”

“In what respect?”

“Are they capable of attempting violence?”

D’Artagnan burst out laughing at the idea.

“Jesus Dieu!” he cried; “one of them is trembling with fever, having
failed to adapt himself to this charming country of yours, and the
other is a knight of Malta, as timid as a young girl; and for greater
security we have taken from them even their penknives and pocket
scissors.”

“Well, then,” said Groslow, “bring them with you.”

“But really——” said D’Artagnan.

“I have eight men on guard, you know. Four of them can guard the king
and the other four your prisoners. I’ll manage it somehow, you will
see.”

“But,” said D’Artagnan, “now I think of it—what is to prevent our
beginning to-night?”

“Nothing at all,” said Groslow.

“Just so. Come to us this evening and to-morrow we’ll return your
visit.”

“Capital! This evening with you, to-morrow at Stuart’s, the next day
with me.”

“You see, that with a little forethought one can lead a merry life
anywhere and everywhere,” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes, with Frenchmen, and Frenchmen like you.”

“And Monsieur du Vallon,” added the other. “You will see what a fellow
he is; a man who nearly killed Mazarin between two doors. They employ
him because they are afraid of him. Ah, there he is calling me now.
You’ll excuse me, I know.”

They exchanged bows and D’Artagnan returned to his companions.

“What on earth can you have been saying to that bulldog?” exclaimed
Porthos.

“My dear fellow, don’t speak like that of Monsieur Groslow. He’s one of
my most intimate friends.”

“One of your friends!” cried Porthos, “this butcher of unarmed
farmers!”

“Hush! my dear Porthos. Monsieur Groslow is perhaps rather hasty, it’s
true, but at bottom I have discovered two good qualities in him—he is
conceited and stupid.”

Porthos opened his eyes in amazement; Athos and Aramis looked at one
another and smiled; they knew D’Artagnan, and knew that he did nothing
without a purpose.

“But,” continued D’Artagnan, “you shall judge of him for yourself. He
is coming to play with us this evening.”

“Oho!” said Porthos, his eyes glistening at the news. “Is he rich?”

“He’s the son of one of the wealthiest merchants in London.”

“And knows lansquenet?”

“Adores it.”

“Basset?”

“His mania.”

“Biribi?”

“Revels in it.”

“Good,” said Porthos; “we shall pass an agreeable evening.”

“The more so, as it will be the prelude to a better.”

“How so?”

“We invite him to play to-night; he has invited us in return to-morrow.
But wait. To-night we stop at Derby; and if there is a bottle of wine
in the town let Mousqueton buy it. It will be well to prepare a light
supper, of which you, Athos and Aramis, are not to partake—Athos,
because I told him you had a fever; Aramis, because you are a knight of
Malta and won’t mix with fellows like us. Do you understand?”

“That’s no doubt very fine,” said Porthos; “but deuce take me if I
understand at all.”

“Porthos, my friend, you know I am descended on the father’s side from
the Prophets and on the mother’s from the Sybils, and that I only speak
in parables and riddles. Let those who have ears hear and those who
have eyes see; I can tell you nothing more at present.”

“Go ahead, my friend,” said Athos; “I am sure that whatever you do is
well done.”

“And you, Aramis, are you of that opinion?”

“Entirely so, my dear D’Artagnan.”

“Very good,” said D’Artagnan; “here indeed are true believers; it is a
pleasure to work miracles before them; they are not like that
unbelieving Porthos, who must see and touch before he will believe.”

“The fact is,” said Porthos, with an air of finesse, “I am rather
incredulous.”

D’Artagnan gave him playful buffet on the shoulder, and as they had
reached the station where they were to breakfast, the conversation
ended there.

At five in the evening they sent Mousqueton on before as agreed upon.
Blaisois went with him.

In crossing the principal street in Derby the four friends perceived
Blaisois standing in the doorway of a handsome house. It was there a
lodging was prepared for them.

At the hour agreed upon Groslow came. D’Artagnan received him as he
would have done a friend of twenty years’ standing. Porthos scanned him
from head to foot and smiled when he discovered that in spite of the
blow he had administered to Parry’s brother, he was not nearly so
strong as himself. Athos and Aramis suppressed as well as they could
the disgust they felt in the presence of such coarseness and brutality.

In short, Groslow seemed to be pleased with his reception.

Athos and Aramis kept themselves to their role. At midnight they
withdrew to their chamber, the door of which was left open on the
pretext of kindly consideration. Furthermore, D’Artagnan went with
them, leaving Porthos at play with Groslow.

Porthos gained fifty pistoles from Groslow, and found him a more
agreeable companion than he had at first believed him to be.

As to Groslow, he promised himself that on the following evening he
would recover from D’Artagnan what he had lost to Porthos, and on
leaving reminded the Gascon of his appointment.

The next day was spent as usual. D’Artagnan went from Captain Groslow
to Colonel Harrison and from Colonel Harrison to his friends. To any
one not acquainted with him he seemed to be in his normal condition;
but to his friends—to Athos and Aramis—was apparent a certain
feverishness in his gayety.

“What is he contriving?” asked Aramis.

“Wait,” said Athos.

Porthos said nothing, but he handled in his pocket the fifty pistoles
he had gained from Groslow with a degree of satisfaction which betrayed
itself in his whole bearing.

Arrived at Ryston, D’Artagnan assembled his friends. His face had lost
the expression of careless gayety it had worn like a mask the whole
day. Athos pinched Aramis’s hand.

“The moment is at hand,” he said.

“Yes,” returned D’Artagnan, who had overheard him, “to-night,
gentlemen, we rescue the king.”

“D’Artagnan,” said Athos, “this is no joke, I trust? It would quite cut
me up.”

“You are a very odd man, Athos,” he replied, “to doubt me thus. Where
and when have you seen me trifle with a friend’s heart and a king’s
life? I have told you, and I repeat it, that to-night we rescue Charles
I. You left it to me to discover the means and I have done so.”

Porthos looked at D’Artagnan with an expression of profound admiration.
Aramis smiled as one who hopes. Athos was pale, and trembled in every
limb.

“Speak,” said Athos.

“We are invited,” replied D’Artagnan, “to pass the night with M.
Groslow. But do you know where?”

“No.”

“In the king’s room.”

“The king’s room?” cried Athos.

“Yes, gentlemen, in the king’s room. Groslow is on guard there this
evening, and to pass the time away he has invited us to keep him
company.”

“All four of us?” asked Athos.

“Pardieu! certainly, all four; we couldn’t leave our prisoners, could
we?”

“Ah! ah!” said Aramis.

“Tell us about it,” said Athos, palpitating.

“We are going, then, we two with our swords, you with daggers. We four
have got to master these eight fools and their stupid captain. Monsieur
Porthos, what do you say to that?”

“I say it is easy enough,” answered Porthos.

“We dress the king in Groslow’s clothes. Mousqueton, Grimaud and
Blaisois have our horses saddled at the end of the first street. We
mount them and before daylight are twenty leagues distant.”

Athos placed his two hands on D’Artagnan’s shoulders, and gazed at him
with his calm, sad smile.

“I declare, my friend,” said he, “that there is not a creature under
the sky who equals you in prowess and in courage. Whilst we thought you
indifferent to our sorrows, which you couldn’t share without crime, you
alone among us have discovered what we were searching for in vain. I
repeat it, D’Artagnan, you are the best one among us; I bless and love
you, my dear son.”

“And to think that I couldn’t find that out,” said Porthos, scratching
his head; “it is so simple.”

“But,” said Aramis, “if I understand rightly we are to kill them all,
eh?”

Athos shuddered and turned pale.

“Mordioux!” answered D’Artagnan, “I believe we must. I confess I can
discover no other safe and satisfactory way.”

“Let us see,” said Aramis, “how are we to act?”

“I have arranged two plans. Firstly, at a given signal, which shall be
the words ‘At last,’ you each plunge a dagger into the heart of the
soldier nearest to you. We, on our side, do the same. That will be four
killed. We shall then be matched, four against the remaining five. If
these five men give themselves up we gag them; if they resist, we kill
them. If by chance our Amphitryon changes his mind and receives only
Porthos and myself, why, then, we must resort to heroic measures and
each give two strokes instead of one. It will take a little longer time
and may make a greater disturbance, but you will be outside with swords
and will rush in at the proper time.”

“But if you yourselves should be struck?” said Athos.

“Impossible!” said D’Artagnan; “those beer drinkers are too clumsy and
awkward. Besides, you will strike at the throat, Porthos; it kills as
quickly and prevents all outcry.”

“Very good,” said Porthos; “it will be a nice little throat cutting.”

“Horrible, horrible,” exclaimed Athos.

“Nonsense,” said D’Artagnan; “you would do as much, Mr. Humanity, in a
battle. But if you think the king’s life is not worth what it must cost
there’s an end of the matter and I send to Groslow to say I am ill.”

“No, you are right,” said Athos.

At this moment a soldier entered to inform them that Groslow was
waiting for them.

“Where?” asked D’Artagnan.

“In the room of the English Nebuchadnezzar,” replied the staunch
Puritan.

“Good,” replied Athos, whose blood mounted to his face at the insult
offered to royalty; “tell the captain we are coming.”

The Puritan then went out. The lackeys had been ordered to saddle eight
horses and to wait, keeping together and without dismounting, at the
corner of a street about twenty steps from the house where the king was
lodged.

It was nine o’clock in the evening; the sentinels had been relieved at
eight and Captain Groslow had been on guard for an hour. D’Artagnan and
Porthos, armed with their swords, and Athos and Aramis, each carrying a
concealed poniard, approached the house which for the time being was
Charles Stuart’s prison. The two latter followed their captors in the
humble guise of captives, without arms.

“Od’s bodikins,” said Groslow, as the four friends entered, “I had
almost given you up.”

D’Artagnan went up to him and whispered in his ear:

“The fact is, we, that is, Monsieur du Vallon and I, hesitated a
little.”

“And why?”

D’Artagnan looked significantly toward Athos and Aramis.

“Aha,” said Groslow; “on account of political opinions? No matter. On
the contrary,” he added, laughing, “if they want to see their Stuart
they shall see him.

“Are we to pass the night in the king’s room?” asked D’Artagnan.

“No, but in the one next to it, and as the door will remain open it
comes to the same thing. Have you provided yourself with money? I
assure you I intend to play the devil’s game to-night.”

D’Artagnan rattled the gold in his pockets.

“Very good,” said Groslow, and opened the door of the room. “I will
show you the way,” and he went in first.

D’Artagnan turned to look at his friends. Porthos was perfectly
indifferent; Athos, pale, but resolute; Aramis was wiping a slight
moisture from his brow.

The eight guards were at their posts. Four in the king’s room, two at
the door between the rooms and two at that by which the friends had
entered. Athos smiled when he saw their bare swords; he felt it was no
longer to be a butchery, but a fight, and he resumed his usual good
humor.

Charles was perceived through the door, lying dressed upon his bed, at
the head of which Parry was seated, reading in a low voice a chapter
from the Bible.

A candle of coarse tallow on a black table lighted up the handsome and
resigned face of the king and that of his faithful retainer, far less
calm.

From time to time Parry stopped, thinking the king, whose eyes were
closed, was really asleep, but Charles would open his eyes and say with
a smile:

“Go on, my good Parry, I am listening.”

Groslow advanced to the door of the king’s room, replaced on his head
the hat he had taken off to receive his guests, looked for a moment
contemptuously at this simple, yet touching scene, then turning to
D’Artagnan, assumed an air of triumph at what he had achieved.

“Capital!” cried the Gascon, “you would make a distinguished general.”

“And do you think,” asked Groslow, “that Stuart will ever escape while
I am on guard?”

“No, to be sure,” replied D’Artagnan; “unless, forsooth, the sky rains
friends upon him.”

Groslow’s face brightened.

It is impossible to say whether Charles, who kept his eyes constantly
closed, had noticed the insolence of the Puritan captain, but the
moment he heard the clear tone of D’Artagnan’s voice his eyelids rose,
in spite of himself.

Parry, too, started and stopped reading.

“What are you thinking about?” said the king; “go on, my good Parry,
unless you are tired.”

Parry resumed his reading.

On a table in the next room were lighted candles, cards, two
dice-boxes, and dice.

“Gentlemen,” said Groslow, “I beg you will take your places. I will sit
facing Stuart, whom I like so much to see, especially where he now is,
and you, Monsieur d’Artagnan, opposite to me.”

Athos turned red with rage. D’Artagnan frowned at him.

“That’s it,” said D’Artagnan; “you, Monsieur le Comte de la Fere, to
the right of Monsieur Groslow. You, Chevalier d’Herblay, to his left.
Du Vallon next me. You’ll bet for me and those gentlemen for Monsieur
Groslow.”

By this arrangement D’Artagnan could nudge Porthos with his knee and
make signs with his eyes to Athos and Aramis.

At the names Comte de la Fere and Chevalier d’Herblay, Charles opened
his eyes, and raising his noble head, in spite of himself, threw a
glance at all the actors in the scene.

At that moment Parry turned over several leaves of his Bible and read
with a loud voice this verse in Jeremiah:

“God said, ‘Hear ye the words of the prophets my servants, whom I have
sent unto you.’”

The four friends exchanged glances. The words that Parry had read
assured them that their presence was understood by the king and was
assigned to its real motive. D’Artagnan’s eyes sparkled with joy.

“You asked me just now if I was in funds,” said D’Artagnan, placing
some twenty pistoles upon the table. “Well, in my turn I advise you to
keep a sharp lookout on your treasure, my dear Monsieur Groslow, for I
can tell you we shall not leave this without robbing you of it.”

“Not without my defending it,” said Groslow.

“So much the better,” said D’Artagnan. “Fight, my dear captain, fight.
You know or you don’t know, that that is what we ask of you.”

“Oh! yes,” said Groslow, bursting with his usual coarse laugh, “I know
you Frenchmen want nothing but cuts and bruises.”

Charles had heard and understood it all. A slight color mounted to his
cheeks. The soldiers then saw him stretch his limbs, little by little,
and under the pretense of much heat throw off the Scotch plaid which
covered him.

Athos and Aramis started with delight to find that the king was lying
with his clothes on.

The game began. The luck had turned, and Groslow, having won some
hundred pistoles, was in the merriest possible humor.

Porthos, who had lost the fifty pistoles he had won the night before
and thirty more besides, was very cross and questioned D’Artagnan with
a nudge of the knee as to whether it would not soon be time to change
the game. Athos and Aramis looked at him inquiringly. But D’Artagnan
remained impassible.

It struck ten. They heard the guard going its rounds.

“How many rounds do they make a night?” asked D’Artagnan, drawing more
pistoles from his pocket.

“Five,” answered Groslow, “one every two hours.”

D’Artagnan glanced at Athos and Aramis and for the first time replied
to Porthos’s nudge of the knee by a nudge responsive. Meanwhile, the
soldiers whose duty it was to remain in the king’s room, attracted by
that love of play so powerful in all men, had stolen little by little
toward the table, and standing on tiptoe, lounged, watching the game,
over the shoulders of D’Artagnan and Porthos. Those on the other side
had followed their example, thus favoring the views of the four
friends, who preferred having them close at hand to chasing them about
the chamber. The two sentinels at the door still had their swords
unsheathed, but they were leaning on them while they watched the game.

Athos seemed to grow calm as the critical moment approached. With his
white, aristocratic hands he played with the louis, bending and
straightening them again, as if they were made of pewter. Aramis, less
self-controlled, fumbled continually with his hidden poniard. Porthos,
impatient at his continued losses, kept up a vigorous play with his
knee.

D’Artagnan turned, mechanically looking behind him, and between the
figures of two soldiers he could see Parry standing up and Charles
leaning on his elbow with his hands clasped and apparently offering a
fervent prayer to God.

D’Artagnan saw that the moment was come. He darted a preparatory glance
at Athos and Aramis, who slyly pushed their chairs a little back so as
to leave themselves more space for action. He gave Porthos a second
nudge of the knee and Porthos got up as if to stretch his legs and took
care at the same time to ascertain that his sword could be drawn
smoothly from the scabbard.

“Hang it!” cried D’Artagnan, “another twenty pistoles lost. Really,
Captain Groslow, you are too much in fortune’s way. This can’t last,”
and he drew another twenty from his pocket. “One more turn, captain;
twenty pistoles on one throw—only one, the last.”

“Done for twenty,” replied Groslow.

And he turned up two cards as usual, a king for D’Artagnan and an ace
for himself.

“A king,” said D’Artagnan; “it’s a good omen, Master Groslow—look out
for the king.”

And in spite of his extraordinary self-control there was a strange
vibration in the Gascon’s voice which made his partner start.

Groslow began turning the cards one after another. If he turned up an
ace first he won; if a king he lost.

He turned up a king.

“At last!” cried D’Artagnan.

At this word Athos and Aramis jumped up. Porthos drew back a step.
Daggers and swords were just about to shine, when suddenly the door was
thrown open and Harrison appeared in the doorway, accompanied by a man
enveloped in a large cloak. Behind this man could be seen the
glistening muskets of half a dozen soldiers.

Groslow jumped up, ashamed at being surprised in the midst of wine,
cards, and dice. But Harrison paid not the least attention to him, and
entering the king’s room, followed by his companion:

“Charles Stuart,” said he, “an order has come to conduct you to London
without stopping day or night. Prepare yourself, then, to start at
once.”

“And by whom is this order given?” asked the king.

“By General Oliver Cromwell. And here is Mr. Mordaunt, who has brought
it and is charged with its execution.”

“Mordaunt!” muttered the four friends, exchanging glances.

D’Artagnan swept up the money that he and Porthos had lost and buried
it in his huge pocket. Athos and Aramis placed themselves behind him.
At this movement Mordaunt turned around, recognized them, and uttered
an exclamation of savage delight.

“I’m afraid we are prisoners,” whispered D’Artagnan to his friend.

“Not yet,” replied Porthos.

“Colonel, colonel,” cried Mordaunt, “you are betrayed. These four
Frenchmen have escaped from Newcastle, and no doubt want to carry off
the king. Arrest them.”

“Ah! my young man,” said D’Artagnan, drawing his sword, “that is an
order sooner given than executed. Fly, friends, fly!” he added,
whirling his sword around him.

The next moment he darted to the door and knocked down two of the
soldiers who guarded it, before they had time to cock their muskets.
Athos and Aramis followed him. Porthos brought up the rear, and before
soldiers, officers, or colonel had time to recover their surprise all
four were in the street.

“Fire!” cried Mordaunt; “fire upon them!”

Three or four shots were fired, but with no other result than to show
the four fugitives turning the corner of the street safe and sound.

The horses were at the place fixed upon, and they leaped lightly into
their saddles.

“Forward!” cried D’Artagnan, “and spur for your dear lives!”

They galloped away and took the road they had come by in the morning,
namely, in the direction toward Scotland. A few hundred yards beyond
the town D’Artagnan drew rein.

“Halt!” he cried, “this time we shall be pursued. We must let them
leave the village and ride after us on the northern road, and when they
have passed we will take the opposite direction.”

There was a stream close by and a bridge across it.

D’Artagnan led his horse under the arch of the bridge. The others
followed. Ten minutes later they heard the rapid gallop of a troop of
horsemen. A few minutes more and the troop passed over their heads.




Chapter LXII.
London.


As soon as the noise of the hoofs was lost in the distance D’Artagnan
remounted the bank of the stream and scoured the plain, followed by his
three friends, directing their course, as well as they could guess,
toward London.

“This time,” said D’Artagnan, when they were sufficiently distant to
proceed at a trot, “I think all is lost and we have nothing better to
do than to reach France. What do you say, Athos, to that proposition?
Isn’t it reasonable?”

“Yes, dear friend,” Athos replied, “but you said a word the other day
that was more than reasonable—it was noble and generous. You said, ‘Let
us die here!’ I recall to you that word.”

“Oh,” said Porthos, “death is nothing: it isn’t death that can disquiet
us, since we don’t know what it is. What troubles me is the idea of
defeat. As things are turning out, I foresee that we must give battle
to London, to the provinces, to all England, and certainly in the end
we can’t fail to be beaten.”

“We ought to witness this great tragedy even to its last scene,” said
Athos. “Whatever happens, let us not leave England before the crisis.
Don’t you agree with me, Aramis?”

“Entirely, my dear count. Then, too, I confess I should not be sorry to
come across Mordaunt again. It appears to me that we have an account to
settle with him, and that it is not our custom to leave a place without
paying our debts, of this kind, at least.”

“Ah! that’s another thing,” said D’Artagnan, “and I should not mind
waiting in London a whole year for a chance of meeting this Mordaunt in
question. Only let us lodge with some one on whom we can count; for I
imagine, just now, that Noll Cromwell would not be inclined to trifle
with us. Athos, do you know any inn in the whole town where one can
find white sheets, roast beef reasonably cooked, and wine which is not
made of hops and gin?”

“I think I know what you want,” replied Athos. “De Winter took us to
the house of a Spaniard, who, he said, had become naturalized as an
Englishman by the guineas of his new compatriots. What do you say to
it, Aramis?”

“Why, the idea of taking quarters with Senor Perez seems to me very
reasonable, and for my part I agree to it. We will invoke the
remembrance of that poor De Winter, for whom he seemed to have a great
regard; we will tell him that we have come as amateurs to see what is
going on; we will spend with him a guinea each per day; and I think
that by taking all these precautions we can be quite undisturbed.”

“You forget, Aramis, one precaution of considerable importance.”

“What is that?”

“The precaution of changing our clothes.”

“Changing our clothes!” exclaimed Porthos. “I don’t see why; we are
very comfortable in those we wear.”

“To prevent recognition,” said D’Artagnan. “Our clothes have a cut
which would proclaim the Frenchman at first sight. Now, I don’t set
sufficient store on the cut of my jerkin to risk being hung at Tyburn
or sent for change of scene to the Indies. I shall buy a
chestnut-colored suit. I’ve remarked that your Puritans revel in that
color.”

“But can you find your man?” said Aramis to Athos.

“Oh! to be sure, yes. He lives at the Bedford Tavern, Greenhall Street.
Besides, I can find my way about the city with my eyes shut.”

“I wish we were already there,” said D’Artagnan; “and my advice is that
we reach London before daybreak, even if we kill our horses.”

“Come on, then,” said Athos, “for unless I am mistaken in my
calculations we have only eight or ten leagues to go.”

The friends urged on their horses and arrived, in fact, at about five
o’clock in the morning. They were stopped and questioned at the gate by
which they sought to enter the city, but Athos replied, in excellent
English, that they had been sent forward by Colonel Harrison to
announce to his colleague, Monsieur Bridge, the approach of the king.
That reply led to several questions about the king’s capture, and Athos
gave details so precise and positive that if the gatekeepers had any
suspicions they vanished completely. The way was therefore opened to
the four friends with all sorts of Puritan congratulations.

Athos was right. He went direct to the Bedford Tavern, and the host,
who recognized him, was delighted to see him again with such a numerous
and promising company.

Though it was scarcely daylight our four travelers found the town in a
great bustle, owing to the reported approach of Harrison and the king.

The plan of changing their clothes was unanimously adopted. The
landlord sent out for every description of garment, as if he wanted to
fit up his wardrobe. Athos chose a black coat, which gave him the
appearance of a respectable citizen. Aramis, not wishing to part with
his sword, selected a dark-blue cloak of a military cut. Porthos was
seduced by a wine-colored doublet and sea-green breeches. D’Artagnan,
who had fixed on his color beforehand, had only to select the shade,
and looked in his chestnut suit exactly like a retired sugar dealer.

“Now,” said D’Artagnan, “for the actual man. We must cut off our hair,
that the populace may not insult us. As we no longer wear the sword of
the gentleman we may as well have the head of the Puritan. This, as you
know, is the important point of distinction between the Covenanter and
the Cavalier.”

After some discussion this was agreed to and Mousqueton played the role
of barber.

“We look hideous,” said Athos.

“And smack of the Puritan to a frightful extent,” said Aramis.

“My head feels actually cold,” said Porthos.

“As for me, I feel anxious to preach a sermon,” said D’Artagnan.

“Now,” said Athos, “that we cannot even recognize one another and have
therefore no fear of others recognizing us, let us go and see the
king’s entrance.”

They had not been long in the crowd before loud cries announced the
king’s arrival. A carriage had been sent to meet him, and the gigantic
Porthos, who stood a head above the entire rabble, soon announced that
he saw the royal equipage approaching. D’Artagnan raised himself on
tiptoe, and as the carriage passed, saw Harrison at one window and
Mordaunt at the other.

The next day, Athos, leaning out of his window, which looked upon the
most populous part of the city, heard the Act of Parliament, which
summoned the ex-king, Charles I., to the bar, publicly cried.

“Parliament indeed!” cried Athos. “Parliament can never have passed
such an act as that.”

At this moment the landlord came in.

“Did parliament pass this act?” Athos asked of him in English.

“Yes, my lord, the pure parliament.”

“What do you mean by ‘the pure parliament’? Are there, then, two
parliaments?”

“My friend,” D’Artagnan interrupted, “as I don’t understand English and
we all understand Spanish, have the kindness to speak to us in that
language, which, since it is your own, you must find pleasure in using
when you have the chance.”

“Ah! excellent!” said Aramis.

As to Porthos, all his attention was concentrated on the allurements of
the breakfast table.

“You were asking, then?” said the host in Spanish.

“I asked,” said Athos, in the same language, “if there are two
parliaments, a pure and an impure?”

“Why, how extraordinary!” said Porthos, slowly raising his head and
looking at his friends with an air of astonishment, “I understand
English, then! I understand what you say!”

“That is because we are talking Spanish, my dear friend,” said Athos.

“Oh, the devil!” said Porthos, “I am sorry for that; it would have been
one language more.”

“When I speak of the pure parliament,” resumed the host, “I mean the
one which Colonel Bridge has weeded.”

“Ah! really,” said D’Artagnan, “these people are very ingenious. When I
go back to France I must suggest some such convenient course to
Cardinal Mazarin and the coadjutor. One of them will weed the
parliament in the name of the court, and the other in the name of the
people; and then there won’t be any parliament at all.”

“And who is this Colonel Bridge?” asked Aramis, “and how does he go to
work to weed the parliament?”

“Colonel Bridge,” replied the Spaniard, “is a retired wagoner, a man of
much sense, who made one valuable observation whilst driving his team,
namely, that where there happened to be a stone on the road, it was
much easier to remove the stone than try and make the wheel pass over
it. Now, of two hundred and fifty-one members who composed the
parliament, there were one hundred and ninety-one who were in the way
and might have upset his political wagon. He took them up, just as he
formerly used to take up the stones from the road, and threw them out
of the house.”

“Neat,” remarked D’Artagnan. “Very!”

“And all these one hundred and ninety-one were Royalists?” asked Athos.

“Without doubt, senor; and you understand that they would have saved
the king.”

“To be sure,” said Porthos, with majestic common sense; “they were in
the majority.”

“And you think,” said Aramis, “he will consent to appear before such a
tribunal?”

“He will be forced to do so,” smiled the Spaniard.

“Now, Athos!” said D’Artagnan, “do you begin to believe that it’s a
ruined cause, and that what with your Harrisons, Joyces, Bridges and
Cromwells, we shall never get the upper hand?”

“The king will be delivered at the tribunal,” said Athos; “the very
silence of his supporters indicates that they are at work.”

D’Artagnan shrugged his shoulders.

“But,” said Aramis, “if they dare to condemn their king, it can only be
to exile or imprisonment.”

D’Artagnan whistled a little air of incredulity.

“We shall see,” said Athos, “for we shall go to the sittings, I
presume.”

“You will not have long to wait,” said the landlord; “they begin
to-morrow.”

“So, then, they drew up the indictments before the king was taken?”

“Of course,” said D’Artagnan; “they began the day he was sold.”

“And you know,” said Aramis, “that it was our friend Mordaunt who made,
if not the bargain, at least the overtures.”

“And you know,” added D’Artagnan, “that whenever I catch him I will
kill him, this Mordaunt.”

“And I, too,” exclaimed Porthos.

“And I, too,” added Aramis.

“Touching unanimity!” cried D’Artagnan, “which well becomes good
citizens like us. Let us take a turn around the town and imbibe a
little fog.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “’twill be at least a little change from beer.”




Chapter LXIII.
The Trial.


The next morning King Charles I. was haled by a strong guard before the
high court which was to judge him. All London was crowding to the doors
of the house. The throng was terrific, and it was not till after much
pushing and some fighting that our friends reached their destination.
When they did so they found the three lower rows of benches already
occupied; but being anxious not to be too conspicuous, all, with the
exception of Porthos, who had a fancy to display his red doublet, were
quite satisfied with their places, the more so as chance had brought
them to the centre of their row, so that they were exactly opposite the
arm-chair prepared for the royal prisoner.

Toward eleven o’clock the king entered the hall, surrounded by guards,
but wearing his head covered, and with a calm expression turned to
every side with a look of complete assurance, as if he were there to
preside at an assembly of submissive subjects, rather than to meet the
accusations of a rebel court.

The judges, proud of having a monarch to humiliate, evidently prepared
to enjoy the right they had arrogated to themselves, and sent an
officer to inform the king that it was customary for the accused to
uncover his head.

Charles, without replying a single word, turned his head in another
direction and pulled his felt hat over it. Then when the officer was
gone he sat down in the arm-chair opposite the president and struck his
boots with a little cane which he carried in his hand. Parry, who
accompanied him, stood behind him.

D’Artagnan was looking at Athos, whose face betrayed all those emotions
which the king, possessing more self-control, had banished from his
own. This agitation in one so cold and calm as Athos, frightened him.

“I hope,” he whispered to him, “that you will follow his majesty’s
example and not get killed for your folly in this den.”

“Set your mind at rest,” replied Athos.

“Aha!” continued D’Artagnan, “it is clear that they are afraid of
something or other; for look, the sentinels are being reinforced. They
had only halberds before, now they have muskets. The halberds were for
the audience in the rear; the muskets are for us.”

“Thirty, forty, fifty, sixty-five men,” said Porthos, counting the
reinforcements.

“Ah!” said Aramis, “but you forget the officer.”

D’Artagnan grew pale with rage. He recognized Mordaunt, who with bare
sword was marshalling the musketeers behind the king and opposite the
benches.

“Do you think they have recognized us?” said D’Artagnan. “In that case
I should beat a retreat. I don’t care to be shot in a box.”

“No,” said Aramis, “he has not seen us. He sees no one but the king.
Mon Dieu! how he stares at him, the insolent dog! Does he hate his
majesty as much as he does us?”

“Pardi,” answered Athos “we only carried off his mother; the king has
spoiled him of his name and property.”

“True,” said Aramis; “but silence! the president is speaking to the
king.”

“Stuart,” Bradshaw was saying, “listen to the roll call of your judges
and address to the court any observations you may have to make.”

The king turned his head away, as if these words had not been intended
for him. Bradshaw waited, and as there was no reply there was a moment
of silence.

Out of the hundred and sixty-three members designated there were only
seventy-three present, for the rest, fearful of taking part in such an
act, had remained away.

When the name of Colonel Fairfax was called, one of those brief but
solemn silences ensued, which announced the absence of the members who
had no wish to take a personal part in the trial.

“Colonel Fairfax,” repeated Bradshaw.

“Fairfax,” answered a laughing voice, the silvery tone of which
betrayed it as that of a woman, “is not such a fool as to be here.”

A loud laugh followed these words, pronounced with that boldness which
women draw from their own weakness—a weakness which removes them beyond
the power of vengeance.

“It is a woman’s voice,” cried Aramis; “faith, I would give a good deal
if she is young and pretty.” And he mounted on the bench to try and get
a sight of her.

“By my soul,” said Aramis, “she is charming. Look D’Artagnan; everybody
is looking at her; and in spite of Bradshaw’s gaze she has not turned
pale.”

“It is Lady Fairfax herself,” said D’Artagnan. “Don’t you remember,
Porthos, we saw her at General Cromwell’s?”

The roll call continued.

“These rascals will adjourn when they find that they are not in
sufficient force,” said the Comte de la Fere.

“You don’t know them. Athos, look at Mordaunt’s smile. Is that the look
of a man whose victim is likely to escape him? Ah, cursed basilisk, it
will be a happy day for me when I can cross something more than a look
with you.”

“The king is really very handsome,” said Porthos; “and look, too,
though he is a prisoner, how carefully he is dressed. The feather in
his hat is worth at least five-and-twenty pistoles. Look at it,
Aramis.”

The roll call finished, the president ordered them to read the act of
accusation. Athos turned pale. A second time he was disappointed in his
expectation. Notwithstanding the judges were so few the trial was to
continue; the king then, was condemned in advance.

“I told you so, Athos,” said D’Artagnan, shrugging his shoulders. “Now
take your courage in both hands and hear what this gentleman in black
is going to say about his sovereign, with full license and privilege.”

Never till then had a more brutal accusation or meaner insults
tarnished kingly majesty.

Charles listened with marked attention, passing over the insults,
noting the grievances, and, when hatred overflowed all bounds and the
accuser turned executioner beforehand, replying with a smile of lofty
scorn.

“The fact is,” said D’Artagnan, “if men are punished for imprudence and
triviality, this poor king deserves punishment. But it seems to me that
that which he is just now undergoing is hard enough.”

“In any case,” Aramis replied, “the punishment should fall not on the
king, but on his ministers; for the first article of the constitution
is, ‘The king can do no wrong.’”

“As for me,” thought Porthos, giving Mordaunt his whole attention,
“were it not for breaking in on the majesty of the situation I would
leap down from the bench, reach Mordaunt in three bounds and strangle
him; I would then take him by the feet and knock the life out of these
wretched musketeers who parody the musketeers of France. Meantime,
D’Artagnan, who is full of invention, would find some way to save the
king. I must speak to him about it.”

As to Athos, his face aflame, his fists clinched, his lips bitten till
they bled, he sat there foaming with rage at that endless parliamentary
insult and that long enduring royal patience; the inflexible arm and
steadfast heart had given place to a trembling hand and a body shaken
by excitement.

At this moment the accuser concluded with these words: “The present
accusation is preferred by us in the name of the English people.”

At these words there was a murmur along the benches, and a second
voice, not that of a woman, but a man’s, stout and furious, thundered
behind D’Artagnan.

“You lie!” it cried. “Nine-tenths of the English people are horrified
at what you say.”

This voice was that of Athos, who, standing up with outstretched hand
and quite out of his mind, thus assailed the public accuser.

King, judges, spectators, all turned their eyes to the bench where the
four friends were seated. Mordaunt did the same and recognized the
gentleman, around whom the three other Frenchmen were standing, pale
and menacing. His eyes glittered with delight. He had discovered those
to whose death he had devoted his life. A movement of fury called to
his side some twenty of his musketeers, and pointing to the bench where
his enemies were: “Fire on that bench!” he cried.

But with the rapidity of thought D’Artagnan seized Athos by the waist,
and followed by Porthos with Aramis, leaped down from the benches,
rushed into the passages, and flying down the staircase were lost in
the crowd without, while the muskets within were pointed on some three
thousand spectators, whose piteous cries and noisy alarm stopped the
impulse already given to bloodshed.

Charles also had recognized the four Frenchmen. He put one hand on his
heart to still its beating and the other over his eyes, that he might
not witness the slaying of his faithful friends.

Mordaunt, pale and trembling with anger, rushed from the hall sword in
hand, followed by six pikemen, pushing, inquiring and panting in the
crowd; and then, having found nothing, returned.

The tumult was indescribable. More than half an hour passed before any
one could make himself heard. The judges were looking for a new
outbreak from the benches. The spectators saw the muskets leveled at
them, and divided between fear and curiosity, remained noisy and
excited.

Quiet was at length restored.

“What have you to say in your defense?” asked Bradshaw of the king.

Then rising, with his head still covered, in the tone of a judge rather
than a prisoner, Charles began.

“Before questioning me,” he said, “reply to my question. I was free at
Newcastle and had there concluded a treaty with both houses. Instead of
performing your part of this contract, as I performed mine, you bought
me from the Scotch, cheaply, I know, and that does honor to the
economic talent of your government. But because you have paid the price
of a slave, do you imagine that I have ceased to be your king? No. To
answer you would be to forget it. I shall only reply to you when you
have satisfied me of your right to question me. To answer you would be
to acknowledge you as my judges, and I only acknowledge you as my
executioners.” And in the middle of a deathlike silence, Charles, calm,
lofty, and with his head still covered, sat down again in his
arm-chair.

“Why are not my Frenchmen here?” he murmured proudly and turning his
eyes to the benches where they had appeared for a moment; “they would
have seen that their friend was worthy of their defense while alive,
and of their tears when dead.”

“Well,” said the president, seeing that Charles was determined to
remain silent, “so be it. We will judge you in spite of your silence.
You are accused of treason, of abuse of power, and murder. The evidence
will support it. Go, and another sitting will accomplish what you have
postponed in this.”

Charles rose and turned toward Parry, whom he saw pale and with his
temples dewed with moisture.

“Well, my dear Parry,” said he, “what is the matter, and what can
affect you in this manner?”

“Oh, my king,” said Parry, with tears in his eyes and in a tone of
supplication, “do not look to the left as we leave the hall.”

“And why, Parry?”

“Do not look, I implore you, my king.”

“But what is the matter? Speak,” said Charles, attempting to look
across the hedge of guards which surrounded him.

“It is—but you will not look, will you?—it is because they have had the
axe, with which criminals are executed, brought and placed there on the
table. The sight is hideous.”

“Fools,” said Charles, “do they take me for a coward, like themselves?
You have done well to warn me. Thank you, Parry.”

When the moment arrived the king followed his guards out of the hall.
As he passed the table on which the axe was laid, he stopped, and
turning with a smile, said:

“Ah! the axe, an ingenious device, and well worthy of those who know
not what a gentleman is; you frighten me not, executioner’s axe,” added
he, touching it with the cane which he held in his hand, “and I strike
you now, waiting patiently and Christianly for you to return the blow.”

And shrugging his shoulders with unaffected contempt he passed on. When
he reached the door a stream of people, who had been disappointed in
not being able to get into the house and to make amends had collected
to see him come out, stood on each side, as he passed, many among them
glaring on him with threatening looks.

“How many people,” thought he, “and not one true friend.”

And as he uttered these words of doubt and depression within his mind,
a voice beside him said:

“Respect to fallen majesty.”

The king turned quickly around, with tears in his eyes and heart. It
was an old soldier of the guards who could not see his king pass
captive before him without rendering him this final homage. But the
next moment the unfortunate man was nearly killed with heavy blows of
sword-hilts, and among those who set upon him the king recognized
Captain Groslow.

“Alas!” said Charles, “that is a severe chastisement for a very
trifling fault.”

He continued his walk, but he had scarcely gone a hundred paces, when a
furious fellow, leaning between two soldiers, spat in the king’s face,
as once an infamous and accursed Jew spit in the face of Jesus of
Nazareth. Loud roars of laughter and sullen murmurs arose together. The
crowd opened and closed again, undulating like a stormy sea, and the
king imagined that he saw shining in the midst of this living wave the
bright eyes of Athos.

Charles wiped his face and said with a sad smile: “Poor wretch, for
half a crown he would do as much to his own father.”

The king was not mistaken. Athos and his friends, again mingling with
the throng, were taking a last look at the martyr king.

When the soldier saluted Charles, Athos’s heart bounded for joy; and
that unfortunate, on coming to himself, found ten guineas that the
French gentleman had slipped into his pocket. But when the cowardly
insulter spat in the face of the captive monarch Athos grasped his
dagger. But D’Artagnan stopped his hand and in a hoarse voice cried,
“Wait!”

Athos stopped. D’Artagnan, leaning on Athos, made a sign to Porthos and
Aramis to keep near them and then placed himself behind the man with
the bare arms, who was still laughing at his own vile pleasantry and
receiving the congratulations of several others.

The man took his way toward the city. The four friends followed him.
The man, who had the appearance of being a butcher, descended a little
steep and isolated street, looking on to the river, with two of his
friends. Arrived at the bank of the river the three men perceived that
they were followed, turned around, and looking insolently at the
Frenchmen, passed some jests from one to another.

“I don’t know English, Athos,” said D’Artagnan; “but you know it and
will interpret for me.”

Then quickening their steps they passed the three men, but turned back
immediately, and D’Artagnan walked straight up to the butcher and
touching him on the chest with the tip of his finger, said to Athos:

“Say this to him in English: ‘You are a coward. You have insulted a
defenseless man. You have befouled the face of your king. You must
die.’”

Athos, pale as a ghost, repeated these words to the man, who, seeing
the bodeful preparations that were making, put himself in an attitude
of defense. Aramis, at this movement, drew his sword.

“No,” cried D’Artagnan, “no steel. Steel is for gentlemen.”

And seizing the butcher by the throat:

“Porthos,” said he, “kill this fellow for me with a single blow.”

Porthos raised his terrible fist, which whistled through the air like a
sling, and the portentous mass fell with a smothered crash on the
insulter’s skull and crushed it. The man fell like an ox beneath the
poleaxe. His companions, horror-struck, could neither move nor cry out.

“Tell them this, Athos,” resumed D’Artagnan; “thus shall all die who
forget that a captive man is sacred and that a captive king doubly
represents the Lord.”

Athos repeated D’Artagnan’s words.

The fellows looked at the body of their companion, swimming in blood,
and then recovering voice and legs together, ran screaming off.

“Justice is done,” said Porthos, wiping his forehead.

“And now,” said D’Artagnan to Athos, “entertain no further doubts about
me; I undertake all that concerns the king.”




Chapter LXIV.
Whitehall.


The parliament condemned Charles to death, as might have been foreseen.
Political judgments are generally vain formalities, for the same
passions which give rise to the accusation ordain to the condemnation.
Such is the atrocious logic of revolutions.

Although our friends were expecting that condemnation, it filled them
with grief. D’Artagnan, whose mind was never more fertile in resources
than in critical emergencies, swore again that he would try all
conceivable means to prevent the dénouement of the bloody tragedy. But
by what means? As yet he could form no definite plan; all must depend
on circumstances. Meanwhile, it was necessary at all hazards, in order
to gain time, to put some obstacle in the way of the execution on the
following day—the day appointed by the judges. The only way of doing
that was to cause the disappearance of the London executioner. The
headsman out of the way, the sentence could not be executed. True, they
could send for the headsman of the nearest town, but at least a day
would be gained, and a day might be sufficient for the rescue.
D’Artagnan took upon himself that more than difficult task.

Another thing, not less essential, was to warn Charles Stuart of the
attempt to be made, so that he might assist his rescuers as much as
possible, or at least do nothing to thwart their efforts. Aramis
assumed that perilous charge. Charles Stuart had asked that Bishop
Juxon might be permitted to visit him. Mordaunt had called on the
bishop that very evening to apprise him of the religious desire
expressed by the king and also of Cromwell’s permission. Aramis
determined to obtain from the bishop, through fear or by persuasion,
consent that he should enter in the bishop’s place, and clad in his
sacerdotal robes, the prison at Whitehall.

Finally, Athos undertook to provide, in any event, the means of leaving
England—in case either of failure or of success.

The night having come they made an appointment to meet at eleven
o’clock at the hotel, and each started out to fulfill his dangerous
mission.

The palace of Whitehall was guarded by three regiments of cavalry and
by the fierce anxiety of Cromwell, who came and went or sent his
generals or his agents continually. Alone in his usual room, lighted by
two candles, the condemned monarch gazed sadly on the luxury of his
past greatness, just as at the last hour one sees the images of life
more mildly brilliant than of yore.

Parry had not quitted his master, and since his condemnation had not
ceased to weep. Charles, leaning on a table, was gazing at a medallion
of his wife and daughter; he was waiting first for Juxon, then for
martyrdom.

At times he thought of those brave French gentlemen who had appeared to
him from a distance of a hundred leagues fabulous and unreal, like the
forms that appear in dreams. In fact, he sometimes asked himself if all
that was happening to him was not a dream, or at least the delirium of
a fever. He rose and took a few steps as if to rouse himself from his
torpor and went as far as the window; he saw glittering below him the
muskets of the guards. He was thereupon constrained to admit that he
was indeed awake and that his bloody dream was real.

Charles returned in silence to his chair, rested his elbow on the
table, bowed his head upon his hand and reflected.

“Alas!” he said to himself, “if I only had for a confessor one of those
lights of the church, whose soul has sounded all the mysteries of life,
all the littlenesses of greatness, perhaps his utterance would overawe
the voice that wails within my soul. But I shall have a priest of
vulgar mind, whose career and fortune I have ruined by my misfortune.
He will speak to me of God and death, as he has spoken to many another
dying man, not understanding that this one leaves his throne to an
usurper, his children to the cold contempt of public charity.”

And he raised the medallion to his lips.

It was a dull, foggy night. A neighboring church clock slowly struck
the hour. The flickering light of the two candles showed fitful phantom
shadows in the lofty room. These were the ancestors of Charles,
standing back dimly in their tarnished frames.

An awful sadness enveloped the heart of Charles. He buried his brow in
his hands and thought of the world, so beautiful when one is about to
leave it; of the caresses of children, so pleasing and so sweet,
especially when one is parting from his children never to see them
again; then of his wife, the noble and courageous woman who had
sustained him to the last moment. He drew from his breast the diamond
cross and the star of the Garter which she had sent him by those
generous Frenchmen; he kissed it, and then, as he reflected, that she
would never again see those things till he lay cold and mutilated in
the tomb, there passed over him one of those icy shivers which may be
called forerunners of death.

Then, in that chamber which recalled to him so many royal souvenirs,
whither had come so many courtiers, the scene of so much flattering
homage, alone with a despairing servant, whose feeble soul could afford
no support to his own, the king at last yielded to sorrow, and his
courage sank to a level with that feebleness, those shadows, and that
wintry cold. That king, who was so grand, so sublime in the hour of
death, meeting his fate with a smile of resignation on his lips, now in
that gloomy hour wiped away a tear which had fallen on the table and
quivered on the gold embroidered cloth.

Suddenly the door opened, an ecclesiastic in episcopal robes entered,
followed by two guards, to whom the king waved an imperious gesture.
The guards retired; the room resumed its obscurity.

“Juxon!” cried Charles, “Juxon, thank you, my last friend; you come at
a fitting moment.”

The bishop looked anxiously at the man sobbing in the ingle-nook.

“Come, Parry,” said the king, “cease your tears.”

“If it’s Parry,” said the bishop, “I have nothing to fear; so allow me
to salute your majesty and to tell you who I am and for what I am
come.”

At this sight and this voice Charles was about to cry out, when Aramis
placed his finger on his lips and bowed low to the king of England.

“The chevalier!” murmured Charles.

“Yes, sire,” interrupted Aramis, raising his voice, “Bishop Juxon, the
faithful knight of Christ, obedient to your majesty’s wishes.”

Charles clasped his hands, amazed and stupefied to find that these
foreigners, without other motive than that which their conscience
imposed on them, thus combated the will of a people and the destiny of
a king.

“You!” he said, “you! how did you penetrate hither? If they recognize
you, you are lost.”

“Care not for me, sire; think only of yourself. You see, your friends
are wakeful. I know not what we shall do yet, but four determined men
can do much. Meanwhile, do not be surprised at anything that happens;
prepare yourself for every emergency.”

Charles shook his head.

“Do you know that I die to-morrow at ten o’clock?”

“Something, your majesty, will happen between now and then to make the
execution impossible.”

The king looked at Aramis with astonishment.

At this moment a strange noise, like the unloading of a cart, and
followed by a cry of pain, was heard beneath the window.

“Do you hear?” said the king.

“I hear,” said Aramis, “but I understand neither the noise nor the cry
of pain.”

“I know not who can have uttered the cry,” said the king, “but the
noise is easily understood. Do you know that I am to be beheaded
outside this window? Well, these boards you hear unloaded are the posts
and planks to build my scaffold. Some workmen must have fallen
underneath them and been hurt.”

Aramis shuddered in spite of himself.

“You see,” said the king, “that it is useless for you to resist. I am
condemned; leave me to my death.”

“My king,” said Aramis, “they well may raise a scaffold, but they
cannot make an executioner.”

“What do you mean?” asked the king.

“I mean that at this hour the headsman has been got out of the way by
force or persuasion. The scaffold will be ready by to-morrow, but the
headsman will be wanting and they will put it off till the day after
to-morrow.”

“What then?” said the king.

“To-morrow night we shall rescue you.”

“How can that be?” cried the king, whose face was lighted up, in spite
of himself, by a flash of joy.

“Oh! sir,” cried Parry, “may you and yours be blessed!”

“How can it be?” repeated the king. “I must know, so that I may assist
you if there is any chance.”

“I know nothing about it,” continued Aramis, “but the cleverest, the
bravest, the most devoted of us four said to me when I left him, ‘Tell
the king that to-morrow at ten o’clock at night, we shall carry him
off.’ He has said it and will do it.”

“Tell me the name of that generous friend,” said the king, “that I may
cherish for him an eternal gratitude, whether he succeeds or not.”

“D’Artagnan, sire, the same who had so nearly rescued you when Colonel
Harrison made his untimely entrance.”

“You are, indeed, wonderful men,” said the king; “if such things had
been related to me I should not have believed them.”

“Now, sire,” resumed Aramis, “listen to me. Do not forget for a single
instant that we are watching over your safety; observe the smallest
gesture, the least bit of song, the least sign from any one near you;
watch everything, hear everything, interpret everything.”

“Oh, chevalier!” cried the king, “what can I say to you? There is no
word, though it should come from the profoundest depth of my heart,
that can express my gratitude. If you succeed I do not say that you
will save a king; no, in presence of the scaffold as I am, royalty, I
assure you, is a very small affair; but you will save a husband to his
wife, a father to his children. Chevalier, take my hand; it is that of
a friend who will love you to his last sigh.”

Aramis stooped to kiss the king’s hand, but Charles clasped his and
pressed it to his heart.

At this moment a man entered, without even knocking at the door. Aramis
tried to withdraw his hand, but the king still held it. The man was one
of those Puritans, half preacher and half soldier, who swarmed around
Cromwell.

“What do you want, sir?” said the king.

“I desire to know if the confession of Charles Stuart is at an end?”
said the stranger.

“And what is it to you?” replied the king; “we are not of the same
religion.”

“All men are brothers,” said the Puritan. “One of my brothers is about
to die and I come to prepare him.”

“Bear with him,” whispered Aramis; “it is doubtless some spy.”

“After my reverend lord bishop,” said the king to the man, “I shall
hear you with pleasure, sir.”

The man retired, but not before examining the supposed Juxon with an
attention which did not escape the king.

“Chevalier,” said the king, when the door was closed, “I believe you
are right and that this man only came here with evil intentions. Take
care that no misfortune befalls you when you leave.”

“I thank your majesty,” said Aramis, “but under these robes I have a
coat of mail, a pistol and a dagger.”

“Go, then, sir, and God keep you!”

The king accompanied him to the door, where Aramis pronounced his
benediction upon him, and passing through the ante-rooms, filled with
soldiers, jumped into his carriage and drove to the bishop’s palace.
Juxon was waiting for him impatiently.

“Well?” said he, on perceiving Aramis.

“Everything has succeeded as I expected; spies, guards, satellites, all
took me for you, and the king blesses you while waiting for you to
bless him.”

“May God protect you, my son; for your example has given me at the same
time hope and courage.”

Aramis resumed his own attire and left Juxon with the assurance that he
might again have recourse to him.

He had scarcely gone ten yards in the street when he perceived that he
was followed by a man, wrapped in a large cloak. He placed his hand on
his dagger and stopped. The man came straight toward him. It was
Porthos.

“My dear friend,” cried Aramis.

“You see, we had each our mission,” said Porthos; “mine was to guard
you and I am doing so. Have you seen the king?”

“Yes, and all goes well.”

“We are to meet our friends at the hotel at eleven.”

It was then striking half-past ten by St. Paul’s.

Arrived at the hotel it was not long before Athos entered.

“All’s well,” he cried, as he entered; “I have hired a cedar wherry, as
light as a canoe, as easy on the wing as any swallow. It is waiting for
us at Greenwich, opposite the Isle of Dogs, manned by a captain and
four men, who for the sum of fifty pounds sterling will keep themselves
at our disposition three successive nights. Once on board we drop down
the Thames and in two hours are on the open sea. In case I am killed,
the captain’s name is Roger and the skiff is called the Lightning. A
handkerchief, tied at the four corners, is to be the signal.”

Next moment D’Artagnan entered.

“Empty your pockets,” said he; “I want a hundred pounds, and as for my
own——” and he emptied them inside out.

The sum was collected in a minute. D’Artagnan ran out and returned
directly after.

“There,” said he, “it’s done. Ough! and not without a deal of trouble,
too.”

“Has the executioner left London?” asked Athos.

“Ah, you see that plan was not sure enough; he might go out by one gate
and return by another.”

“Where is he, then?”

“In the cellar.”

“The cellar—what cellar?”

“Our landlord’s, to be sure. Mousqueton is propped against the door and
here’s the key.”

“Bravo!” said Aramis, “how did you manage it?”

“Like everything else, with money; but it cost me dear.”

“How much?” asked Athos.

“Five hundred pounds.”

“And where did you get so much money?” said Athos. “Had you, then, that
sum?”

“The queen’s famous diamond,” answered D’Artagnan, with a sigh.

“Ah, true,” said Aramis. “I recognized it on your finger.”

“You bought it back, then, from Monsieur des Essarts?” asked Porthos.

“Yes, but it was fated that I should not keep it.”

“So, then, we are all right as regards the executioner,” said Athos;
“but unfortunately every executioner has his assistant, his man, or
whatever you call him.”

“And this one had his,” said D’Artagnan; “but, as good luck would have
it, just as I thought I should have two affairs to manage, our friend
was brought home with a broken leg. In the excess of his zeal he had
accompanied the cart containing the scaffolding as far as the king’s
window, and one of the crossbeams fell on his leg and broke it.”

“Ah!” cried Aramis, “that accounts for the cry I heard.”

“Probably,” said D’Artagnan, “but as he is a thoughtful young man he
promised to send four expert workmen in his place to help those already
at the scaffold, and wrote the moment he was brought home to Master Tom
Lowe, an assistant carpenter and friend of his, to go down to
Whitehall, with three of his friends. Here’s the letter he sent by a
messenger, for sixpence, who sold it to me for a guinea.”

“And what on earth are you going to do with it?” asked Athos.

“Can’t you guess, my dear Athos? You, who speak English like John Bull
himself, are Master Tom Lowe, we, your three companions. Do you
understand it now?”

Athos uttered a cry of joy and admiration, ran to a closet and drew
forth workmen’s clothes, which the four friends immediately put on;
they then left the hotel, Athos carrying a saw, Porthos a vise, Aramis
an axe and D’Artagnan a hammer and some nails.

The letter from the executioner’s assistant satisfied the master
carpenter that those were the men he expected.




Chapter LXV.
The Workmen.


Toward midnight Charles heard a great noise beneath his window. It
arose from blows of hammer and hatchet, clinking of pincers and
cranching of saws.

Lying dressed upon his bed, the noise awoke him with a start and found
a gloomy echo in his heart. He could not endure it, and sent Parry to
ask the sentinel to beg the workmen to strike more gently and not
disturb the last slumber of one who had been their king. The sentinel
was unwilling to leave his post, but allowed Parry to pass.

Arriving at the window Parry found an unfinished scaffold, over which
they were nailing a covering of black serge. Raised to the height of
twenty feet, so as to be on a level with the window, it had two lower
stories. Parry, odious as was this sight to him, sought for those among
some eight or ten workmen who were making the most noise; and fixed on
two men, who were loosening the last hooks of the iron balcony.

“My friends,” said Parry, mounting the scaffold and standing beside
them, “would you work a little more quietly? The king wishes to get a
sleep.”

One of the two, who was standing up, was of gigantic size and was
driving a pick with all his might into the wall, whilst the other,
kneeling beside him, was collecting the pieces of stone. The face of
the first was lost to Parry in the darkness; but as the second turned
around and placed his finger on his lips Parry started back in
amazement.

“Very well, very well,” said the workman aloud, in excellent English.
“Tell the king that if he sleeps badly to-night he will sleep better
to-morrow night.”

These blunt words, so terrible if taken literally, were received by the
other workmen with a roar of laughter. But Parry withdrew, thinking he
was dreaming.

Charles was impatiently awaiting his return. At the moment he
re-entered, the sentinel who guarded the door put his head through the
opening, curious as to what the king was doing. The king was lying on
his bed, resting on his elbow. Parry closed the door and approaching
the king, his face radiant with joy:

“Sire,” he said, in a low voice, “do you know who these workmen are who
are making so much noise?”

“I? No; how would you have me know?”

Parry bent his head and whispered to the king: “It is the Comte de la
Fere and his friends.”

“Raising my scaffold!” cried the king, astounded.

“Yes, and at the same time making a hole in the wall.”

The king clasped his hands and raised his eyes to Heaven; then leaping
down from his bed he went to the window, and pulling aside the curtain
tried to distinguish the figures outside, but in vain.

Parry was not wrong. It was Athos he had recognized, and Porthos who
was boring a hole through the wall.

This hole communicated with a kind of loft—the space between the floor
of the king’s room and the ceiling of the one below it. Their plan was
to pass through the hole they were making into this loft and cut out
from below a piece of the flooring of the king’s room, so as to form a
kind of trap-door.

Through this the king was to escape the next night, and, hidden by the
black covering of the scaffold, was to change his dress for that of a
workman, slip out with his deliverers, pass the sentinels, who would
suspect nothing, and so reach the skiff that was waiting for him at
Greenwich.

Day gilded the tops of the houses. The aperture was finished and Athos
passed through it, carrying the clothes destined for the king wrapped
in black cloth, and the tools with which he was to open a communication
with the king’s room. He had only two hours’ work to do to open
communication with the king and, according to the calculations of the
four friends, they had the entire day before them, since, the
executioner being absent, another must be sent for to Bristol.

D’Artagnan returned to change his workman’s clothes for his
chestnut-colored suit, and Porthos to put on his red doublet. As for
Aramis, he went off to the bishop’s palace to see if he could possibly
pass in with Juxon to the king’s presence. All three agreed to meet at
noon in Whitehall Place to see how things went on.

Before leaving the scaffold Aramis had approached the opening where
Athos was concealed to tell him that he was about to make an attempt to
gain another interview with the king.

“Adieu, then, and be of good courage,” said Athos. “Report to the king
the condition of affairs. Say to him that when he is alone it will help
us if he will knock on the floor, for then I can continue my work in
safety. Try, Aramis, to keep near the king. Speak loud, very loud, for
they will be listening at the door. If there is a sentinel within the
apartment, kill him without hesitation. If there are two, let Parry
kill one and you the other. If there are three, let yourself be slain,
but save the king.”

“Be easy,” said Aramis; “I will take two poniards and give one to
Parry. Is that all?”

“Yes, go; but urge the king strongly not to stand on false generosity.
While you are fighting if there is a fight, he must flee. The trap once
replaced over his head, you being on the trap, dead or alive, they will
need at least ten minutes to find the hole by which he has escaped. In
those ten minutes we shall have gained the road and the king will be
saved.”

“Everything shall be done as you say, Athos. Your hand, for perhaps we
shall not see each other again.”

Athos put his arm around Aramis’s neck and embraced him.

“For you,” he said. “Now if I die, say to D’Artagnan that I love him as
a son, and embrace him for me. Embrace also our good and brave Porthos.
Adieu.”

“Adieu,” said Aramis. “I am as sure now that the king will be saved as
I am sure that I clasp the most loyal hand in the world.”

Aramis parted from Athos, went down from the scaffold in his turn and
took his way to the hotel, whistling the air of a song in praise of
Cromwell. He found the other two friends sitting at table before a good
fire, drinking a bottle of port and devouring a cold chicken. Porthos
was cursing the infamous parliamentarians; D’Artagnan ate in silence,
revolving in his mind the most audacious plans.

Aramis related what had been agreed upon. D’Artagnan approved with a
movement of the head and Porthos with his voice.

“Bravo!” he said; “besides, we shall be there at the time of the
flight. What with D’Artagnan, Grimaud and Mousqueton, we can manage to
dispatch eight of them. I say nothing about Blaisois, for he is only
fit to hold the horses. Two minutes a man makes four minutes.
Mousqueton will lose another, that’s five; and in five minutes we shall
have galloped a quarter of a league.”

Aramis swallowed a hasty mouthful, gulped a glass of wine and changed
his clothes.

“Now,” said he, “I’m off to the bishop’s. Take care of the executioner,
D’Artagnan.”

“All right. Grimaud has relieved Mousqueton and has his foot on the
cellar door.”

“Well, don’t be inactive.”

“Inactive, my dear fellow! Ask Porthos. I pass my life upon my legs.”

Aramis again presented himself at the bishop’s. Juxon consented the
more readily to take him with him, as he would require an assistant
priest in case the king should wish to communicate. Dressed as Aramis
had been the night before, the bishop got into his carriage, and the
former, more disguised by his pallor and sad countenance than his
deacon’s dress, got in by his side. The carriage stopped at the door of
the palace.

It was about nine o’clock in the morning.

Nothing was changed. The ante-rooms were still full of soldiers, the
passages still lined by guards. The king was already sanguine, but when
he perceived Aramis his hope turned to joy. He embraced Juxon and
pressed the hand of Aramis. The bishop affected to speak in a loud
voice, before every one, of their previous interview. The king replied
that the words spoken in that interview had borne their fruit, and that
he desired another under the same conditions. Juxon turned to those
present and begged them to leave him and his assistant alone with the
king. Every one withdrew. As soon as the door was closed:

“Sire,” said Aramis, speaking rapidly, “you are saved; the London
executioner has vanished. His assistant broke his leg last night
beneath your majesty’s window—the cry we heard was his—and there is no
executioner nearer at hand than Bristol.”

“But the Comte de la Fere?” asked the king.

“Two feet below you; take the poker from the fireplace and strike three
times on the floor. He will answer you.”

The king did so, and the moment after, three muffled knocks, answering
the given signal, sounded beneath the floor.

“So,” said Charles, “he who knocks down there——”

“Is the Comte de la Fere, sire,” said Aramis. “He is preparing a way
for your majesty to escape. Parry, for his part, will raise this slab
of marble and a passage will be opened.”

“Oh, Juxon,” said the king, seizing the bishop’s two hands in his own,
“promise that you will pray all your life for this gentleman and for
the other that you hear beneath your feet, and for two others also,
who, wherever they may be, are on the watch for my safety.”

“Sire,” replied Juxon, “you shall be obeyed.”

Meanwhile, the miner underneath was heard working away incessantly,
when suddenly an unexpected noise resounded in the passage. Aramis
seized the poker and gave the signal to stop; the noise came nearer and
nearer. It was that of a number of men steadily approaching. The four
men stood motionless. All eyes were fixed on the door, which opened
slowly and with a kind of solemnity.

A parliamentary officer, clothed in black and with a gravity that
augured ill, entered, bowed to the king, and unfolding a parchment,
read the sentence, as is usually done to criminals before their
execution.

“What is this?” said Aramis to Juxon.

Juxon replied with a sign which meant that he knew no more than Aramis
about it.

“Then it is for to-day?” asked the king.

“Was not your majesty warned that it was to take place this morning?”

“Then I must die like a common criminal by the hand of the London
executioner?”

“The London executioner has disappeared, your majesty, but a man has
offered his services instead. The execution will therefore only be
delayed long enough for you to arrange your spiritual and temporal
affairs.”

A slight moisture on his brow was the only trace of emotion that
Charles evinced, as he learned these tidings. But Aramis was livid. His
heart ceased beating, he closed his eyes and leaned upon the table.
Charles perceived it and took his hand.

“Come, my friend,” said he, “courage.” Then he turned to the officer.
“Sir, I am ready. There is but little reason why I should delay you.
Firstly, I wish to communicate; secondly, to embrace my children and
bid them farewell for the last time. Will this be permitted me?”

“Certainly,” replied the officer, and left the room.

Aramis dug his nails into his flesh and groaned aloud.

“Oh! my lord bishop,” he cried, seizing Juxon’s hands, “where is
Providence? where is Providence?”

“My son,” replied the bishop, with firmness, “you see Him not, because
the passions of the world conceal Him.”

“My son,” said the king to Aramis, “do not take it so to heart. You ask
what God is doing. God beholds your devotion and my martyrdom, and
believe me, both will have their reward. Ascribe to men, then, what is
happening, and not to God. It is men who drive me to death; it is men
who make you weep.”

“Yes, sire,” said Aramis, “yes, you are right. It is men whom I should
hold responsible, and I will hold them responsible.”

“Be seated, Juxon,” said the king, falling upon his knees. “I have now
to confess to you. Remain, sir,” he added to Aramis, who had moved to
leave the room. “Remain, Parry. I have nothing to say that cannot be
said before all.”

Juxon sat down, and the king, kneeling humbly before him, began his
confession.




Chapter LXVI.
Remember!


The mob had already assembled when the confession terminated. The
king’s children next arrived—the Princess Charlotte, a beautiful,
fair-haired child, with tears in her eyes, and the Duke of Gloucester,
a boy eight or nine years old, whose tearless eyes and curling lip
revealed a growing pride. He had wept all night long, but would not
show his grief before the people.

Charles’s heart melted within him at the sight of those two children,
whom he had not seen for two years and whom he now met at the moment of
death. He turned to brush away a tear, and then, summoning up all his
firmness, drew his daughter toward him, recommending her to be pious
and resigned. Then he took the boy upon his knee.

“My son,” he said to him, “you saw a great number of people in the
streets as you came here. These men are going to behead your father. Do
not forget that. Perhaps some day they will want to make you king,
instead of the Prince of Wales, or the Duke of York, your elder
brothers. But you are not the king, my son, and can never be so while
they are alive. Swear to me, then, never to let them put a crown upon
your head unless you have a legal right to the crown. For one
day—listen, my son—one day, if you do so, they will doom you to
destruction, head and crown, too, and then you will not be able to die
with a calm conscience, as I die. Swear, my son.”

The child stretched out his little hand toward that of his father and
said, “I swear to your majesty.”

“Henry,” said Charles, “call me your father.”

“Father,” replied the child, “I swear to you that they shall kill me
sooner than make me king.”

“Good, my child. Now kiss me; and you, too, Charlotte. Never forget
me.”

“Oh! never, never!” cried both the children, throwing their arms around
their father’s neck.

“Farewell,” said Charles, “farewell, my children. Take them away,
Juxon; their tears will deprive me of the courage to die.”

Juxon led them away, and this time the doors were left open.

Meanwhile, Athos, in his concealment, waited in vain the signal to
recommence his work. Two long hours he waited in terrible inaction. A
deathlike silence reigned in the room above. At last he determined to
discover the cause of this stillness. He crept from his hole and stood,
hidden by the black drapery, beneath the scaffold. Peeping out from the
drapery, he could see the rows of halberdiers and musketeers around the
scaffold and the first ranks of the populace swaying and groaning like
the sea.

“What is the matter, then?” he asked himself, trembling more than the
wind-swayed cloth he was holding back. “The people are hurrying on, the
soldiers under arms, and among the spectators I see D’Artagnan. What is
he waiting for? What is he looking at? Good God! have they allowed the
headsman to escape?”

Suddenly the dull beating of muffled drums filled the square. The sound
of heavy steps was heard above his head. The next moment the very
planks of the scaffold creaked with the weight of an advancing
procession, and the eager faces of the spectators confirmed what a last
hope at the bottom of his heart had prevented him till then believing.
At the same moment a well-known voice above him pronounced these words:

“Colonel, I want to speak to the people.”

Athos shuddered from head to foot. It was the king speaking on the
scaffold.

In fact, after taking a few drops of wine and a piece of bread,
Charles, weary of waiting for death, had suddenly decided to go to meet
it and had given the signal for movement. Then the two wings of the
window facing the square had been thrown open, and the people had seen
silently advancing from the interior of the vast chamber, first, a
masked man, who, carrying an axe in his hand, was recognized as the
executioner. He approached the block and laid his axe upon it. Behind
him, pale indeed, but marching with a firm step, was Charles Stuart,
who advanced between two priests, followed by a few superior officers
appointed to preside at the execution and attended by two files of
partisans who took their places on opposite sides of the scaffold.

The sight of the masked man gave rise to a prolonged sensation. Every
one was full of curiosity as to who that unknown executioner could be
who presented himself so opportunely to assure to the people the
promised spectacle, when the people believed it had been postponed
until the following day. All gazed at him searchingly.

But they could discern nothing but a man of middle height, dressed in
black, apparently of a certain age, for the end of a gray beard peeped
out from the bottom of the mask that hid his features.

The king’s request had undoubtedly been acceded to by an affirmative
sign, for in firm, sonorous accents, which vibrated in the depths of
Athos’s heart, the king began his speech, explaining his conduct and
counseling the welfare of the kingdom.

“Oh!” said Athos to himself, “is it indeed possible that I hear what I
hear and that I see what I see? Is it possible that God has abandoned
His representative on earth and left him to die thus miserably? And I
have not seen him! I have not said adieu to him!”

A noise was heard like that the instrument of death would make if moved
upon the block.

“Do not touch the axe,” said the king, and resumed his speech.

At the end of his speech the king looked tenderly around upon the
people. Then unfastening the diamond ornament which the queen had sent
him, he placed it in the hands of the priest who accompanied Juxon.
Then he drew from his breast a little cross set in diamonds, which,
like the order, had been the gift of Henrietta Maria.

“Sir,” said he to the priest, “I shall keep this cross in my hand till
the last moment. Take it from me when I am—dead.”

“Yes, sire,” said a voice, which Athos recognized as that of Aramis.

He then took his hat from his head and threw it on the ground. One by
one he undid the buttons of his doublet, took it off and deposited it
by the side of his hat. Then, as it was cold, he asked for his gown,
which was brought to him.

All the preparations were made with a frightful calmness. One would
have thought the king was going to bed and not to his coffin.

“Will these be in your way?” he said to the executioner, raising his
long locks; “if so, they can be tied up.”

Charles accompanied these words with a look designed to penetrate the
mask of the unknown headsman. His calm, noble gaze forced the man to
turn away his head. But after the searching look of the king he
encountered the burning eyes of Aramis.

The king, seeing that he did not reply, repeated his question.

“It will do,” replied the man, in a tremulous voice, “if you separate
them across the neck.”

The king parted his hair with his hands, and looking at the block he
said:

“This block is very low, is there no other to be had?”

“It is the usual block,” answered the man in the mask.

“Do you think you can behead me with a single blow?” asked the king.

“I hope so,” was the reply. There was something so strange in these
three words that everybody, except the king, shuddered.

“I do not wish to be taken by surprise,” added the king. “I shall kneel
down to pray; do not strike then.”

“When shall I strike?”

“When I shall lay my head on the block and say ‘Remember!’ then strike
boldly.”

“Gentlemen,” said the king to those around him, “I leave you to brave
the tempest; I go before you to a kingdom which knows no storms.
Farewell.”

He looked at Aramis and made a special sign to him with his head.

“Now,” he continued, “withdraw a little and let me say my prayer, I
beseech you. You, also, stand aside,” he said to the masked man. “It is
only for a moment and I know that I belong to you; but remember that
you are not to strike till I give the signal.”

Then he knelt down, made the sign of the cross, and lowering his face
to the planks, as if he would have kissed them, said in a low tone, in
French, “Comte de la Fere, are you there?”

“Yes, your majesty,” he answered, trembling.

“Faithful friend, noble heart!” said the king, “I should not have been
rescued. I have addressed my people and I have spoken to God; last of
all I speak to you. To maintain a cause which I believed sacred I have
lost the throne and my children their inheritance. A million in gold
remains; it is buried in the cellars of Newcastle Keep. You only know
that this money exists. Make use of it, then, whenever you think it
will be most useful, for my eldest son’s welfare. And now, farewell.”

“Farewell, saintly, martyred majesty,” lisped Athos, chilled with
terror.

A moment’s silence ensued and then, in a full, sonorous voice, the king
exclaimed: “Remember!”

He had scarcely uttered the word when a heavy blow shook the scaffold
and where Athos stood immovable a warm drop fell upon his brow. He
reeled back with a shudder and the same moment the drops became a
crimson cataract.

Athos fell on his knees and remained some minutes as if bewildered or
stunned. At last he rose and taking his handkerchief steeped it in the
blood of the martyred king. Then as the crowd gradually dispersed he
leaped down, crept from behind the drapery, glided between two horses,
mingled with the crowd and was the first to arrive at the inn.

Having gained his room he raised his hand to his face, and observing
that his fingers were covered with the monarch’s blood, fell down
insensible.




Chapter LXVII.
The Man in the Mask.


The snow was falling thick and icy. Aramis was the next to come in and
to discover Athos almost insensible. But at the first words he uttered
the comte roused himself from the kind of lethargy in which he had
sunk.

“Well,” said Aramis, “beaten by fate!”

“Beaten!” said Athos. “Noble and unhappy king!”

“Are you wounded?” cried Aramis.

“No, this is his blood.”

“Where were you, then?”

“Where you left me—under the scaffold.”

“Did you see it all?”

“No, but I heard all. God preserve me from another such hour as I have
just passed.”

“Then you know that I did not leave him?”

“I heard your voice up to the last moment.”

“Here is the order he gave me and the cross I took from his hand; he
desired they should be returned to the queen.”

“Then here is a handkerchief to wrap them in,” replied Athos, drawing
from his pocket the one he had steeped in the king’s blood.

“And what,” he continued, “has been done with the poor body?”

“By order of Cromwell royal honors will be accorded to it. The doctors
are embalming the corpse, and when it is ready it will be placed in a
lighted chapel.”

“Mockery,” muttered Athos, savagely; “royal honors to one whom they
have murdered!”

“Well, cheer up!” said a loud voice from the staircase, which Porthos
had just mounted. “We are all mortal, my poor friends.”

“You are late, my dear Porthos.”

“Yes, there were some people on the way who delayed me. The wretches
were dancing. I took one of them by the throat and three-quarters
throttled him. Just then a patrol rode up. Luckily the man I had had
most to do with was some minutes before he could speak, so I took
advantage of his silence to walk off.”

“Have you seen D’Artagnan?”

“We got separated in the crowd and I could not find him again.”

“Oh!” said Athos, satirically, “I saw him. He was in the front row of
the crowd, admirably placed for seeing; and as on the whole the sight
was curious, he probably wished to stay to the end.”

“Ah Comte de la Fere,” said a calm voice, though hoarse with running,
“is it your habit to calumniate the absent?”

This reproof stung Athos to the heart, but as the impression produced
by seeing D’Artagnan foremost in a coarse, ferocious crowd had been
very strong, he contented himself with replying:

“I am not calumniating you, my friend. They were anxious about you
here; I simply told them where you were. You didn’t know King Charles;
to you he was only a foreigner and you were not obliged to love him.”

So saying, he stretched out his hand, but the other pretended not to
see it and he let it drop again slowly by his side.

“Ugh! I am tired,” cried D’Artagnan, sitting down.

“Drink a glass of port,” said Aramis; “it will refresh you.”

“Yes, let us drink,” said Athos, anxious to make it up by hobnobbing
with D’Artagnan, “let us drink and get away from this hateful country.
The felucca is waiting for us, you know; let us leave to-night, we have
nothing more to do here.”

“You are in a hurry, sir count,” said D’Artagnan.

“But what would you have us to do here, now that the king is dead?”

“Go, sir count,” replied D’Artagnan, carelessly; “you see nothing to
keep you a little longer in England? Well, for my part, I, a
bloodthirsty ruffian, who can go and stand close to a scaffold, in
order to have a better view of the king’s execution—I remain.”

Athos turned pale. Every reproach his friend uttered struck deeply in
his heart.

“Ah! you remain in London?” said Porthos.

“Yes. And you?”

“Hang it!” said Porthos, a little perplexed between the two, “I
suppose, as I came with you, I must go away with you. I can’t leave you
alone in this abominable country.”

“Thanks, my worthy friend. So I have a little adventure to propose to
you when the count is gone. I want to find out who was the man in the
mask, who so obligingly offered to cut the king’s throat.”

“A man in a mask?” cried Athos. “You did not let the executioner
escape, then?”

“The executioner is still in the cellar, where, I presume, he has had
an interview with mine host’s bottles. But you remind me. Mousqueton!”

“Sir,” answered a voice from the depths of the earth.

“Let out your prisoner. All is over.”

“But,” said Athos, “who is the wretch that has dared to raise his hand
against his king?”

“An amateur headsman,” replied Aramis, “who however, does not handle
the axe amiss.”

“Did you not see his face?” asked Athos.

“He wore a mask.”

“But you, Aramis, who were close to him?”

“I could see nothing but a gray beard under the fringe of the mask.”

“Then it must be a man of a certain age.”

“Oh!” said D’Artagnan, “that matters little. When one puts on a mask,
it is not difficult to wear a beard under it.”

“I am sorry I did not follow him,” said Porthos.

“Well, my dear Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “that’s the very thing it
came into my head to do.”

Athos understood all now.

“Pardon me, D’Artagnan,” he said. “I have distrusted God; I could the
more easily distrust you. Pardon me, my friend.”

“We will see about that presently,” said D’Artagnan, with a slight
smile.

“Well, then?” said Aramis.

“Well, while I was watching—not the king, as monsieur le comte thinks,
for I know what it is to see a man led to death, and though I ought to
be accustomed to the sight it always makes me ill—while I was watching
the masked executioner, the idea came to me, as I said, to find out who
he was. Now, as we are wont to complete ourselves each by all the rest
and to depend on one another for assistance, as one calls his other
hand to aid the first, I looked around instinctively to see if Porthos
was there; for I had seen you, Aramis, with the king, and you, count, I
knew would be under the scaffold, and for that reason I forgive you,”
he added, offering Athos his hand, “for you must have suffered much. I
was looking around for Porthos when I saw near me a head which had been
broken, but which, for better or worse, had been patched with plaster
and with black silk. ‘Humph!’ thought I, ‘that looks like my handiwork;
I fancy I must have mended that skull somewhere or other.’ And, in
fact, it was that unfortunate Scotchman, Parry’s brother, you know, on
whom Groslow amused himself by trying his strength. Well, this man was
making signs to another at my left, and turning around I recognized the
honest Grimaud. ‘Oh!’ said I to him. Grimaud turned round with a jerk,
recognized me, and pointed to the man in the mask. ‘Eh!’ said he, which
meant, ‘Do you see him?’ ‘Parbleu!’ I answered, and we perfectly
understood one another. Well, everything was finished as you know. The
mob dispersed. I made a sign to Grimaud and the Scotchman, and we all
three retired into a corner of the square. I saw the executioner return
into the king’s room, change his clothes, put on a black hat and a
large cloak and disappear. Five minutes later he came down the grand
staircase.”

“You followed him?” cried Athos.

“I should think so, but not without difficulty. Every few minutes he
turned around, and thus obliged us to conceal ourselves. I might have
gone up to him and killed him. But I am not selfish, and I thought it
might console you all a little to have a share in the matter. So we
followed him through the lowest streets in the city, and in half an
hour’s time he stopped before a little isolated house. Grimaud drew out
a pistol. ‘Eh?’ said he, showing it. I held back his arm. The man in
the mask stopped before a low door and drew out a key; but before he
placed it in the lock he turned around to see if he was being followed.
Grimaud and I got behind a tree, and the Scotchman having nowhere to
hide himself, threw himself on his face in the road. Next moment the
door opened and the man disappeared.”

“The scoundrel!” said Aramis. “While you have been returning hither he
will have escaped and we shall never find him.”

“Come, now, Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, “you must be taking me for some
one else.”

“Nevertheless,” said Athos, “in your absence——”

“Well, in my absence haven’t I put in my place Grimaud and the
Scotchman? Before he had taken ten steps beyond the door I had examined
the house on all sides. At one of the doors, that by which he had
entered, I placed our Scotchman, making a sign to him to follow the man
wherever he might go, if he came out again. Then going around the house
I placed Grimaud at the other exit, and here I am. Our game is beaten
up. Now for the tally-ho.”

Athos threw himself into D’Artagnan’s arms.

“Friend,” he said, “you have been too good in pardoning me; I was
wrong, a hundred times wrong. I ought to have known you better by this
time; but we are all possessed of a malignant spirit, which bids us
doubt.”

“Humph!” said Porthos. “Don’t you think the executioner might be Master
Cromwell, who, to make sure of this affair, undertook it himself?”

“Ah! just so. Cromwell is stout and short, and this man thin and lanky,
rather tall than otherwise.”

“Some condemned soldier, perhaps,” suggested Athos, “whom they have
pardoned at the price of regicide.”

“No, no,” continued D’Artagnan, “it was not the measured step of a foot
soldier, nor was it the gait of a horseman. If I am not mistaken we
have to do with a gentleman.”

“A gentleman!” exclaimed Athos. “Impossible! It would be a dishonor to
all the nobility.”

“Fine sport, by Jove!” cried Porthos, with a laugh that shook the
windows. “Fine sport!”

“Are you still bent on departure, Athos?” asked D’Artagnan.

“No, I remain,” replied Athos, with a threatening gesture that promised
no good to whomsoever it was addressed.

“Swords, then!” cried Aramis, “swords! let us not lose a moment.”

The four friends resumed their own clothes, girded on their swords,
ordered Mousqueton and Blaisois to pay the bill and to arrange
everything for immediate departure, and wrapped in their large cloaks
left in search of their game.

The night was dark, snow was falling, the streets were silent and
deserted. D’Artagnan led the way through the intricate windings and
narrow alleys of the city and ere long they had reached the house in
question. For a moment D’Artagnan thought that Parry’s brother had
disappeared; but he was mistaken. The robust Scotchman, accustomed to
the snows of his native hills, had stretched himself against a post,
and like a fallen statue, insensible to the inclemency of the weather,
had allowed the snow to cover him. He rose, however, as they
approached.

“Come,” said Athos, “here’s another good servant. Really, honest men
are not so scarce as I thought.”

“Don’t be in a hurry to weave crowns for our Scotchman. I believe the
fellow is here on his own account, for I have heard that these
gentlemen born beyond the Tweed are very vindictive. I should not like
to be Groslow, if he meets him.”

“Well?” said Athos, to the man, in English.

“No one has come out,” he replied.

“Then, Porthos and Aramis, will you remain with this man while we go
around to Grimaud?”

Grimaud had made himself a kind of sentry box out of a hollow willow,
and as they drew near he put his head out and gave a low whistle.

“Soho!” cried Athos.

“Yes,” said Grimaud.

“Well, has anybody come out?”

“No, but somebody has gone in.”

“A man or a woman?”

“A man.”

“Ah! ah!” said D’Artagnan, “there are two of them, then!”

“I wish there were four,” said Athos; “the two parties would then be
equal.”

“Perhaps there are four,” said D’Artagnan.

“What do you mean?”

“Other men may have entered before them and waited for them.”

“We can find out,” said Grimaud. At the same time he pointed to a
window, through the shutters of which a faint light streamed.

“That is true,” said D’Artagnan, “let us call the others.”

They returned around the house to fetch Porthos and Aramis.

“Have you seen anything?” they asked.

“No, but we are going to,” replied D’Artagnan, pointing to Grimaud, who
had already climbed some five or six feet from the ground.

All four came up together. Grimaud continued to climb like a cat and
succeeded at last in catching hold of a hook, which served to keep one
of the shutters back when opened. Then resting his foot on a small
ledge he made a sign to show all was right.

“Well?” asked D’Artagnan.

Grimaud showed his closed hand, with two fingers spread out.

“Speak,” said Athos; “we cannot see your signs. How many are there?”

“Two. One opposite to me, the other with his back to me.”

“Good. And the man opposite to you is——

“The man I saw go in.”

“Do you know him?”

“I thought I recognized him, and was not mistaken. Short and stout.”

“Who is it?” they all asked together in a low tone.

“General Oliver Cromwell.”

The four friends looked at one another.

“And the other?” asked Athos.

“Thin and lanky.”

“The executioner,” said D’Artagnan and Aramis at the same time.

“I can see nothing but his back,” resumed Grimaud. “But wait. He is
moving; and if he has taken off his mask I shall be able to see. Ah——”

And as if struck in the heart he let go the hook and dropped with a
groan.

“Did you see him?” they all asked.

“Yes,” said Grimaud, with his hair standing on end.

“The thin, spare man?”

“Yes.”

“The executioner, in short?” asked Aramis.

“Yes.”

“And who is it?” said Porthos.

“He—he—is——” murmured Grimaud, pale as a ghost and seizing his master’s
hand.

“Who? He?” asked Athos.

“Mordaunt,” replied Grimaud.

D’Artagnan, Porthos and Aramis uttered a cry of joy.

Athos stepped back and passed his hand across his brow.

“Fatality!” he muttered.




Chapter LXVIII.
Cromwell’s House.


It was, in fact, Mordaunt whom D’Artagnan had followed, without knowing
it. On entering the house he had taken off his mask and imitation
beard, then, mounting a staircase, had opened a door, and in a room
lighted by a single lamp found himself face to face with a man seated
behind a desk.

This man was Cromwell.

Cromwell had two or three of these retreats in London, unknown except
to the most intimate of his friends. Mordaunt was among these.

“It is you, Mordaunt,” he said. “You are late.”

“General, I wished to see the ceremony to the end, which delayed me.”

“Ah! I scarcely thought you were so curious as that.”

“I am always curious to see the downfall of your honor’s enemies, and
he was not among the least of them. But you, general, were you not at
Whitehall?”

“No,” said Cromwell.

There was a moment’s silence.

“Have you had any account of it?”

“None. I have been here since the morning. I only know that there was a
conspiracy to rescue the king.”

“Ah, you knew that?” said Mordaunt.

“It matters little. Four men, disguised as workmen, were to get the
king out of prison and take him to Greenwich, where a vessel was
waiting.”

“And knowing all that, your honor remained here, far from the city,
tranquil and inactive.”

“Tranquil, yes,” replied Cromwell. “But who told you I was inactive?”

“But—if the plot had succeeded?”

“I wished it to do so.”

“I thought your excellence considered the death of Charles I. as a
misfortune necessary to the welfare of England.”

“Yes, his death; but it would have been more seemly not upon the
scaffold.”

“Why so?” asked Mordaunt.

Cromwell smiled. “Because it could have been said that I had had him
condemned for the sake of justice and had let him escape out of pity.”

“But if he had escaped?”

“Impossible; my precautions were taken.”

“And does your honor know the four men who undertook to rescue him?”

“The four Frenchmen, of whom two were sent by the queen to her husband
and two by Mazarin to me.”

“And do you think Mazarin commissioned them to act as they have done?”

“It is possible. But he will not avow it.”

“How so?”

“Because they failed.”

“Your honor gave me two of these Frenchmen when they were only guilty
of fighting for Charles I. Now that they are guilty of a conspiracy
against England will your honor give me all four of them?”

“Take them,” said Cromwell.

Mordaunt bowed with a smile of triumphant ferocity.

“Did the people shout at all?” Cromwell asked.

“Very little, except ‘Long live Cromwell!’”

“Where were you placed?”

Mordaunt tried for a moment to read in the general’s face if this was
simply a useless question, or whether he knew everything. But his
piercing eyes could by no means penetrate the sombre depths of
Cromwell’s.

“I was so situated as to hear and see everything,” he answered.

It was now Cromwell’s turn to look fixedly at Mordaunt, and Mordaunt to
make himself impenetrable.

“It appears,” said Cromwell, “that this improvised executioner did his
duty remarkably well. The blow, so they tell me at least, was struck
with a master’s hand.”

Mordaunt remembered that Cromwell had told him he had had no detailed
account, and he was now quite convinced that the general had been
present at the execution, hidden behind some screen or curtain.

“In fact,” said Mordaunt, with a calm voice and immovable countenance,
“a single blow sufficed.”

“Perhaps it was some one in that occupation,” said Cromwell.

“Do you think so, sir? He did not look like an executioner.”

“And who else save an executioner would have wished to fill that
horrible office?”

“But,” said Mordaunt, “it might have been some personal enemy of the
king, who had made a vow of vengeance and accomplished it in this way.
Perhaps it was some man of rank who had grave reasons for hating the
fallen king, and who, learning that the king was about to flee and
escape him, threw himself in the way, with a mask on his face and an
axe in his hand, not as substitute for the executioner, but as an
ambassador of Fate.”

“Possibly.”

“And if that were the case would your honor condemn his action?”

“It is not for me to judge. It rests between his conscience and his
God.”

“But if your honor knew this man?”

“I neither know nor wish to know him. Provided Charles is dead, it is
the axe, not the man, we must thank.”

“And yet, without the man, the king would have been rescued.”

Cromwell smiled.

“They would have carried him to Greenwich,” he said, “and put him on
board a felucca with five barrels of powder in the hold. Once out to
sea, you are too good a politician not to understand the rest,
Mordaunt.”

“Yes, they would have all been blown up.”

“Just so. The explosion would have done what the axe had failed to do.
Men would have said that the king had escaped human justice and been
overtaken by God’s. You see now why I did not care to know your
gentleman in the mask; for really, in spite of his excellent
intentions, I could not thank him for what he has done.”

Mordaunt bowed humbly. “Sir,” he said, “you are a profound thinker and
your plan was sublime.”

“Say absurd, since it has become useless. The only sublime ideas in
politics are those which bear fruit. So to-night, Mordaunt, go to
Greenwich and ask for the captain of the felucca Lightning. Show him a
white handkerchief knotted at the four corners and tell the crew to
disembark and carry the powder back to the arsenal, unless, indeed——”

“Unless?” said Mordaunt, whose face was lighted by a savage joy as
Cromwell spoke:

“This skiff might be of use to you for personal projects.”

“Oh, my lord, my lord!”

“That title,” said Cromwell, laughing, “is all very well here, but take
care a word like that does not escape your lips in public.”

“But your honor will soon be called so generally.”

“I hope so, at least,” said Cromwell, rising and putting on his cloak.

“You are going, sir?”

“Yes,” said Cromwell. “I slept here last night and the night before,
and you know it is not my custom to sleep three times in the same bed.”

“Then,” said Mordaunt, “your honor gives me my liberty for to-night?”

“And even for all day to-morrow, if you want it. Since last evening,”
he added, smiling, “you have done enough in my service, and if you have
any personal matters to settle it is just that I should give you time.”

“Thank you, sir; it will be well employed, I hope.”

Cromwell turned as he was going.

“Are you armed?” he asked.

“I have my sword.”

“And no one waiting for you outside?”

“No.”

“Then you had better come with me.”

“Thank you, sir, but the way by the subterranean passage would take too
much time and I have none to lose.”

Cromwell placed his hand on a hidden handle and opened a door so well
concealed by the tapestry that the most practiced eye could not have
discovered it. It closed after him with a spring. This door
communicated with a subterranean passage, leading under the street to a
grotto in the garden of a house about a hundred yards from that of the
future Protector.

It was just before this that Grimaud had perceived the two men seated
together.

D’Artagnan was the first to recover from his surprise.

“Mordaunt,” he cried. “Ah! by Heaven! it is God Himself who sent us
here.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “let us break the door in and fall upon him.”

“No,” replied D’Artagnan, “no noise. Now, Grimaud, you come here, climb
up to the window again and tell us if Mordaunt is alone and whether he
is preparing to go out or go to bed. If he comes out we shall catch
him. If he stays in we will break in the window. It is easier and less
noisy than the door.”

Grimaud began to scale the wall again.

“Keep guard at the other door, Athos and Aramis. Porthos and I will
stay here.”

The friends obeyed.

“He is alone,” said Grimaud.

“We did not see his companion come out.”

“He may have gone by the other door.”

“What is he doing?”

“Putting on his cloak and gloves.”

“He’s ours,” muttered D’Artagnan.

Porthos mechanically drew his dagger from the scabbard.

“Put it up again, my friend,” said D’Artagnan. “We must proceed in an
orderly manner.”

“Hush!” said Grimaud, “he is coming out. He has put out the lamp, I can
see nothing now.”

“Get down then and quickly.”

Grimaud leaped down. The snow deadened the noise of his fall.

“Now go and tell Athos and Aramis to stand on each side of the door and
clap their hands if they catch him. We will do the same.”

The next moment the door opened and Mordaunt appeared on the threshold,
face to face with D’Artagnan. Porthos clapped his hands and the other
two came running around. Mordaunt was livid, but he uttered no cry nor
called for assistance. D’Artagnan quietly pushed him in again, and by
the light of a lamp on the staircase made him ascend the steps backward
one by one, keeping his eyes all the time on Mordaunt’s hands, who,
however, knowing that it was useless, attempted no resistance. At last
they stood face to face in the very room where ten minutes before
Mordaunt had been talking to Cromwell.

Porthos came up behind, and unhooking the lamp on the staircase relit
that in the room. Athos and Aramis entered last and locked the door
behind them.

“Oblige me by taking a seat,” said D’Artagnan, pushing a chair toward
Mordaunt, who sat down, pale but calm. Aramis, Porthos and D’Artagnan
drew their chairs near him. Athos alone kept away and sat in the
furthest corner of the room, as if determined to be merely a spectator
of the proceedings. He seemed to be quite overcome. Porthos rubbed his
hands in feverish impatience. Aramis bit his lips till the blood came.

D’Artagnan alone was calm, at least in appearance.

“Monsieur Mordaunt,” he said, “since, after running after one another
so long, chance has at last brought us together, let us have a little
conversation, if you please.”




Chapter LXIX.
Conversational.


Though Mordaunt had been so completely taken by surprise and had
mounted the stairs in such utter confusion, when once seated he
recovered himself, as it were, and prepared to seize any possible
opportunity of escape. His eye wandered to a long stout sword on his
flank and he instinctively slipped it around within reach of his right
hand.

D’Artagnan was waiting for a reply to his remark and said nothing.
Aramis muttered to himself, “We shall hear nothing but the usual
commonplace things.”

Porthos sucked his mustache, muttering, “A good deal of ceremony
to-night about crushing an adder.” Athos shrunk into his corner, pale
and motionless as a bas-relief.

The silence, however, could not last forever. So D’Artagnan began:

“Sir,” he said, with desperate politeness, “it seems to me that you
change your costume almost as rapidly as I have seen the Italian
mummers do, whom the Cardinal Mazarin brought over from Bergamo and
whom he doubtless took you to see during your travels in France.”

Mordaunt did not reply.

“Just now,” D’Artagnan continued, “you were disguised—I mean to say,
attired—as a murderer, and now——”

“And now I look very much like a man who is going to be murdered.”

“Oh! sir,” said D’Artagnan, “how can you talk like that when you are in
the company of gentlemen and have such an excellent sword at your
side?”

“No sword is excellent enough to be of use against four swords and
daggers.”

“Well, that is scarcely the question. I had the honor of asking you why
you altered your costume. The mask and beard became you very well, and
as to the axe, I do not think it would be out of keeping even at this
moment. Why, then, have you laid it aside?”

“Because, remembering the scene at Armentieres, I thought I should find
four axes for one, as I was to meet four executioners.”

“Sir,” replied D’Artagnan, in the calmest manner possible, “you are
very young; I shall therefore overlook your frivolous remarks. What
took place at Armentieres has no connection whatever with the present
occasion. We could scarcely have requested your mother to take a sword
and fight us.”

“Aha! It is a duel, then?” cried Mordaunt, as if disposed to reply at
once to the provocation.

Porthos rose, always ready for this kind of adventure.

“Pardon me,” said D’Artagnan. “Do not let us do things in a hurry. We
will arrange the matter rather better. Confess, Monsieur Mordaunt, that
you are anxious to kill some of us.”

“All,” replied Mordaunt.

“Then, my dear sir; I am convinced that these gentlemen return your
kind wishes and will be delighted to kill you also. Of course they will
do so as honorable gentlemen, and the best proof I can furnish is
this——”

So saying, he threw his hat on the ground, pushed back his chair to the
wall and bowed to Mordaunt with true French grace.

“At your service, sir,” he continued. “My sword is shorter than yours,
it’s true, but, bah! I think the arm will make up for the sword.”

“Halt!” cried Porthos coming forward. “I begin, and without any
rhetoric.”

“Allow me, Porthos,” said Aramis.

Athos did not move. He might have been taken for a statue. Even his
breathing seemed to be arrested.

“Gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “you shall have your turn. Monsieur
Mordaunt dislikes you sufficiently not to refuse you afterward. You can
see it in his eye. So pray keep your places, like Athos, whose calmness
is entirely laudable. Besides, we will have no words about it. I have
particular business to settle with this gentleman and I shall and will
begin.”

Porthos and Aramis drew back, disappointed, and drawing his sword
D’Artagnan turned to his adversary:

“Sir, I am waiting for you.”

“And for my part, gentlemen, I admire you. You are disputing which
shall fight me first, but you do not consult me who am most concerned
in the matter. I hate you all, but not equally. I hope to kill all four
of you, but I am more likely to kill the first than the second, the
second than the third, and the third than the last. I claim, then, the
right to choose my opponent. If you refuse this right you may kill me,
but I shall not fight.”

“It is but fair,” said Porthos and Aramis, hoping he would choose one
of them.

Athos and D’Artagnan said nothing, but their silence seemed to imply
consent.

“Well, then,” said Mordaunt, “I choose for my adversary the man who,
not thinking himself worthy to be called Comte de la Fere, calls
himself Athos.”

Athos sprang up, but after an instant of motionless silence he said, to
the astonishment of his friends, “Monsieur Mordaunt, a duel between us
is impossible. Submit this honour to somebody else.” And he sat down.

“Ah!” said Mordaunt, with a sneer, “there’s one who is afraid.”

“Zounds!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, bounding toward him, “who says that
Athos is afraid?”

“Let him have his say, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, with a smile of sadness
and contempt.

“Is it your decision, Athos?” resumed the Gascon.

“Irrevocably.”

“You hear, sir,” said D’Artagnan, turning to Mordaunt. “The Comte de la
Fere will not do you the honor of fighting with you. Choose one of us
to replace the Comte de la Fere.”

“As long as I don’t fight with him it is the same to me with whom I
fight. Put your names into a hat and draw lots.”

“A good idea,” said D’Artagnan.

“At least that will conciliate us all,” said Aramis.

“I should never have thought of that,” said Porthos, “and yet it is
very simple.”

“Come, Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, “write this for us in those neat
little characters in which you wrote to Marie Michon that the mother of
this gentleman intended to assassinate the Duke of Buckingham.”

Mordaunt sustained this new attack without wincing. He stood with his
arms folded, apparently as calm as any man could be in such
circumstances. If he had not courage he had what is very like it,
namely, pride.

Aramis went to Cromwell’s desk, tore off three bits of paper of equal
size, wrote on the first his own name and on the others those of his
two companions, and presented them open to Mordaunt, who by a movement
of his head indicated that he left the matter entirely to Aramis. He
then rolled them separately and put them in a hat, which he handed to
Mordaunt.

Mordaunt put his hand into the hat, took out one of the three papers
and disdainfully dropped it on the table without reading it.

“Ah! serpent,” muttered D’Artagnan, “I would give my chance of a
captaincy in the mousquetaires for that to be my name.”

Aramis opened the paper, and in a voice trembling with hate and
vengeance read “D’Artagnan.”

The Gascon uttered a cry of joy and turning to Mordaunt:

“I hope, sir,” said he, “you have no objection to make.”

“None, whatever,” replied the other, drawing his sword and resting the
point on his boot.

The moment that D’Artagnan saw that his wish was accomplished and his
man would not escape him, he recovered his usual tranquillity. He
turned up his cuffs neatly and rubbed the sole of his right boot on the
floor, but did not fail, however, to remark that Mordaunt was looking
about him in a singular manner.

“Are you ready, sir?” he said at last.

“I was waiting for you, sir,” said Mordaunt, raising his head and
casting at his opponent a look it would be impossible to describe.

“Well, then,” said the Gascon, “take care of yourself, for I am not a
bad hand at the rapier.”

“Nor I either.”

“So much the better; that sets my mind at rest. Defend yourself.”

“One minute,” said the young man. “Give me your word, gentlemen, that
you will not attack me otherwise than one after the other.”

“Is it to have the pleasure of insulting us that you say that, my
little viper?”

“No, but to set my mind at rest, as you observed just now.”

“It is for something else than that, I imagine,” muttered D’Artagnan,
shaking his head doubtfully.

“On the honor of gentlemen,” said Aramis and Porthos.

“In that case, gentlemen, have the kindness to retire into the corners,
so as to give us ample room. We shall require it.”

“Yes, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “we must not leave this person the
slightest pretext for behaving badly, which, with all due respect, I
fancy he is anxious still to do.”

This new attack made no impression on Mordaunt. The space was cleared,
the two lamps placed on Cromwell’s desk, in order that the combatants
might have as much light as possible; and the swords crossed.

D’Artagnan was too good a swordsman to trifle with his opponent. He
made a rapid and brilliant feint which Mordaunt parried.

“Aha!” he cried with a smile of satisfaction.

And without losing a minute, thinking he saw an opening, he thrust his
right in and forced Mordaunt to parry a counter en quarte so fine that
the point of the weapon might have turned within a wedding ring.

This time it was Mordaunt who smiled.

“Ah, sir,” said D’Artagnan, “you have a wicked smile. It must have been
the devil who taught it you, was it not?”

Mordaunt replied by trying his opponent’s weapon with an amount of
strength which the Gascon was astonished to find in a form apparently
so feeble; but thanks to a parry no less clever than that which
Mordaunt had just achieved, he succeeded in meeting his sword, which
slid along his own without touching his chest.

Mordaunt rapidly sprang back a step.

“Ah! you lose ground, you are turning? Well, as you please, I even gain
something by it, for I no longer see that wicked smile of yours. You
have no idea what a false look you have, particularly when you are
afraid. Look at my eyes and you will see what no looking-glass has ever
shown you—a frank and honorable countenance.”

To this flow of words, not perhaps in the best taste, but
characteristic of D’Artagnan, whose principal object was to divert his
opponent’s attention, Mordaunt did not reply, but continuing to turn
around he succeeded in changing places with D’Artagnan.

He smiled more and more sarcastically and his smile began to make the
Gascon anxious.

“Come, come,” cried D’Artagnan, “we must finish with this,” and in his
turn he pressed Mordaunt hard, who continued to lose ground, but
evidently on purpose and without letting his sword leave the line for a
moment. However, as they were fighting in a room and had not space to
go on like that forever, Mordaunt’s foot at last touched the wall,
against which he rested his left hand.

“Ah, this time you cannot lose ground, my fine friend!” exclaimed
D’Artagnan. “Gentlemen, did you ever see a scorpion pinned to a wall?
No. Well, then, you shall see it now.”

In a second D’Artagnan had made three terrible thrusts at Mordaunt, all
of which touched, but only pricked him. The three friends looked on,
panting and astonished. At last D’Artagnan, having got up too close,
stepped back to prepare a fourth thrust, but the moment when, after a
fine, quick feint, he was attacking as sharply as lightning, the wall
seemed to give way, Mordaunt disappeared through the opening, and
D’Artagnan’s blade, caught between the panels, shivered like a sword of
glass. D’Artagnan sprang back; the wall had closed again.

Mordaunt, in fact, while defending himself, had manoeuvred so as to
reach the secret door by which Cromwell had left, had felt for the knob
with his left hand, pressed it and disappeared.

The Gascon uttered a furious imprecation, which was answered by a wild
laugh on the other side of the iron panel.

“Help me, gentlemen,” cried D’Artagnan, “we must break in this door.”

“It is the devil in person!” said Aramis, hastening forward.

“He escapes us,” growled Porthos, pushing his huge shoulder against the
hinges, but in vain. “‘Sblood! he escapes us.”

“So much the better,” muttered Athos.

“I thought as much,” said D’Artagnan, wasting his strength in useless
efforts. “Zounds, I thought as much when the wretch kept moving around
the room. I thought he was up to something.”

“It’s a misfortune, to which his friend, the devil, treats us,” said
Aramis.

“It’s a piece of good fortune sent from Heaven,” said Athos, evidently
much relieved.

“Really!” said D’Artagnan, abandoning the attempt to burst open the
panel after several ineffectual attempts, “Athos, I cannot imagine how
you can talk to us in that way. You cannot understand the position we
are in. In this kind of game, not to kill is to let one’s self be
killed. This fox of a fellow will be sending us a hundred iron-sided
beasts who will pick us off like sparrows in this place. Come, come, we
must be off. If we stay here five minutes more there’s an end of us.”

“Yes, you are right.”

“But where shall we go?” asked Porthos.

“To the hotel, to be sure, to get our baggage and horses; and from
there, if it please God, to France, where, at least, I understand the
architecture of the houses.”

So, suiting the action to the word, D’Artagnan thrust the remnant of
his sword into its scabbard, picked up his hat and ran down the stairs,
followed by the others.




Chapter LXX.
The Skiff “Lightning.”


D’Artagnan had judged correctly; Mordaunt felt that he had no time to
lose, and he lost none. He knew the rapidity of decision and action
that characterized his enemies and resolved to act with reference to
that. This time the musketeers had an adversary who was worthy of them.

After closing the door carefully behind him Mordaunt glided into the
subterranean passage, sheathing on the way his now useless sword, and
thus reached the neighboring house, where he paused to examine himself
and to take breath.

“Good!” he said, “nothing, almost nothing—scratches, nothing more; two
in the arm and one in the breast. The wounds that I make are better
than that—witness the executioner of Bethune, my uncle and King
Charles. Now, not a second to lose, for a second lost will perhaps save
them. They must die—die all together—killed at one stroke by the
thunder of men in default of God’s. They must disappear, broken,
scattered, annihilated. I will run, then, till my legs no longer serve,
till my heart bursts in my bosom but I will arrive before they do.”

Mordaunt proceeded at a rapid pace to the nearest cavalry barracks,
about a quarter of a league distant. He made that quarter of a league
in four or five minutes. Arrived at the barracks he made himself known,
took the best horse in the stables, mounted and gained the high road. A
quarter of an hour later he was at Greenwich.

“There is the port,” he murmured. “That dark point yonder is the Isle
of Dogs. Good! I am half an hour in advance of them, an hour, perhaps.
Fool that I was! I have almost killed myself by my needless haste.
Now,” he added, rising in the stirrups and looking about him, “which, I
wonder, is the Lightning?”

At this moment, as if in reply to his words, a man lying on a coil of
cables rose and advanced a few steps toward him. Mordaunt drew a
handkerchief from his pocket, and tying a knot at each corner—the
signal agreed upon—waved it in the air and the man came up to him. He
was wrapped in a large rough cape, which concealed his form and partly
his face.

“Do you wish to go on the water, sir?” said the sailor.

“Yes, just so. Along the Isle of Dogs.”

“And perhaps you have a preference for one boat more than another. You
would like one that sails as rapidly as——”

“Lightning,” interrupted Mordaunt.

“Then mine is the boat you want, sir. I’m your man.”

“I begin to think so, particularly if you have not forgotten a certain
signal.”

“Here it is, sir,” and the sailor took from his coat a handkerchief,
tied at each corner.

“Good, quite right!” cried Mordaunt, springing off his horse. “There’s
not a moment to lose; now take my horse to the nearest inn and conduct
me to your vessel.”

“But,” asked the sailor, “where are your companions? I thought there
were four of you.”

“Listen to me, sir. I’m not the man you take me for; you are in Captain
Rogers’s post, are you not? under orders from General Cromwell. Mine,
also, are from him!”

“Indeed, sir, I recognize you; you are Captain Mordaunt.”

Mordaunt was startled.

“Oh, fear nothing,” said the skipper, showing his face. “I am a
friend.”

“Captain Groslow!” cried Mordaunt.

“Himself. The general remembered that I had formerly been a naval
officer and he gave me the command of this expedition. Is there
anything new in the wind?”

“Nothing.”

“I thought, perhaps, that the king’s death——”

“Has only hastened their flight; in ten minutes they will perhaps be
here.”

“What have you come for, then?”

“To embark with you.”

“Ah! ah! the general doubted my fidelity?”

“No, but I wish to have a share in my revenge. Haven’t you some one who
will relieve me of my horse?”

Groslow whistled and a sailor appeared.

“Patrick,” said Groslow, “take this horse to the stables of the nearest
inn. If any one asks you whose it is you can say that it belongs to an
Irish gentleman.”

The sailor departed without reply.

“Now,” said Mordaunt, “are you not afraid that they will recognize
you?”

“There is no danger, dressed as I am in this pilot coat, on a night as
dark as this. Besides even you didn’t recognize me; they will be much
less likely to.”

“That is true,” said Mordaunt, “and they will be far from thinking of
you. Everything is ready, is it not?”

“Yes.”

“The cargo on board?”

“Yes.”

“Five full casks?”

“And fifty empty ones.”

“Good.”

“We are carrying port wine to Anvers.”

“Excellent. Now take me aboard and return to your post, for they will
soon be here.”

“I am ready.”

“It is important that none of your crew should see me.”

“I have but one man on board, and I am as sure of him as I am of
myself. Besides, he doesn’t know you; like his mates he is ready to
obey our orders knowing nothing of our plan.”

“Very well; let us go.”

They then went down to the Thames. A boat was fastened to the shore by
a chain fixed to a stake. Groslow jumped in, followed by Mordaunt, and
in five minutes they were quite away from that world of houses which
then crowded the outskirts of London; and Mordaunt could discern the
little vessel riding at anchor near the Isle of Dogs. When they reached
the side of this felucca, Mordaunt, dexterous in his eagerness for
vengeance, seized a rope and climbed up the side of the vessel with a
coolness and agility very rare among landsmen. He went with Groslow to
the captain’s berth, a sort of temporary cabin of planks, for the chief
apartment had been given up by Captain Rogers to the passengers, who
were to be accommodated at the other end of the boat.

“They will have nothing to do, then at this end?” said Mordaunt.

“Nothing at all.”

“That’s a capital arrangement. Return to Greenwich and bring them here.
I shall hide myself in your cabin. You have a longboat?”

“That in which we came.”

“It appeared light and well constructed.”

“Quite a canoe.”

“Fasten it to the poop with a rope; put the oars into it, so that it
may follow in the track and there will be nothing to do except to cut
the cord. Put a good supply of rum and biscuit in it for the seamen;
should the night happen to be stormy they will not be sorry to find
something to console themselves with.”

“Consider all this done. Do you wish to see the powder-room?”

“No. When you return I will set the fuse myself, but be careful to
conceal your face, so that you cannot be recognized by them.”

“Never fear.”

“There’s ten o’clock striking at Greenwich.”

Groslow, then, having given the sailor on duty an order to be on the
watch with more than usual vigilance, went down into the longboat and
soon reached Greenwich. The wind was chilly and the jetty was deserted,
as he approached it; but he had no sooner landed than he heard a noise
of horses galloping upon the paved road.

These horsemen were our friends, or rather, an avant garde, composed of
D’Artagnan and Athos. As soon as they arrived at the spot where Groslow
stood they stopped, as if guessing that he was the man they wanted.
Athos alighted and calmly opened the handkerchief tied at each corner,
whilst D’Artagnan, ever cautious, remained on horseback, one hand upon
his pistol, leaning forward watchfully.

On seeing the appointed signal, Groslow, who had at first crept behind
one of the cannons planted on that spot, walked straight up to the
gentlemen. He was so well wrapped up in his cloak that it would have
been impossible to see his face even if the night had not been so dark
as to render precaution superfluous; nevertheless, the keen glance of
Athos perceived at once it was not Rogers who stood before them.

“What do you want with us?” he asked of Groslow.

“I wish to inform you, my lord,” replied Groslow, with an Irish accent,
feigned of course, “that if you are looking for Captain Rogers you will
not find him. He fell down this morning and broke his leg. But I’m his
cousin; he told me everything and desired me to watch instead of him,
and in his place to conduct, wherever they wished to go, the gentlemen
who should bring me a handkerchief tied at each corner, like that one
which you hold and one which I have in my pocket.”

And he drew out the handkerchief.

“Was that all he said?” inquired Athos.

“No, my lord; he said you had engaged to pay seventy pounds if I landed
you safe and sound at Boulogne or any other port you choose in France.”

“What do you think of all this?” said Athos, in a low tone to
D’Artagnan, after explaining to him in French what the sailor had said
in English.

“It seems a likely story to me.”

“And to me, too.”

“Besides, we can but blow out his brains if he proves false,” said the
Gascon; “and you, Athos, you know something of everything and can be
our captain. I dare say you know how to navigate, should he fail us.”

“My dear friend, you guess well. My father meant me for the navy and I
have some vague notions about navigation.”

“You see!” cried D’Artagnan.

They then summoned their friends, who, with Blaisois, Mousqueton and
Grimaud, promptly joined them, leaving Parry behind them, who was to
take back to London the horses of the gentlemen and of their lackeys,
which had been sold to the host in settlement of their account with
him. Thanks to this stroke of business the four friends were able to
take away with them a sum of money which, if not large, was sufficient
as a provision against delays and accidents.

Parry parted from his friends regretfully; they had proposed his going
with them to France, but he had straightway declined.

“It is very simple,” Mousqueton had said; “he is thinking of Groslow.”

It was Captain Groslow, the reader will remember, who had broken
Parry’s head.

D’Artagnan resumed immediately the attitude of distrust that was
habitual with him. He found the wharf too completely deserted, the
night too dark, the captain too accommodating. He had reported to
Aramis what had taken place, and Aramis, not less distrustful than he,
had increased his suspicions. A slight click of the tongue against his
teeth informed Athos of the Gascon’s uneasiness.

“We have no time now for suspicions,” said Athos. “The boat is waiting
for us; come.”

“Besides,” said Aramis, “what prevents our being distrustful and going
aboard at the same time? We can watch the skipper.”

“And if he doesn’t go straight I will crush him, that’s all.”

“Well said, Porthos,” replied D’Artagnan. “Let us go, then. You first,
Mousqueton,” and he stopped his friends, directing the valets to go
first, in order to test the plank leading from the pier to the boat.

The three valets passed without accident. Athos followed them, then
Porthos, then Aramis. D’Artagnan went last, still shaking his head.

“What in the devil is the matter with you, my friend?” said Porthos.
“Upon my word you would make Caesar afraid.”

“The matter is,” replied D’Artagnan, “that I can see upon this pier
neither inspector nor sentinel nor exciseman.”

“And you complain of that!” said Porthos. “Everything goes as if in
flowery paths.”

“Everything goes too well, Porthos. But no matter; we must trust in
God.”

As soon as the plank was withdrawn the captain took his place at the
tiller and made a sign to one of the sailors, who, boat-hook in hand,
began to push out from the labyrinth of boats in which they were
involved. The other sailor had already seated himself on the port side
and was ready to row. As soon as there was room for rowing, his
companion rejoined him and the boat began to move more rapidly.

“At last we are off!” exclaimed Porthos.

“Alas,” said Athos, “we depart alone.”

“Yes; but all four together and without a scratch; which is a
consolation.”

“We are not yet at our destination,” observed the prudent D’Artagnan;
“beware of misadventure.”

“Ah, my friend!” cried Porthos, “like the crows, you always bring bad
omens. Who could intercept us on such a night as this, pitch dark, when
one does not see more than twenty yards before one?”

“Yes, but to-morrow morning——”

“To-morrow we shall be at Boulogne.”

“I hope so, with all my heart,” said the Gascon, “and I confess my
weakness. Yes, Athos, you may laugh, but as long as we were within
gunshot of the pier or of the vessels lying by it I was looking for a
frightful discharge of musketry which would crush us.”

“But,” said Porthos, with great wisdom, “that was impossible, for they
would have killed the captain and the sailors.”

“Bah! much Monsieur Mordaunt would care. You don’t imagine he would
consider a little thing like that?”

“At any rate,” said Porthos, “I am glad to hear D’Artagnan admit that
he is afraid.”

“I not only confess it, but am proud of it,” returned the Gascon; “I’m
not such a rhinoceros as you are. Oho! what’s that?”

“The Lightning,” answered the captain, “our felucca.”

“So far, so good,” laughed Athos.

They went on board and the captain instantly conducted them to the
berth prepared for them—a cabin which was to serve for all purposes and
for the whole party; he then tried to slip away under pretext of giving
orders to some one.

“Stop a moment,” cried D’Artagnan; “pray how many men have you on
board, captain?”

“I don’t understand,” was the reply.

“Explain it, Athos.”

Groslow, on the question being interpreted, answered, “Three, without
counting myself.”

D’Artagnan understood, for while replying the captain had raised three
fingers. “Oh!” he exclaimed, “I begin to be more at my ease, however,
whilst you settle yourselves, I shall make the round of the boat.”

“As for me,” said Porthos, “I will see to the supper.”

“A very good idea, Porthos,” said the Gascon. “Athos lend me Grimaud,
who in the society of his friend Parry has perhaps picked up a little
English, and can act as my interpreter.”

“Go, Grimaud,” said Athos.

D’Artagnan, finding a lantern on the deck, took it up and with a pistol
in his hand he said to the captain, in English, “Come,” (being, with
the classic English oath, the only English words he knew), and so
saying he descended to the lower deck.

This was divided into three compartments—one which was covered by the
floor of that room in which Athos, Porthos and Aramis were to pass the
night; the second was to serve as the sleeping-room for the servants,
the third, under the prow of the ship, was under the temporary cabin in
which Mordaunt was concealed.

“Oho!” cried D’Artagnan, as he went down the steps of the hatchway,
preceded by the lantern, “what a number of barrels! one would think one
was in the cave of Ali Baba. What is there in them?” he added, putting
his lantern on one of the casks.

The captain seemed inclined to go upon deck again, but controlling
himself he answered:

“Port wine.”

“Ah! port wine! ’tis a comfort,” said the Gascon, “since we shall not
die of thirst. Are they all full?”

Grimaud translated the question, and Groslow, who was wiping the
perspiration from off his forehead, answered:

“Some full, others empty.”

D’Artagnan struck the barrels with his hand, and having ascertained
that he spoke the truth, pushed his lantern, greatly to the captain’s
alarm, into the interstices between the barrels, and finding that there
was nothing concealed in them:

“Come along,” he said; and he went toward the door of the second
compartment.

“Stop!” said the Englishman, “I have the key of that door;” and he
opened the door, with a trembling hand, into the second compartment,
where Mousqueton and Blaisois were preparing supper.

Here there was evidently nothing to seek or to apprehend and they
passed rapidly to examine the third compartment.

This was the room appropriated to the sailors. Two or three hammocks
hung upon the ceiling, a table and two benches composed the entire
furniture. D’Artagnan picked up two or three old sails hung on the
walls, and meeting nothing to suspect, regained by the hatchway the
deck of the vessel.

“And this room?” he asked, pointing to the captain’s cabin.

“That’s my room,” replied Groslow.

“Open the door.”

The captain obeyed. D’Artagnan stretched out his arm in which he held
the lantern, put his head in at the half opened door, and seeing that
the cabin was nothing better than a shed:

“Good,” he said. “If there is an army on board it is not here that it
is hidden. Let us see what Porthos has found for supper.” And thanking
the captain, he regained the state cabin, where his friends were.

Porthos had found nothing, and with him fatigue had prevailed over
hunger. He had fallen asleep and was in a profound slumber when
D’Artagnan returned. Athos and Aramis were beginning to close their
eyes, which they half opened when their companion came in again.

“Well!” said Aramis.

“All is well; we may sleep tranquilly.”

On this assurance the two friends fell asleep; and D’Artagnan, who was
very weary, bade good-night to Grimaud and laid himself down in his
cloak, with naked sword at his side, in such a manner that his body
barricaded the passage, and it should be impossible to enter the room
without upsetting him.




Chapter LXXI.
Port Wine.


In ten minutes the masters slept; not so the servants—-hungry, and more
thirsty than hungry.

Blaisois and Mousqueton set themselves to preparing their bed which
consisted of a plank and a valise. On a hanging table, which swung to
and fro with the rolling of the vessel, were a pot of beer and three
glasses.

“This cursed rolling!” said Blaisois. “I know it will serve me as it
did when we came over.”

“And to think,” said Mousqueton, “that we have nothing to fight
seasickness with but barley bread and hop beer. Pah!”

“But where is your wicker flask, Monsieur Mousqueton? Have you lost
it?” asked Blaisois.

“No,” replied Mousqueton, “Parry kept it. Those devilish Scotchmen are
always thirsty. And you, Grimaud,” he said to his companion, who had
just come in after his round with D’Artagnan, “are you thirsty?”

“As thirsty as a Scotchman!” was Grimaud’s laconic reply.

And he sat down and began to cast up the accounts of his party, whose
money he managed.

“Oh, lackadaisy! I’m beginning to feel queer!” cried Blaisois.

“If that’s the case,” said Mousqueton, with a learned air, “take some
nourishment.”

“Do you call that nourishment?” said Blaisois, pointing to the barley
bread and pot of beer upon the table.

“Blaisois,” replied Mousqueton, “remember that bread is the true
nourishment of a Frenchman, who is not always able to get bread, ask
Grimaud.”

“Yes, but beer?” asked Blaisois sharply, “is that their true drink?”

“As to that,” answered Mousqueton, puzzled how to get out of the
difficulty, “I must confess that to me beer is as disagreeable as wine
is to the English.”

“What! Monsieur Mousqueton! The English—do they dislike wine?”

“They hate it.”

“But I have seen them drink it.”

“As a punishment. For example, an English prince died one day because
they had put him into a butt of Malmsey. I heard the Chevalier
d’Herblay say so.”

“The fool!” cried Blaisois, “I wish I had been in his place.”

“Thou canst be,” said Grimaud, writing down his figures.

“How?” asked Blaisois, “I can? Explain yourself.”

Grimaud went on with his sum and cast up the whole.

“Port,” he said, extending his hand in the direction of the first
compartment examined by D’Artagnan and himself.

“Eh? eh? ah? Those barrels I saw through the door?”

“Port!” replied Grimaud, beginning a fresh sum.

“I have heard,” said Blaisois, “that port is a very good wine.”

“Excellent!” exclaimed Mousqueton, smacking his lips. “Excellent; there
is port wine in the cellar of Monsieur le Baron de Bracieux.”

“Suppose we ask these Englishmen to sell us a bottle,” said the honest
Blaisois.

“Sell!” cried Mousqueton, about whom there was a remnant of his ancient
marauding character left. “One may well perceive, young man, that you
are inexperienced. Why buy what one can take?”

“Take!” said Blaisois; “covet the goods of your neighbor? That is
forbidden, it seems to me.”

“Where forbidden?” asked Mousqueton.

“In the commandments of God, or of the church, I don’t know which. I
only know it says, ‘Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s goods, nor yet
his wife.’”

“That is a child’s reason, Monsieur Blaisois,” said Mousqueton in his
most patronizing manner. “Yes, you talk like a child—I repeat the word.
Where have you read in the Scriptures, I ask you, that the English are
your neighbors?”

“Where, that is true,” said Blaisois; “at least, I can’t now recall
it.”

“A child’s reason—I repeat it,” continued Mousqueton. “If you had been
ten years engaged in war, as Grimaud and I have been, my dear Blaisois,
you would know the difference there is between the goods of others and
the goods of enemies. Now an Englishman is an enemy; this port wine
belongs to the English, therefore it belongs to us.”

“And our masters?” asked Blaisois, stupefied by this harangue,
delivered with an air of profound sagacity, “will they be of your
opinion?”

Mousqueton smiled disdainfully.

“I suppose that you think it necessary that I should disturb the repose
of these illustrious lords to say, ‘Gentlemen, your servant,
Mousqueton, is thirsty.’ What does Monsieur Bracieux care, think you,
whether I am thirsty or not?”

“’Tis a very expensive wine,” said Blaisois, shaking his head.

“Were it liquid gold, Monsieur Blaisois, our masters would not deny
themselves this wine. Know that Monsieur de Bracieux is rich enough to
drink a tun of port wine, even if obliged to pay a pistole for every
drop.” His manner became more and more lofty every instant; then he
arose and after finishing off the beer at one draught he advanced
majestically to the door of the compartment where the wine was. “Ah!
locked!” he exclaimed; “these devils of English, how suspicious they
are!”

“Locked!” said Blaisois; “ah! the deuce it is; unlucky, for my stomach
is getting more and more upset.”

“Locked!” repeated Mousqueton.

“But,” Blaisois ventured to say, “I have heard you relate, Monsieur
Mousqueton, that once on a time, at Chantilly, you fed your master and
yourself by taking partridges in a snare, carp with a line, and bottles
with a slipnoose.”

“Perfectly true; but there was an airhole in the cellar and the wine
was in bottles. I cannot throw the loop through this partition nor move
with a pack-thread a cask of wine which may perhaps weigh two hundred
pounds.”

“No, but you can take out two or three boards of the partition,”
answered Blaisois, “and make a hole in the cask with a gimlet.”

Mousqueton opened his great round eyes to the utmost, astonished to
find in Blaisois qualities for which he did not give him credit.

“’Tis true,” he said; “but where can I get a chisel to take the planks
out, a gimlet to pierce the cask?”

“Trousers,” said Grimaud, still squaring his accounts.

“Ah, yes!” said Mousqueton.

Grimaud, in fact, was not only the accountant, but the armorer of the
party; and as he was a man full of forethought, these trousers,
carefully rolled up in his valise, contained every sort of tool for
immediate use.

Mousqueton, therefore, was soon provided with tools and he began his
task. In a few minutes he had extracted three boards. He tried to pass
his body through the aperture, but not being like the frog in the
fable, who thought he was larger than he really was, he found he must
take out three or four more before he could get through.

He sighed and set to work again.

Grimaud had now finished his accounts. He arose and stood near
Mousqueton.

“I,” he said.

“What?” said Mousqueton.

“I can pass.”

“That is true,” said Mousqueton, glancing at his friend’s long and thin
body, “you will pass easily.”

“And he knows the full casks,” said Blaisois, “for he has already been
in the hold with Monsieur le Chevalier d’Artagnan. Let Monsieur Grimaud
go in, Monsieur Mouston.”

“I could go in as well as Grimaud,” said Mousqueton, a little piqued.

“Yes, but that would take too much time and I am thirsty. I am getting
more and more seasick.”

“Go in, then, Grimaud,” said Mousqueton, handing him the beer pot and
gimlet.

“Rinse the glasses,” said Grimaud. Then with a friendly gesture toward
Mousqueton, that he might forgive him for finishing an enterprise so
brilliantly begun by another, he glided like a serpent through the
opening and disappeared.

Blaisois was in a state of great excitement; he was in ecstasies. Of
all the exploits performed since their arrival in England by the
extraordinary men with whom he had the honor to be associated, this
seemed without question to be the most wonderful.

“You are about to see,” said Mousqueton, looking at Blaisois with an
expression of superiority which the latter did not even think of
questioning, “you are about to see, Blaisois, how we old soldiers drink
when we are thirsty.”

“My cloak,” said Grimaud, from the bottom of the hold.

“What do you want?” asked Blaisois.

“My cloak—stop up the aperture with it.”

“Why?” asked Blaisois.

“Simpleton!” exclaimed Mousqueton; “suppose any one came into the
room.”

“Ah, true,” cried Blaisois, with evident admiration; “but it will be
dark in the cellar.”

“Grimaud always sees, dark or light, night as well as day,” answered
Mousqueton.

“That is lucky,” said Blaisois. “As for me, when I have no candle I
can’t take two steps without knocking against something.”

“That’s because you haven’t served,” said Mousqueton. “Had you been in
the army you would have been able to pick up a needle on the floor of a
closed oven. But hark! I think some one is coming.”

Mousqueton made, with a low whistling sound, the sign of alarm well
known to the lackeys in the days of their youth, resumed his place at
the table and made a sign to Blaisois to follow his example.

Blaisois obeyed.

The door of their cabin was opened. Two men, wrapped in their cloaks,
appeared.

“Oho!” said they, “not in bed at a quarter past eleven. That’s against
all rules. In a quarter of an hour let every one be in bed and
snoring.”

These two men then went toward the compartment in which Grimaud was
secreted; opened the door, entered and shut it after them.

“Ah!” cried Blaisois, “he is lost!”

“Grimaud’s a cunning fellow,” murmured Mousqueton.

They waited for ten minutes, during which time no noise was heard that
might indicate that Grimaud was discovered, and at the expiration of
that anxious interval the two men returned, closed the door after them,
and repeating their orders that the servants should go to bed and
extinguish their lights, disappeared.

“Shall we obey?” asked Blaisois. “All this looks suspicious.”

“They said a quarter of an hour. We still have five minutes,” replied
Mousqueton.

“Suppose we warn the masters.”

“Let’s wait for Grimaud.”

“But perhaps they have killed him.”

“Grimaud would have cried out.”

“You know he is almost dumb.”

“We should have heard the blow, then.”

“But if he doesn’t return?”

“Here he is.”

At that very moment Grimaud drew back the cloak which hid the aperture
and came in with his face livid, his eyes staring wide open with
terror, so that the pupils were contracted almost to nothing, with a
large circle of white around them. He held in his hand a tankard full
of a dark substance, and approaching the gleam of light shed by the
lamp he uttered this single monosyllable: “Oh!” with such an expression
of extreme terror that Mousqueton started, alarmed, and Blaisois was
near fainting from fright.

Both, however, cast an inquisitive glance into the tankard—it was full
of gunpowder.

Convinced that the ship was full of powder instead of having a cargo of
wine, Grimaud hastened to awake D’Artagnan, who had no sooner beheld
him than he perceived that something extraordinary had taken place.
Imposing silence, Grimaud put out the little night lamp, then knelt
down and poured into the lieutenant’s ear a recital melodramatic enough
not to require play of feature to give it pith.

This was the gist of his strange story:

The first barrel that Grimaud had found on passing into the compartment
he struck—it was empty. He passed on to another—it, also, was empty,
but the third which he tried was, from the dull sound it gave out,
evidently full. At this point Grimaud stopped and was preparing to make
a hole with his gimlet, when he found a spigot; he therefore placed his
tankard under it and turned the spout; something, whatever it was the
cask contained, fell silently into the tankard.

Whilst he was thinking that he should first taste the liquor which the
tankard contained before taking it to his companions, the door of the
cellar opened and a man with a lantern in his hands and enveloped in a
cloak, came and stood just before the hogshead, behind which Grimaud,
on hearing him come in, instantly crept. This was Groslow. He was
accompanied by another man, who carried in his hand something long and
flexible rolled up, resembling a washing line. His face was hidden
under the wide brim of his hat. Grimaud, thinking that they had come,
as he had, to try the port wine, effaced himself behind his cask and
consoled himself with the reflection that if he were discovered the
crime was not a great one.

“Have you the wick?” asked the one who carried the lantern.

“Here it is,” answered the other.

At the voice of this last speaker, Grimaud started and felt a shudder
creeping through his very marrow. He rose gently, so that his head was
just above the round of the barrel, and under the large hat he
recognized the pale face of Mordaunt.

“How long will this fuse burn?” asked this person.

“About five minutes,” replied the captain.

That voice also was known to Grimaud. He looked from one to the other
and after Mordaunt he recognized Groslow.

“Then tell the men to be in readiness—don’t tell them why now. When the
clock strikes a quarter after midnight collect your men. Get down into
the longboat.”

“That is, when I have lighted the match?”

“I will undertake that. I wish to be sure of my revenge. Are the oars
in the boat?”

“Everything is ready.”

“’Tis well.”

Mordaunt knelt down and fastened one end of the train to the spigot, in
order that he might have nothing to do but to set it on fire at the
opposite end with the match.

He then arose.

“You hear me—at a quarter past midnight—in fact, in twenty minutes.”

“I understand all perfectly, sir,” replied Groslow; “but allow me to
say there is great danger in what you undertake; would it not be better
to intrust one of the men to set fire to the train?”

“My dear Groslow,” answered Mordaunt, “you know the French proverb,
‘Nothing one does not do one’s self is ever well done.’ I shall abide
by that rule.”

Grimaud had heard all this, if he had not understood it. But what he
saw made good what he lacked in perfect comprehension of the language.
He had seen the two mortal enemies of the musketeers, had seen Mordaunt
adjust the fuse; he had heard the proverb, which Mordaunt had given in
French. Then he felt and felt again the contents of the tankard he held
in his hand; and, instead of the lively liquor expected by Blaisois and
Mousqueton, he found beneath his fingers the grains of some coarse
powder.

Mordaunt went away with the captain. At the door he stopped to listen.

“Do you hear how they sleep?” he asked.

In fact, Porthos could be heard snoring through the partition.

“’Tis God who gives them into our hands,” answered Groslow.

“This time the devil himself shall not save them,” rejoined Mordaunt.

And they went out together.




Chapter LXXII.
End of the Port Wine Mystery.


Grimaud waited till he heard the bolt grind in the lock and when he was
satisfied that he was alone he slowly rose from his recumbent posture.

“Ah!” he said, wiping with his sleeve large drops of sweat from his
forehead, “how lucky it was that Mousqueton was thirsty!”

He made haste to pass out by the opening, still thinking himself in a
dream; but the sight of the gunpowder in the tankard proved to him that
his dream was a fatal nightmare.

It may be imagined that D’Artagnan listened to these details with
increasing interest; before Grimaud had finished he rose without noise
and putting his mouth to Aramis’s ear, and at the same time touching
him on the shoulder to prevent a sudden movement:

“Chevalier,” he said, “get up and don’t make the least noise.”

Aramis awoke. D’Artagnan, pressing his hand, repeated his call. Aramis
obeyed.

“Athos is near you,” said D’Artagnan; “warn him as I have warned you.”

Aramis easily aroused Athos, whose sleep was light, like that of all
persons of a finely organized constitution. But there was more
difficulty in arousing Porthos. He was beginning to ask full
explanation of that breaking in on his sleep, which was very annoying
to him, when D’Artagnan, instead of explaining, closed his mouth with
his hand.

Then our Gascon, extending his arms, drew to him the heads of his three
friends till they almost touched one another.

“Friends,” he said, “we must leave this craft at once or we are dead
men.”

“Bah!” said Athos, “are you still afraid?”

“Do you know who is captain of this vessel?”

“No.”

“Captain Groslow.”

The shudder of the three musketeers showed to D’Artagnan that his words
began to make some impression on them.

“Groslow!” said Aramis; “the devil!

“Who is this Groslow?” asked Porthos. “I don’t remember him.”

“Groslow is the man who broke Parry’s head and is now getting ready to
break ours.”

“Oh! oh!”

“And do you know who is his lieutenant?”

“His lieutenant? There is none,” said Athos. “They don’t have
lieutenants in a felucca manned by a crew of four.”

“Yes, but Monsieur Groslow is not a captain of the ordinary kind; he
has a lieutenant, and that lieutenant is Monsieur Mordaunt.”

This time the musketeers did more than shudder—they almost cried out.
Those invincible men were subject to a mysterious and fatal influence
which that name had over them; the mere sound of it filled them with
terror.

“What shall we do?” said Athos.

“We must seize the felucca,” said Aramis.

“And kill him,” said Porthos.

“The felucca is mined,” said D’Artagnan. “Those casks which I took for
casks of port wine are filled with powder. When Mordaunt finds himself
discovered he will destroy all, friends and foes; and on my word he
would be bad company in going either to Heaven or to hell.”

“You have some plan, then?” asked Athos.

“Yes.”

“What is it?”

“Have you confidence in me?”

“Give your orders,” said the three musketeers.

“Very well; come this way.”

D’Artagnan went toward a very small, low window, just large enough to
let a man through. He turned it gently on its hinges.

“There,” he said, “is our road.”

“The deuce! it is a very cold one, my dear friend,” said Aramis.

“Stay here, if you like, but I warn you ’twill be rather too warm
presently.”

“But we cannot swim to the shore.”

“The longboat is yonder, lashed to the felucca. We will take possession
of it and cut the cable. Come, my friends.”

“A moment’s delay,” said Athos; “our servants?”

“Here we are!” they cried.

Meantime the three friends were standing motionless before the awful
sight which D’Artagnan, in raising the shutters, had disclosed to them
through the narrow opening of the window.

Those who have once beheld such a spectacle know that there is nothing
more solemn, more striking, than the raging sea, rolling, with its
deafening roar, its dark billows beneath the pale light of a wintry
moon.

“Gracious Heaven, we are hesitating!” cried D’Artagnan; “if we hesitate
what will the servants do?”

“I do not hesitate, you know,” said Grimaud.

“Sir,” interposed Blaisois, “I warn you that I can only swim in
rivers.”

“And I not at all,” said Mousqueton.

But D’Artagnan had now slipped through the window.

“You have decided, friend?” said Athos.

“Yes,” the Gascon answered; “Athos! you, who are a perfect being, bid
spirit triumph over body. Do you, Aramis, order the servants. Porthos,
kill every one who stands in your way.”

And after pressing the hand of Athos, D’Artagnan chose a moment when
the ship rolled backward, so that he had only to plunge into the water,
which was already up to his waist.

Athos followed him before the felucca rose again on the waves; the
cable which tied the boat to the vessel was then seen plainly rising
out of the sea.

D’Artagnan swam to it and held it, suspending himself by this rope, his
head alone out of water.

In one second Athos joined him.

Then they saw, as the felucca turned, two other heads peeping, those of
Aramis and Grimaud.

“I am uneasy about Blaisois,” said Athos; “he can, he says, only swim
in rivers.”

“When people can swim at all they can swim anywhere. To the boat! to
the boat!”

“But Porthos, I do not see him.”

“Porthos is coming—he swims like Leviathan.”

In fact, Porthos did not appear; for a scene, half tragedy and half
comedy, had been performed by him with Mousqueton and Blaisois, who,
frightened by the noise of the sea, by the whistling of the wind, by
the sight of that dark water yawning like a gulf beneath them, shrank
back instead of going forward.

“Come, come!” said Porthos; “jump in.”

“But, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “I can’t swim; let me stay here.”

“And me, too, monsieur,” said Blaisois.

“I assure you, I shall be very much in the way in that little boat,”
said Mousqueton.

“And I know I shall drown before reaching it,” continued Blaisois.

“Come along! I shall strangle you both if you don’t get out,” said
Porthos at last, seizing Mousqueton by the throat. “Forward, Blaisois!”

A groan, stifled by the grasp of Porthos, was all the reply of poor
Blaisois, for the giant, taking him neck and heels, plunged him into
the water headforemost, pushing him out of the window as if he had been
a plank.

“Now, Mousqueton,” he said, “I hope you don’t mean to desert your
master?”

“Ah, sir,” replied Mousqueton, his eyes filling with tears, “why did
you re-enter the army? We were all so happy in the Chateau de
Pierrefonds!”

And without any other complaint, passive and obedient, either from true
devotion to his master or from the example set by Blaisois, Mousqueton
leaped into the sea headforemost. A sublime action, at all events, for
Mousqueton looked upon himself as dead. But Porthos was not a man to
abandon an old servant, and when Mousqueton rose above the water, blind
as a new-born puppy, he found he was supported by the large hand of
Porthos and that he was thus enabled, without having occasion even to
move, to advance toward the cable with the dignity of a very triton.

In a few minutes Porthos had rejoined his companions, who were already
in the boat; but when, after they had all got in, it came to his turn,
there was great danger that in putting his huge leg over the edge of
the boat he would upset the little vessel. Athos was the last to enter.

“Are you all here?” he asked.

“Ah! have you your sword, Athos?” cried D’Artagnan.

“Yes.”

“Cut the cable, then.”

Athos drew a sharp poniard from his belt and cut the cord. The felucca
went on, the boat continued stationary, rocked only by the swashing
waves.

“Come, Athos!” said D’Artagnan, giving his hand to the count; “you are
going to see something curious,” added the Gascon.




Chapter LXIII.
Fatality.


Scarcely had D’Artagnan uttered these words when a ringing and sudden
noise was heard resounding through the felucca, which had now become
dim in the obscurity of the night.

“That, you may be sure,” said the Gascon, “means something.”

They then at the same instant perceived a large lantern carried on a
pole appear on the deck, defining the forms of shadows behind it.

Suddenly a terrible cry, a cry of despair, was wafted through space;
and as if the shrieks of anguish had driven away the clouds, the veil
which hid the moon was cleated away and the gray sails and dark shrouds
of the felucca were plainly visible beneath the silvery light.

Shadows ran, as if bewildered, to and fro on the vessel, and mournful
cries accompanied these delirious walkers. In the midst of these
screams they saw Mordaunt upon the poop with a torch in hand.

The agitated figures, apparently wild with terror, consisted of
Groslow, who at the hour fixed by Mordaunt had collected his men and
the sailors. Mordaunt, after having listened at the door of the cabin
to hear if the musketeers were still asleep, had gone down into the
cellar, convinced by their silence that they were all in a deep
slumber. Then he had run to the train, impetuous as a man who is
excited by revenge, and full of confidence, as are those whom God
blinds, he had set fire to the wick of nitre.

All this while Groslow and his men were assembled on deck.

“Haul up the cable and draw the boat to us,” said Groslow.

One of the sailors got down the side of the ship, seized the cable, and
drew it; it came without the least resistance.

“The cable is cut!” he cried, “no boat!”

“How! no boat!” exclaimed Groslow; “it is impossible.”

“’Tis true, however,” answered the sailor; “there’s nothing in the wake
of the ship; besides, here’s the end of the cable.”

“What’s the matter?” cried Mordaunt, who, coming up out of the
hatchway, rushed to the stern, waving his torch.

“Only that our enemies have escaped; they have cut the cord and gone
off with the boat.”

Mordaunt bounded with one step to the cabin and kicked open the door.

“Empty!” he exclaimed; “the infernal demons!”

“We must pursue them,” said Groslow, “they can’t be gone far, and we
will sink them, passing over them.”

“Yes, but the fire,” ejaculated Mordaunt; “I have lighted it.”

“Ten thousand devils!” cried Groslow, rushing to the hatchway; “perhaps
there is still time to save us.”

Mordaunt answered only by a terrible laugh, threw his torch into the
sea and plunged in after it. The instant Groslow put his foot upon the
hatchway steps the ship opened like the crater of a volcano. A burst of
flame rose toward the skies with an explosion like that of a hundred
cannon; the air burned, ignited by flaming embers, then the frightful
lightning disappeared, the brands sank, one after another, into the
abyss, where they were extinguished, and save for a slight vibration in
the air, after a few minutes had elapsed one would have thought that
nothing had happened.

Only—the felucca had disappeared from the surface of the sea and
Groslow and his three sailors were consumed.

The four friends saw all this—not a single detail of this fearful scene
escaped them. At one moment, bathed as they were in a flood of
brilliant light, which illumined the sea for the space of a league,
they might each be seen, each by his own peculiar attitude and manner
expressing the awe which, even in their hearts of bronze, they could
not help experiencing. Soon a torrent of vivid sparks fell around
them—then, at last, the volcano was extinguished—then all was dark and
still—the floating bark and heaving ocean.

They sat silent and dejected.

“By Heaven!” at last said Athos, the first to speak, “by this time, I
think, all must be over.”

“Here, my lords! save me! help!” cried a voice, whose mournful accents,
reaching the four friends, seemed to proceed from some phantom of the
ocean.

All looked around; Athos himself stared.

“’Tis he! it is his voice!”

All still remained silent, the eyes of all were turned in the direction
where the vessel had disappeared, endeavoring in vain to penetrate the
darkness. After a minute or two they were able to distinguish a man,
who approached them, swimming vigorously.

Athos extended his arm toward him, pointing him out to his companions.

“Yes, yes, I see him well enough,” said D’Artagnan.

“He—again!” cried Porthos, who was breathing like a blacksmith’s
bellows; “why, he is made of iron.”

“Oh, my God!” muttered Athos.

Aramis and D’Artagnan whispered to each other.

Mordaunt made several strokes more, and raising his arm in sign of
distress above the waves: “Pity, pity on me, gentlemen, in Heaven’s
name! my strength is failing me; I am dying.”

The voice that implored aid was so piteous that it awakened pity in the
heart of Athos.

“Poor fellow!” he exclaimed.

“Indeed!” said D’Artagnan, “monsters have only to complain to gain your
sympathy. I believe he’s swimming toward us. Does he think we are going
to take him in? Row, Porthos, row.” And setting the example he plowed
his oar into the sea; two strokes took the bark on twenty fathoms
further.

“Oh! you will not abandon me! You will not leave me to perish! You will
not be pitiless!” cried Mordaunt.

“Ah! ah!” said Porthos to Mordaunt, “I think we have you now, my hero!
and there are no doors by which you can escape this time but those of
hell.”

“Oh! Porthos!” murmured the Comte de la Fere.

“Oh, pray, for mercy’s sake, don’t fly from me. For pity’s sake!” cried
the young man, whose agony-drawn breath at times, when his head went
under water, under the wave, exhaled and made the icy waters bubble.

D’Artagnan, however, who had consulted with Aramis, spoke to the poor
wretch. “Go away,” he said; “your repentance is too recent to inspire
confidence. See! the vessel in which you wished to fry us is still
smoking; and the situation in which you are is a bed of roses compared
to that in which you wished to place us and in which you have placed
Monsieur Groslow and his companions.”

“Sir!” replied Mordaunt, in a tone of deep despair, “my penitence is
sincere. Gentlemen, I am young, scarcely twenty-three years old. I was
drawn on by a very natural resentment to avenge my mother. You would
have done what I did.”

Mordaunt wanted now only two or three fathoms to reach the boat, for
the approach of death seemed to give him supernatural strength.

“Alas!” he said, “I am then to die? You are going to kill the son, as
you killed the mother! Surely, if I am culpable and if I ask for
pardon, I ought to be forgiven.”

Then, as if his strength failed him, he seemed unable to sustain
himself above the water and a wave passed over his head, which drowned
his voice.

“Oh! this is torture to me,” cried Athos.

Mordaunt reappeared.

“For my part,” said D’Artagnan, “I say this must come to an end;
murderer, as you were, of your uncle! executioner, as you were, of King
Charles! incendiary! I recommend you to sink forthwith to the bottom of
the sea; and if you come another fathom nearer, I’ll stave your wicked
head in with this oar.”

“D’Artagnan! D’Artagnan!” cried Athos, “my son, I entreat you; the
wretch is dying, and it is horrible to let a man die without extending
a hand to save him. I cannot resist doing so; he must live.”

“Zounds!” replied D’Artagnan, “why don’t you give yourself up directly,
feet and hands bound, to that wretch? Ah! Comte de la Fere, you wish to
perish by his hands! I, your son, as you call me—I will not let you!”

’Twas the first time D’Artagnan had ever refused a request from Athos.

Aramis calmly drew his sword, which he had carried between his teeth as
he swam.

“If he lays his hand on the boat’s edge I will cut it off, regicide
that he is.”

“And I,” said Porthos. “Wait.”

“What are you going to do?” asked Aramis.

“Throw myself in the water and strangle him.”

“Oh, gentlemen!” cried Athos, “be men! be Christians! See! death is
depicted on his face! Ah! do not bring on me the horrors of remorse!
Grant me this poor wretch’s life. I will bless you—I——”

“I am dying!” cried Mordaunt, “come to me! come to me!”

D’Artagnan began to be touched. The boat at this moment turned around,
and the dying man was by that turn brought nearer Athos.

“Monsieur the Comte de la Fere,” he cried, “I supplicate you! pity me!
I call on you—where are you? I see you no longer—I am dying—help me!
help me!”

“Here I am, sir!” said Athos, leaning and stretching out his arm to
Mordaunt with that air of dignity and nobility of soul habitual to him;
“here I am, take my hand and jump into our boat.”

Mordaunt made a last effort—rose—seized the hand thus extended to him
and grasped it with the vehemence of despair.

“That’s right,” said Athos; “put your other hand here.” And he offered
him his shoulder as another stay and support, so that his head almost
touched that of Mordaunt; and these two mortal enemies were in as close
an embrace as if they had been brothers.

“Now, sir,” said the count, “you are safe—calm yourself.”

“Ah! my mother,” cried Mordaunt, with eyes on fire with a look of hate
impossible to paint, “I can only offer thee one victim, but it shall at
any rate be the one thou wouldst thyself have chosen!”

And whilst D’Artagnan uttered a cry, Porthos raised the oar, and Aramis
sought a place to strike, a frightful shake given to the boat
precipitated Athos into the sea; whilst Mordaunt, with a shout of
triumph, grasped the neck of his victim, and in order to paralyze his
movements, twined arms and legs around the musketeer. For an instant,
without an exclamation, without a cry for help, Athos tried to sustain
himself on the surface of the waters, but the weight dragged him down;
he disappeared by degrees; soon nothing was to be seen except his long,
floating hair; then both men disappeared and the bubbling of the water,
which, in its turn, was soon effaced, alone indicated the spot where
these two had sunk.

Mute with horror, the three friends had remained open-mouthed, their
eyes dilated, their arms extended like statues, and, motionless as they
were, the beating of their hearts was audible. Porthos was the first
who came to himself. He tore his hair.

“Oh!” he cried, “Athos! Athos! thou man of noble heart; woe is me! I
have let thee perish!”

At this instant, in the midst of the silver circle illumined by the
light of the moon the same whirlpool which had been made by the sinking
men was again obvious, and first were seen, rising above the waves, a
wisp of hair, then a pale face with open eyes, yet, nevertheless, the
eyes of death; then a body, which, after rising of itself even to the
waist above the sea, turned gently on its back, according to the
caprice of the waves, and floated.

In the bosom of this corpse was plunged a poniard, the gold hilt of
which shone in the moonbeams.

“Mordaunt! Mordaunt!” cried the three friends; “’tis Mordaunt!”

“But Athos!” exclaimed D’Artagnan.

Suddenly the boat leaned on one side beneath a new and unexpected
weight and Grimaud uttered a shout of joy; every one turned around and
beheld Athos, livid, his eyes dim and his hands trembling, supporting
himself on the edge of the boat. Eight vigorous arms lifted him up
immediately and laid him in the boat, where directly Athos was warmed
and reanimated, reviving with the caresses and cares of his friends,
who were intoxicated with joy.

“You are not hurt?” asked D’Artagnan.

“No,” replied Athos; “and he——”

“Oh, he! now we may say at last, thank Heaven! he is really dead.
Look!” and D’Artagnan, obliging Athos to look in the direction he
pointed, showed him the body of Mordaunt floating on its back, which,
sometimes submerged, sometimes rising, seemed still to pursue the four
friends with looks of insult and mortal hatred.

At last he sank. Athos had followed him with a glance in which the
deepest melancholy and pity were expressed.

“Bravo! Athos!” cried Aramis, with an emotion very rare in him.

“A capital blow you gave!” cried Porthos.

“I have a son. I wished to live,” said Athos.

“In short,” said D’Artagnan, “this has been the will of God.”

“It was not I who killed him,” said Athos in a soft, low tone, “’twas
destiny.”




Chapter LXIV.
How Mousqueton had a Narrow Escape of being eaten.


A deep silence reigned for a long time in the boat after the fearful
scene described.

The moon, which had shone for a short time, disappeared behind the
clouds; every object was again plunged in the obscurity that is so
awful in the deserts and still more so in that liquid desert, the
ocean, and nothing was heard save the whistling of the west wind
driving along the tops of the crested billows.

Porthos was the first to speak.

“I have seen,” he said, “many dreadful things, but nothing that ever
agitated me so much as what I have just witnessed. Nevertheless, even
in my present state of perturbation, I protest that I feel happy. I
have a hundred pounds’ weight less upon my chest. I breathe more
freely.” In fact, Porthos breathed so loud as to do credit to the free
play of his powerful lungs.

“For my part,” observed Aramis, “I cannot say the same as you do,
Porthos. I am still terrified to such a degree that I scarcely believe
my eyes. I look around the boat, expecting every moment to see that
poor wretch holding between his hands the poniard plunged into his
heart.”

“Oh! I feel easy,” replied Porthos. “The poniard was pointed at the
sixth rib and buried up to the hilt in his body. I do not reproach you,
Athos, for what you have done. On the contrary, when one aims a blow
that is the regulation way to strike. So now, I breathe again—I am
happy!”

“Don’t be in haste to celebrate a victory, Porthos,” interposed
D’Artagnan; “never have we incurred a greater danger than we are now
encountering. Men may subdue men—they cannot overcome the elements. We
are now on the sea, at night, without any pilot, in a frail bark;
should a blast of wind upset the boat we are lost.”

Mousqueton heaved a deep sigh.

“You are ungrateful, D’Artagnan,” said Athos; “yes, ungrateful to
Providence, to whom we owe our safety in the most miraculous manner.
Let us sail before the wind, and unless it changes we shall be drifted
either to Calais or Boulogne. Should our bark be upset we are five of
us good swimmers, able enough to turn it over again, or if not, to hold
on by it. Now we are on the very road which all the vessels between
Dover and Calais take, ’tis impossible but that we should meet with a
fisherman who will pick us up.”

“But should we not find any fisherman and should the wind shift to the
north?”

“That,” said Athos, “would be quite another thing; and we should
nevermore see land until we were upon the other side of the Atlantic.”

“Which implies that we may die of hunger,” said Aramis.

“’Tis more than possible,” answered the Comte de la Fere.

Mousqueton sighed again, more deeply than before.

“What is the matter? what ails you?” asked Porthos.

“I am cold, sir,” said Mousqueton.

“Impossible! your body is covered with a coating of fat which preserves
it from the cold air.”

“Ah! sir, ’tis this very coating of fat that makes me shiver.”

“How is that, Mousqueton?

“Alas! your honor, in the library of the Chateau of Bracieux there are
a lot of books of travels.”

“What then?”

“Amongst them the voyages of Jean Mocquet in the time of Henry IV.”

“Well?”

“In these books, your honor, ’tis told how hungry voyagers, drifting
out to sea, have a bad habit of eating each other and beginning with——”

“The fattest among them!” cried D’Artagnan, unable in spite of the
gravity of the occasion to help laughing.

“Yes, sir,” answered Mousqueton; “but permit me to say I see nothing
laughable in it. However,” he added, turning to Porthos, “I should not
regret dying, sir, were I sure that by doing so I might still be useful
to you.”

“Mouston,” replied Porthos, much affected, “should we ever see my
castle of Pierrefonds again you shall have as your own and for your
descendants the vineyard that surrounds the farm.”

“And you should call it ‘Devotion,’” added Aramis; “the vineyard of
self-sacrifice, to transmit to latest ages the recollection of your
devotion to your master.”

“Chevalier,” said D’Artagnan, laughing, “you could eat a piece of
Mouston, couldn’t you, especially after two or three days of fasting?”

“Oh, no,” replied Aramis, “I should much prefer Blaisois; we haven’t
known him so long.”

One may readily conceive that during these jokes which were intended
chiefly to divert Athos from the scene which had just taken place, the
servants, with the exception of Grimaud, were not silent. Suddenly
Mousqueton uttered a cry of delight, taking from beneath one of the
benches a bottle of wine; and on looking more closely in the same place
he discovered a dozen similar bottles, bread, and a monster junk of
salted beef.

“Oh, sir!” he cried, passing the bottle to Porthos, “we are saved—the
bark is supplied with provisions.”

This intelligence restored every one save Athos to gayety.

“Zounds!” exclaimed Porthos, “’tis astonishing how empty violent
agitation makes the stomach.”

And he drank off half a bottle at a draught and bit great mouthfuls of
the bread and meat.

“Now,” said Athos, “sleep, or try to sleep, my friends, and I will
watch.”

In a few moments, notwithstanding their wet clothes, the icy blast that
blew and the previous scene of terror, these hardy adventurers, with
their iron frames, inured to every hardship, threw themselves down,
intending to profit by the advice of Athos, who sat at the helm,
pensively wakeful, guiding the little bark the way it was to go, his
eyes fixed on the heavens, as if he sought to verify not only the road
to France, but the benign aspect of protecting Providence. After some
hours of repose the sleepers were aroused by Athos.

Dawn was shedding its pallid, placid glimmer on the purple ocean, when
at the distance of a musket shot from them was seen a dark gray mass,
above which gleamed a triangular sail; then masters and servants joined
in a fervent cry to the crew of that vessel to hear them and to save.

“A bark!” all cried together.

It was, in fact, a small craft from Dunkirk bound for Boulogne.

A quarter of an hour afterward the rowboat of this craft took them all
aboard. Grimaud tendered twenty guineas to the captain, and at nine
o’clock in the morning, having a fair wind, our Frenchmen set foot on
their native land.

“Egad! how strong one feels here!” said Porthos, almost burying his
large feet in the sands. “Zounds! I could defy a nation!”

“Be quiet, Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, “we are observed.”

“We are admired, i’faith,” answered Porthos.

“These people who are looking at us are only merchants,” said Athos,
“and are looking more at the cargo than at us.”

“I shall not trust to that,” said the lieutenant, “and I shall make for
the Dunes* as soon as possible.”

* Sandy hills about Dunkirk, from which it derives its name.


The party followed him and soon disappeared with him behind the
hillocks of sand unobserved. Here, after a short conference, they
proposed to separate.

“And why separate?” asked Athos.

“Because,” answered the Gascon, “we were sent, Porthos and I, by
Cardinal Mazarin to fight for Cromwell; instead of fighting for
Cromwell we have served Charles I.—not the same thing by any means. In
returning with the Comte de la Fere and Monsieur d’Herblay our crime
would be confirmed. We have circumvented Cromwell, Mordaunt, and the
sea, but we shall find a certain difficulty in circumventing Mazarin.”

“You forget,” replied Athos, “that we consider ourselves your prisoners
and not free from the engagement we entered into.”

“Truly, Athos,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “I am vexed that such a man as
you are should talk nonsense which schoolboys would be ashamed of.
Chevalier,” he continued, addressing Aramis, who, leaning proudly on
his sword, seemed to agree with his companion, “Chevalier, Porthos and
I run no risk; besides, should any ill-luck happen to two of us, will
it not be much better that the other two should be spared to assist
those who may be apprehended? Besides, who knows whether, divided, we
may not obtain a pardon—you from the queen, we from Mazarin—which, were
we all four together, would never be granted. Come, Athos and Aramis,
go to the right; Porthos, come with me to the left; these gentlemen
should file off into Normandy, whilst we, by the nearest road, reach
Paris.”

He then gave his friends minute directions as to their route.

“Ah! my dear friend,” exclaimed Athos, “how I should admire the
resources of your mind did I not stop to adore those of your heart.”

And he gave him his hand.

“Isn’t this fox a genius, Athos?” asked the Gascon. “No! he knows how
to crunch fowls, to dodge the huntsman and to find his way home by day
or by night, that’s all. Well, is all said?”

“All.”

“Then let’s count our money and divide it. Ah! hurrah! there’s the sun!
A merry morning to you, Sunshine. ’Tis a long time since I saw thee!”

“Come, come, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, “do not affect to be
strong-minded; there are tears in your eyes. Let us be open with each
other and sincere.”

“What!” cried the Gascon, “do you think, Athos, we can take leave,
calmly, of two friends at a time not free from danger to you and
Aramis?”

“No,” answered Athos; “embrace me, my son.”

“Zounds!” said Porthos, sobbing, “I believe I’m crying; but how foolish
all this is!”

Then they embraced. At that moment their fraternal bond of union was
closer than ever, and when they parted, each to take the route agreed
on, they turned back to utter affectionate expressions, which the
echoes of the Dunes repeated. At last they lost sight of each other.

“Sacrebleu! D’Artagnan,” said Porthos, “I must out with it at once, for
I can’t keep to myself anything I have against you; I haven’t been able
to recognize you in this matter.”

“Why not?” said D’Artagnan, with his wise smile.

“Because if, as you say, Athos and Aramis are in real danger, this is
not the time to abandon them. For my part, I confess to you that I was
all ready to follow them and am still ready to rejoin them, in spite of
all the Mazarins in the world.”

“You would be right, Porthos, but for one thing, which may change the
current of your ideas; and that is, that it is not those gentlemen who
are in the greatest danger, it is ourselves; it is not to abandon them
that we have separated, but to avoid compromising them.”

“Really?” said Porthos, opening his eyes in astonishment.

“Yes, no doubt. If they are arrested they will only be put in the
Bastile; if we are arrested it is a matter of the Place de Greve.”

“Oh! oh!” said Porthos, “there is quite a gap between that fate and the
baronial coronet you promised me, D’Artagnan.”

“Bah! perhaps not so great as you think, Porthos; you know the proverb,
‘All roads lead to Rome.’”

“But how is it that we are incurring greater risks than Athos and
Aramis?” asked Porthos.

“Because they have but fulfilled the mission confided to them by Queen
Henrietta and we have betrayed that confided to us by Mazarin; because,
going hence as emissaries to Cromwell, we became partisans of King
Charles; because, instead of helping cut off the royal head condemned
by those fellows called Mazarin, Cromwell, Joyce, Bridge, Fairfax,
etc., we very nearly succeeded in saving it.”

“Upon my word that is true,” said Porthos; “but how can you suppose, my
dear friend, that in the midst of his great preoccupations General
Cromwell has had time to think——”

“Cromwell thinks of everything; Cromwell has time for everything; and
believe me, dear friend, we ought not to lose our time—it is precious.
We shall not be safe till we have seen Mazarin, and then——”

“The devil!” said Porthos; “what can we say to Mazarin?”

“Leave that to me—I have my plan. He laughs best who laughs last.
Cromwell is mighty, Mazarin is tricky, but I would rather have to do
with them than with the late Monsieur Mordaunt.”

“Ah!” said Porthos, “it is very pleasant to be able to say ‘the late
Monsieur Mordaunt.’”

“My faith, yes,” said D’Artagnan. “But we must be going.”

The two immediately started across country toward the road to Paris,
followed by Mousqueton, who, after being too cold all night, at the end
of a quarter of an hour found himself too warm.




Chapter LXXV.
The Return.


During the six weeks that Athos and Aramis had been absent from France,
the Parisians, finding themselves one morning without either queen or
king, were greatly annoyed at being thus deserted, and the absence of
Mazarin, a thing so long desired, did not compensate for that of the
two august fugitives.

The first feeling that pervaded Paris on hearing of the flight to Saint
Germain, was that sort of affright which seizes children when they
awake in the night and find themselves alone. A deputation was
therefore sent to the queen to entreat her to return to Paris; but she
not only declined to receive the deputies, but sent an intimation by
Chancellor Seguier, implying that if the parliament did not humble
itself before her majesty by negativing all the questions that had been
the cause of the quarrel, Paris would be besieged the very next day.

This threatening answer, unluckily for the court, produced quite a
different effect to that which was intended. It wounded the pride of
the parliament, which, supported by the citizens, replied by declaring
that Cardinal Mazarin was the cause of all the discontent; denounced
him as the enemy both of the king and the state, and ordered him to
retire from the court that same day and from France within a week
afterward; enjoining, in case of disobedience on his part, all the
subjects of the king to pursue and take him.

Mazarin being thus placed beyond the pale of the protection of the law,
preparations on both sides were commenced—by the queen, to attack
Paris, by the citizens, to defend it. The latter were occupied in
breaking up the pavement and stretching chains across the streets,
when, headed by the coadjutor, appeared the Prince de Conti (the
brother of the Prince de Condé) and the Duc de Longueville, his
brother-in-law. This unexpected band of auxiliaries arrived in Paris on
the tenth of January and the Prince of Conti was named, but not until
after a stormy discussion, generalissimo of the army of the king, out
of Paris.

As for the Duc de Beaufort, he arrived from Vendome, according to the
annals of the day, bringing with him his high bearing and his long and
beautiful hair, qualifications which gained him the sovereignty of the
marketplaces.

The Parisian army had organized with the promptness characteristic of
the bourgeois whenever they are moved by any sentiment whatever to
disguise themselves as soldiers. On the nineteenth the impromptu army
had attempted a sortie, more to assure itself and others of its actual
existence than with any more serious intention. They carried a banner,
on which could be read this strange device: “We are seeking our king.”

The next following days were occupied in trivial movements which
resulted only in the carrying off of a few herds of cattle and the
burning of two or three houses.

That was still the situation of affairs up to the early days of
February. On the first day of that month our four companions had landed
at Boulogne, and, in two parties, had set out for Paris. Toward the end
of the fourth day of the journey Athos and Aramis reached Nanterre,
which place they cautiously passed by on the outskirts, fearing that
they might encounter some troop from the queen’s army.

It was against his will that Athos took these precautions, but Aramis
had very judiciously reminded him that they had no right to be
imprudent, that they had been charged by King Charles with a supreme
and sacred mission, which, received at the foot of the scaffold, could
be accomplished only at the feet of Queen Henrietta. Upon that, Athos
yielded.

On reaching the capital Athos and Aramis found it in arms. The sentinel
at the gate refused even to let them pass, and called his sergeant.

The sergeant, with the air of importance which such people assume when
they are clad with military dignity, said:

“Who are you, gentlemen?”

“Two gentlemen.”

“And where do you come from?”

“From London.”

“And what are you going to do in Paris?”

“We are going with a mission to Her Majesty, the Queen of England.”

“Ah, every one seems to be going to see the queen of England. We have
already at the station three gentlemen whose passports are under
examination, who are on their way to her majesty. Where are your
passports?”

“We have none; we left England, ignorant of the state of politics here,
having left Paris before the departure of the king.”

“Ah!” said the sergeant, with a cunning smile, “you are Mazarinists,
who are sent as spies.”

“My dear friend,” here Athos spoke, “rest assured, if we were
Mazarinists we should come well prepared with every sort of passport.
In your situation distrust those who are well provided with every
formality.”

“Enter the guardroom,” said the sergeant; “we will lay your case before
the commandant of the post.”

The guardroom was filled with citizens and common people, some playing,
some drinking, some talking. In a corner, almost hidden from view, were
three gentlemen, who had preceded Athos and Aramis, and an officer was
examining their passports. The first impulse of these three, and of
those who last entered, was to cast an inquiring glance at each other.
The first arrivals wore long cloaks, in whose drapery they were
carefully enveloped; one of them, shorter than the rest, remained
pertinaciously in the background.

When the sergeant on entering the room announced that in all
probability he was bringing in two Mazarinists, it appeared to be the
unanimous opinion of the officers on guard that they ought not to pass.

“Be it so,” said Athos; “yet it is probable, on the contrary, that we
shall enter, because we seem to have to do with sensible people. There
seems to be only one thing to do, which is, to send our names to Her
Majesty the Queen of England, and if she engages to answer for us I
presume we shall be allowed to enter.”

On hearing these words the shortest of the other three men seemed more
attentive than ever to what was going on, wrapping his cloak around him
more carefully than before.

“Merciful goodness!” whispered Aramis to Athos, “did you see?”

“What?” asked Athos.

“The face of the shortest of those three gentlemen?”

“No.”

“He looked to me—but ’tis impossible.”

At this instant the sergeant, who had been for his orders, returned,
and pointing to the three gentlemen in cloaks, said:

“The passports are in order; let these three gentlemen pass.”

The three gentlemen bowed and hastened to take advantage of this
permission.

Aramis looked after them, and as the last of them passed close to him
he pressed the hand of Athos.

“What is the matter with you, my friend?” asked the latter.

“I have—doubtless I am dreaming; tell me, sir,” he said to the
sergeant, “do you know those three gentlemen who are just gone out?”

“Only by their passports; they are three Frondists, who are gone to
rejoin the Duc de Longueville.”

“’Tis strange,” said Aramis, almost involuntarily; “I fancied that I
recognized Mazarin himself.”

The sergeant burst into a fit of laughter.

“He!” he cried; “he venture himself amongst us, to be hung! Not so
foolish as all that.”

“Ah!” muttered Athos, “I may be mistaken, I haven’t the unerring eye of
D’Artagnan.”

“Who is speaking of Monsieur D’Artagnan?” asked an officer who appeared
at that moment upon the threshold of the room.

“What!” cried Aramis and Athos, “what! Planchet!”

“Planchet,” added Grimaud; “Planchet, with a gorget, indeed!”

“Ah, gentlemen!” cried Planchet, “so you are back again in Paris. Oh,
how happy you make us! no doubt you come to join the princes!”

“As thou seest, Planchet,” said Aramis, whilst Athos smiled on seeing
what important rank was held in the city militia by the former comrade
of Mousqueton, Bazin and Grimaud.

“And Monsieur d’Artagnan, of whom you spoke just now, Monsieur
d’Herblay; may I ask if you have any news of him?”

“We parted from him four days ago and we have reason to believe that he
has reached Paris before us.”

“No, sir; I am sure he hasn’t yet arrived. But then he may have stopped
at Saint Germain.”

“I don’t think so; we appointed to meet at La Chevrette.”

“I was there this very day.”

“And had the pretty Madeleine no news?” asked Aramis, smiling.

“No, sir, and it must be admitted that she seemed very anxious.”

“In fact,” said Aramis, “there is no time lost and we made our journey
quickly. Permit me, then, my dear Athos, without inquiring further
about our friend, to pay my respects to M. Planchet.”

“Ah, monsieur le chevalier,” said Planchet, bowing.

“Lieutenant?” asked Aramis.

“Lieutenant, with a promise of becoming captain.”

“’Tis capital; and pray, how did you acquire all these honors?”

“In the first place, gentlemen, you know that I was the means of
Monsieur de Rochefort’s escape; well, I was very near being hung by
Mazarin and that made me more popular than ever.”

“So, owing to your popularity——”

“No; thanks to something better. You know, gentlemen, that I served the
Piedmont regiment and had the honor of being a sergeant?”

“Yes.”

“Well, one day when no one could drill a mob of citizens, who began to
march, some with the right foot, others with the left, I succeeded, I
did, in making them all begin with the same foot, and I was made
lieutenant on the spot.”

“So I presume,” said Athos, “that you have a large number of the nobles
with you?”

“Certainly. There are the Prince de Conti, the Duc de Longueville, the
Duc de Beaufort, the Duc de Bouillon, the Marechal de la Mothe, the
Marquis de Sevigne, and I don’t know who, for my part.”

“And the Vicomte Raoul de Bragelonne?” inquired Athos, in a tremulous
voice. “D’Artagnan told me that he had recommended him to your care, in
parting.”

“Yes, count; nor have I lost sight of him for a single instant since.”

“Then,” said Athos in a tone of delight, “he is well? no accident has
happened to him?”

“None, sir.”

“And he lives?”

“Still at the Hotel of the Great Charlemagne.”

“And passes his time?”

“Sometimes with the queen of England, sometimes with Madame de
Chevreuse. He and the Count de Guiche are like each other’s shadows.”

“Thanks, Planchet, thanks!” cried Athos, extending his hand to the
lieutenant.

“Oh, sir!” Planchet only touched the tips of the count’s fingers.

“Well, what are you doing, count—to a former lackey?

“My friend,” said Athos, “he has given me news of Raoul.”

“And now, gentlemen,” said Planchet, who had not heard what they were
saying, “what do you intend to do?”

“Re-enter Paris, if you will let us, my good Planchet.”

“Let you, sir? Now, as ever, I am nothing but your servant.” Then
turning to his men:

“Allow these gentlemen to pass,” he said; “they are friends of the Duc
de Beaufort.”

“Long live the Duc de Beaufort!” cried the sentinels.

The sergeant drew near to Planchet.

“What! without passports?” he murmured.

“Without passports,” said Planchet.

“Take notice, captain,” he continued, giving Planchet his expected
title, “take notice that one of the three men who just now went out
from here told me privately to distrust these gentlemen.”

“And I,” said Planchet, with dignity, “I know them and I answer for
them.”

As he said this, he pressed Grimaud’s hand, who seemed honored by the
distinction.

“Farewell till we meet again,” said Aramis, as they took leave of
Planchet; “if anything happens to us we shall blame you for it.”

“Sir,” said Planchet, “I am in all things at your service.”

“That fellow is no fool,” said Aramis, as he got on his horse.

“How should he be?” replied Athos, whilst mounting also, “seeing he was
used so long to brush your hats.”




Chapter LXXVI.
The Ambassadors.


The two friends rode rapidly down the declivity of the Faubourg, but on
arriving at the bottom were surprised to find that the streets of Paris
had become rivers, and the open places lakes; after the great rains
which fell in January the Seine had overflowed its banks and the river
inundated half the capital. The two gentlemen were obliged, therefore,
to get off their horses and take a boat; and in that strange manner
they approached the Louvre.

Night had closed in, and Paris, seen thus, by the light of lanterns
flickering on the pools of water, crowded with ferry-boats of every
kind, including those that glittered with the armed patrols, with the
watchword, passing from post to post—Paris presented such an aspect as
to strongly seize the senses of Aramis, a man most susceptible to
warlike impressions.

They reached the queen’s apartments, but were compelled to stop in the
ante-chamber, since her majesty was at that moment giving audience to
gentlemen bringing her news from England.

“We, too,” said Athos, to the footman who had given him that answer,
“not only bring news from England, but have just come from there.”

“What? then, are your names, gentlemen?”

“The Comte de la Fere and the Chevalier d’Herblay,” said Aramis.

“Ah! in that case, gentlemen,” said the footman, on hearing the names
which the queen had so often pronounced with hope, “in that case it is
another thing, and I think her majesty will pardon me for not keeping
you here a moment. Please follow me,” and he went on before, followed
by Athos and Aramis.

On arriving at the door of the room where the queen was receiving he
made a sign for them to wait and opening the door:

“Madame,” he said, “I hope your majesty will forgive me for disobeying
your orders, when you learn that the gentlemen I have come to announce
are the Comte de la Fere and the Chevalier d’Herblay.”

On hearing those two names the queen uttered a cry of joy, which the
two gentlemen heard.

“Poor queen!” murmured Athos.

“Oh, let them come in! let them come in,” cried the young princess,
bounding to the door.

The poor child was constant in her attendance on her mother and sought
by her filial attentions to make her forget the absence of her two sons
and her other daughter.

“Come in, gentlemen,” repeated the princess, opening the door herself.

The queen was seated on a fauteuil and before her were standing two or
three gentlemen, and among them the Duc de Chatillon, the brother of
the nobleman killed eight or nine years previously in a duel on account
of Madame de Longueville, on the Place Royale. All these gentlemen had
been noticed by Athos and Aramis in the guardhouse, and when the two
friends were announced they started and exchanged some words in a low
tone. “Well, sirs!” cried the queen, on perceiving the two friends,
“you have come, faithful friends! But the royal couriers have been more
expeditious than you, and here are Monsieur de Flamarens and Monsieur
de Chatillon, who bring me from Her Majesty the Queen Anne of Austria,
the very latest intelligence.”

Aramis and Athos were astounded by the calmness, even the gayety of the
queen’s manner.

“Go on with your recital, sirs,” said the queen, turning to the Duc de
Chatillon. “You said that His Majesty, King Charles, my august consort,
had been condemned to death by a majority of his subjects!”

“Yes, madame,” Chatillon stammered out.

Athos and Aramis were more and more astonished.

“And that being conducted to the scaffold,” resumed the queen—“oh, my
lord! oh, my king!—and that being led to the scaffold he had been saved
by an indignant people.”

“Just so madame,” replied Chatillon, in so low a voice that though the
two friends were listening eagerly they could hardly hear this
affirmation.

The queen clasped her hands in enthusiastic gratitude, whilst her
daughter threw her arms around her mother’s neck and kissed her—her own
eyes streaming with tears.

“Now, madame, nothing remains to me except to proffer my respectful
homage,” said Chatillon, who felt confused and ashamed beneath the
stern gaze of Athos.

“One moment, yes,” answered the queen. “One moment—I beg—for here are
the Chevalier d’Herblay and the Comte de la Fere, just arrived from
London, and they can give you, as eye-witnesses, such details as you
can convey to the queen, my royal sister. Speak, gentlemen, speak—I am
listening; conceal nothing, gloss over nothing. Since his majesty still
lives, since the honor of the throne is safe, everything else is a
matter of indifference to me.”

Athos turned pale and laid his hand on his heart.

“Well!” exclaimed the queen, who remarked this movement and his
paleness. “Speak, sir! I beg you to do so.”

“I beg you to excuse me, madame; I wish to add nothing to the recital
of these gentlemen until they perceive themselves that they have
perhaps been mistaken.”

“Mistaken!” cried the queen, almost suffocated by emotion; “mistaken!
what has happened, then?”

“Sir,” interposed Monsieur de Flamarens to Athos, “if we are mistaken
the error has originated with the queen. I do not suppose you will have
the presumption to set it to rights—that would be to accuse Her
Majesty, Queen Anne, of falsehood.”

“With the queen, sir?” replied Athos, in his calm, vibrating voice.

“Yes,” murmured Flamarens, lowering his eyes.

Athos sighed deeply.

“Or rather, sir,” said Aramis, with his peculiar irritating politeness,
“the error of the person who was with you when we met you in the
guardroom; for if the Comte de la Fere and I are not mistaken, we saw
you in the company of a third gentleman.”

Chatillon and Flamarens started.

“Explain yourself, count!” cried the queen, whose anxiety grew greater
every moment. “On your brow I read despair—your lips falter ere you
announce some terrible tidings—your hands tremble. Oh, my God! my God!
what has happened?”

“Lord!” ejaculated the young princess, falling on her knees, “have
mercy on us!”

“Sir,” said Chatillon, “if you bring bad tidings it will be cruel in
you to announce them to the queen.”

Aramis went so close to Chatillon as almost to touch him.

“Sir,” said he, with compressed lips and flashing eyes, “you have not
the presumption to instruct the Comte de la Fere and myself what we
ought to say here?”

During this brief altercation Athos, with his hands on his heart, his
head bent low, approached the queen and in a voice of deepest sorrow
said:

“Madame, princes—who by nature are above other men—receive from Heaven
courage to support greater misfortunes than those of lower rank, for
their hearts are elevated as their fortunes. We ought not, therefore, I
think, to act toward a queen so illustrious as your majesty as we
should act toward a woman of our lowlier condition. Queen, destined as
you are to endure every sorrow on this earth, hear the result of our
unhappy mission.”

Athos, kneeling down before the queen, trembling and very cold, drew
from his bosom, inclosed in the same case, the order set in diamonds
which the queen had given to Lord de Winter and the wedding ring which
Charles I. before his death had placed in the hands of Aramis. Since
the moment he had first received these two mementoes Athos had never
parted with them.

He opened the case and offered them to the queen with deep and silent
anguish.

The queen stretched out her hand, seized the ring, pressed it
convulsively to her lips—and without being able to breathe a sigh, to
give vent to a sob, she extended her arms, became deadly pale, and fell
senseless in the arms of her attendants and her daughter.

Athos kissed the hem of the robe of the widowed queen and rising, with
a dignity that made a deep impression on those around:

“I, the Comte de la Fere, a gentleman who has never deceived any human
being, swear before God and before this unhappy queen, that all that
was possible to save the king of England was done whilst we were on
English ground. Now, chevalier,” he added, turning to Aramis, “let us
go. Our duty is fulfilled.”

“Not yet.” said Aramis; “we have still a word to say to these
gentlemen.”

And turning to Chatillon: “Sir, be so good as not to go away without
giving me an opportunity to tell you something I cannot say before the
queen.”

Chatillon bowed in token of assent and they all went out, stopping at
the window of a gallery on the ground floor.

“Sir,” said Aramis, “you allowed yourself just now to treat us in a
most extraordinary manner. That would not be endurable in any case, and
is still less so on the part of those who came to bring the queen the
message of a liar.”

“Sir!” cried De Chatillon.

“What have you done with Monsieur de Bruy? Has he by any possibility
gone to change his face which was too like that of Monsieur de Mazarin?
There is an abundance of Italian masks at the Palais Royal, from
harlequin even to pantaloon.”

“Chevalier! chevalier!” said Athos.

“Leave me alone,” said Aramis impatiently. “You know well that I don’t
like to leave things half finished.”

“Conclude, then, sir,” answered De Chatillon, with as much hauteur as
Aramis.

“Gentlemen,” resumed Aramis, “any one but the Comte de la Fere and
myself would have had you arrested—for we have friends in Paris—but we
are contented with another course. Come and converse with us for just
five minutes, sword in hand, upon this deserted terrace.”

“One moment, gentlemen,” cried Flamarens. “I know well that the
proposition is tempting, but at present it is impossible to accept it.”

“And why not?” said Aramis, in his tone of raillery. “Is it Mazarin’s
proximity that makes you so prudent?”

“Oh, you hear that, Flamarens!” said Chatillon. “Not to reply would be
a blot on my name and my honor.”

“That is my opinion,” said Aramis.

“You will not reply, however, and these gentlemen, I am sure, will
presently be of my opinion.”

Aramis shook his head with a motion of indescribable insolence.

Chatillon saw the motion and put his hand to his sword.

“Willingly,” replied De Chatillon.

“Duke,” said Flamarens, “you forget that to-morrow you are to command
an expedition of the greatest importance, projected by the prince,
assented to by the queen. Until to-morrow evening you are not at your
own disposal.”

“Let it be then the day after to-morrow,” said Aramis.

“To-morrow, rather,” said De Chatillon, “if you will take the trouble
of coming so far as the gates of Charenton.”

“How can you doubt it, sir? For the pleasure of a meeting with you I
would go to the end of the world.”

“Very well, to-morrow, sir.”

“I shall rely on it. Are you going to rejoin your cardinal? Swear
first, on your honor, not to inform him of our return.”

“Conditions?”

“Why not?”

“Because it is for victors to make conditions, and you are not yet
victors, gentlemen.”

“Then let us draw on the spot. It is all one to us—to us who do not
command to-morrow’s expedition.”

Chatillon and Flamarens looked at each other. There was such irony in
the words and in the bearing of Aramis that the duke had great
difficulty in bridling his anger, but at a word from Flamarens he
restrained himself and contented himself with saying:

“You promise, sir—that’s agreed—that I shall find you to-morrow at
Charenton?”

“Oh, don’t be afraid, sir,” replied Aramis; and the two gentlemen
shortly afterward left the Louvre.

“For what reason is all this fume and fury?” asked Athos. “What have
they done to you?”

“They—did you not see what they did?”

“No.”

“They laughed when we swore that we had done our duty in England. Now,
if they believed us, they laughed in order to insult us; if they did
not believe it they insulted us all the more. However, I’m glad not to
fight them until to-morrow. I hope we shall have something better to do
to-night than to draw the sword.”

“What have we to do?”

“Egad! to take Mazarin.”

Athos curled his lip with disdain.

“These undertakings do not suit me, as you know, Aramis.”

“Why?”

“Because it is taking people unawares.”

“Really, Athos, you would make a singular general. You would fight only
by broad daylight, warn your foe before an attack, and never attempt
anything by night lest you should be accused of taking advantage of the
darkness.”

Athos smiled.

“You know one cannot change his nature,” he said. “Besides, do you know
what is our situation, and whether Mazarin’s arrest wouldn’t be rather
an encumbrance than an advantage?”

“Say at once you disapprove of my proposal.”

“I think you ought to do nothing, since you exacted a promise from
these gentlemen not to let Mazarin know that we were in France.”

“I have entered into no engagement and consider myself quite free.
Come, come.”

“Where?”

“Either to seek the Duc de Beaufort or the Duc de Bouillon, and to tell
them about this.”

“Yes, but on one condition—that we begin by the coadjutor. He is a
priest, learned in cases of conscience, and we will tell him ours.”

It was then agreed that they were to go first to Monsieur de Bouillon,
as his house came first; but first of all Athos begged that he might go
to the Hotel du Grand Charlemagne, to see Raoul.

They re-entered the boat which had brought them to the Louvre and
thence proceeded to the Halles; and taking up Grimaud and Blaisois,
they went on foot to the Rue Guenegaud.

But Raoul was not at the Hotel du Grand Charlemagne. He had received a
message from the prince, to whom he had hastened with Olivain the
instant he had received it.




Chapter LXXVII.
The three Lieutenants of the Generalissimo.


The night was dark, but still the town resounded with those noises that
disclose a city in a state of siege. Athos and Aramis did not proceed a
hundred steps without being stopped by sentinels placed before the
barricades, who demanded the watchword; and on their saying that they
were going to Monsieur de Bouillon on a mission of importance a guide
was given them under pretext of conducting them, but in fact as a spy
over their movements.

On arriving at the Hotel de Bouillon they came across a little troop of
three cavaliers, who seemed to know every possible password; for they
walked without either guide or escort, and on arriving at the
barricades had nothing to do but to speak to those who guarded them,
who instantly let them pass with evident deference, due probably to
their high birth.

On seeing them Athos and Aramis stood still.

“Oh!” cried Aramis, “do you see, count?”

“Yes,” said Athos.

“Who do these three cavaliers appear to you to be?”

“What do you think, Aramis?”

“Why, they are our men.”

“You are not mistaken; I recognize Monsieur de Flamarens.”

“And I, Monsieur de Chatillon.”

“As to the cavalier in the brown cloak——”

“It is the cardinal.”

“In person.”

“How the devil do they venture so near the Hotel de Bouillon?”

Athos smiled, but did not reply. Five minutes afterward they knocked at
the prince’s door.

This door was guarded by a sentinel and there was also a guard placed
in the courtyard, ready to obey the orders of the Prince de Conti’s
lieutenant.

Monsieur de Bouillon had the gout, but notwithstanding his illness,
which had prevented his mounting on horseback for the last month—-that
is, since Paris had been besieged—he was ready to receive the Comte de
la Fere and the Chevalier d’Herblay.

He was in bed, but surrounded with all the paraphernalia of war.
Everywhere were swords, pistols, cuirasses, and arquebuses, and it was
plain that as soon as his gout was better Monsieur de Bouillon would
give a pretty tangle to the enemies of the parliament to unravel.
Meanwhile, to his great regret, as he said, he was obliged to keep his
bed.

“Ah, gentlemen,” he cried, as the two friends entered, “you are very
happy! you can ride, you can go and come and fight for the cause of the
people. But I, as you see, am nailed to my bed—ah! this demon,
gout—this demon, gout!”

“My lord,” said Athos, “we are just arrived from England and our first
concern is to inquire after your health.”

“Thanks, gentlemen, thanks! As you see, my health is but indifferent.
But you come from England. And King Charles is well, as I have just
heard?”

“He is dead, my lord!” said Aramis.

“Pooh!” said the duke, too much astonished to believe it true.

“Dead on the scaffold; condemned by parliament.”

“Impossible!”

“And executed in our presence.”

“What, then, has Monsieur de Flamarens been telling me?”

“Monsieur de Flamarens?”

“Yes, he has just gone out.”

Athos smiled. “With two companions?” he said.

“With two companions, yes,” replied the duke. Then he added with a
certain uneasiness, “Did you meet them?”

“Why, yes, I think so—in the street,” said Athos; and he looked
smilingly at Aramis, who looked at him with an expression of surprise.

“The devil take this gout!” cried Monsieur de Bouillon, evidently ill
at ease.

“My lord,” said Athos, “we admire your devotion to the cause you have
espoused, in remaining at the head of the army whilst so ill, in so
much pain.”

“One must,” replied Monsieur de Bouillon, “sacrifice one’s comfort to
the public good; but I confess to you I am now almost exhausted. My
spirit is willing, my head is clear, but this demon, the gout,
o’ercrows me. I confess, if the court would do justice to my claims and
give the head of my house the title of prince, and if my brother De
Turenne were reinstated in his command I would return to my estates and
leave the court and parliament to settle things between themselves as
they might.”

“You are perfectly right, my lord.”

“You think so? At this very moment the court is making overtures to me;
hitherto I have repulsed them; but since such men as you assure me that
I am wrong in doing so, I’ve a good mind to follow your advice and to
accept a proposition made to me by the Duc de Chatillon just now.”

“Accept it, my lord, accept it,” said Aramis.

“Faith! yes. I am even sorry that this evening I almost repulsed—but
there will be a conference to-morrow and we shall see.”

The two friends saluted the duke.

“Go, gentlemen,” he said; “you must be much fatigued after your voyage.
Poor King Charles! But, after all, he was somewhat to blame in all that
business and we may console ourselves with the reflection that France
has no cause of reproach in the matter and did all she could to serve
him.”

“Oh! as to that,” said Aramis, “we are witnesses. Mazarin especially——”

“Yes, do you know, I am very glad to hear you give that testimony; the
cardinal has some good in him, and if he were not a foreigner—well, he
would be more justly estimated. Oh! the devil take this gout!”

Athos and Aramis took their leave, but even in the ante-chamber they
could still hear the duke’s cries; he was evidently suffering the
tortures of the damned.

When they reached the street, Aramis said:

“Well, Athos, what do you think?”

“Of whom?”

“Pardieu! of Monsieur de Bouillon.”

“My friend, I think that he is much troubled with gout.”

“You noticed that I didn’t breathe a word as to the purpose of our
visit?”

“You did well; you would have caused him an access of his disease. Let
us go to Monsieur de Beaufort.”

The two friends went to the Hotel de Vendome. It was ten o’clock when
they arrived. The Hotel de Vendome was not less guarded than the Hotel
de Bouillon, and presented as warlike an appearance. There were
sentinels, a guard in the court, stacks of arms, and horses saddled.
Two horsemen going out as Athos and Aramis entered were obliged to give
place to them.

“Ah! ah! gentlemen,” said Aramis, “decidedly it is a night for
meetings. We shall be very unfortunate if, after meeting so often this
evening, we should not succeed in meeting to-morrow.”

“Oh, as to that, sir,” replied Chatillon (for it was he who, with
Flamarens, was leaving the Duc de Beaufort), “you may be assured; for
if we meet by night without seeking each other, much more shall we meet
by day when wishing it.”

“I hope that is true,” said Aramis.

“As for me, I am sure of it,” said the duke.

De Flamarens and De Chatillon continued on their way and Athos and
Aramis dismounted.

Hardly had they given the bridles of their horses to their lackeys and
rid themselves of their cloaks when a man approached them, and after
looking at them for an instant by the doubtful light of the lantern
hung in the centre of the courtyard he uttered an exclamation of joy
and ran to embrace them.

“Comte de la Fere!” the man cried out; “Chevalier d’Herblay! How does
it happen that you are in Paris?”

“Rochefort!” cried the two friends.

“Yes! we arrived four or five days ago from the Vendomois, as you know,
and we are going to give Mazarin something to do. You are still with
us, I presume?”

“More than ever. And the duke?”

“Furious against the cardinal. You know his success—our dear duke? He
is really king of Paris; he can’t go out without being mobbed by his
admirers.”

“Ah! so much the better! Can we have the honor of seeing his highness?”

“I shall be proud to present you,” and Rochefort walked on. Every door
was opened to him. Monsieur de Beaufort was at supper, but he rose
quickly on hearing the two friends announced.

“Ah!” he cried, “by Jove! you’re welcome, sirs. You are coming to sup
with me, are you not? Boisgoli, tell Noirmont that I have two guests.
You know Noirmont, do you not? The successor of Father Marteau who
makes the excellent pies you know of. Boisgoli, let him send one of his
best, but not such a one as he made for La Ramee. Thank God! we don’t
want either rope ladders or gag-pears now.”

“My lord,” said Athos, “do not let us disturb you. We came merely to
inquire after your health and to take your orders.”

“As to my health, since it has stood five years of prison, with
Monsieur de Chavigny to boot, ’tis excellent! As to my orders, since
every one gives his own commands in our party, I shall end, if this
goes on, by giving none at all.”

“In short, my lord,” said Athos, glancing at Aramis, “your highness is
discontented with your party?”

“Discontented, sir! say my highness is furious! To such a degree, I
assure you, though I would not say so to others, that if the queen,
acknowledging the injuries she has done me, would recall my mother and
give me the reversion of the admiralty, which belonged to my father and
was promised me at his death, well! it would not be long before I
should be training dogs to say that there were greater traitors in
France than the Cardinal Mazarin!”

At this Athos and Aramis could not help exchanging not only a look but
a smile; and had they not known it for a fact, this would have told
them that De Chatillon and De Flamarens had been there.

“My lord,” said Athos, “we are satisfied; we came here only to express
our loyalty and to say that we are at your lordship’s service and his
most faithful servants.”

“My most faithful friends, gentlemen, my most faithful friends; you
have proved it. And if ever I am reconciled with the court I shall
prove to you, I hope, that I remain your friend, as well as that
of—what the devil are their names—D’Artagnan and Porthos?”

“D’Artagnan and Porthos.”

“Ah, yes. You understand, then, Comte de la Fere, you understand,
Chevalier d’Herblay, that I am altogether and always at your service.”

Athos and Aramis bowed and went out.

“My dear Athos,” cried Aramis, “I think you consented to accompany me
only to give me a lesson—God forgive me!”

“Wait a little, Aramis; it will be time for you to perceive my motive
when we have paid our visit to the coadjutor.”

“Let us then go to the archiepiscopal palace,” said Aramis.

They directed their horses to the city. On arriving at the cradle from
which Paris sprang they found it inundated with water, and it was again
necessary to take a boat. The palace rose from the bosom of the water,
and to see the number of boats around it one would have fancied one’s
self not in Paris, but in Venice. Some of these boats were dark and
mysterious, others noisy and lighted up with torches. The friends slid
in through this congestion of embarkation and landed in their turn. The
palace was surrounded with water, but a kind of staircase had been
fixed to the lower walls; and the only difference was, that instead of
entering by the doors, people entered by the windows.

Thus did Athos and Aramis make their appearance in the ante-chamber,
where about a dozen noblemen were collected in waiting.

“Good heavens!” said Aramis to Athos, “does the coadjutor intend to
indulge himself in the pleasure of making us cool our hearts off in his
ante-chamber?”

“My dear friend, we must take people as we find them. The coadjutor is
at this moment one of the seven kings of Paris, and has a court. Let us
send in our names, and if he does not send us a suitable message we
will leave him to his own affairs or those of France. Let us call one
of these lackeys, with a demi-pistole in the left hand.”

“Exactly so,” cried Aramis. “Ah! if I’m not mistaken here’s Bazin. Come
here, fellow.”

Bazin, who was crossing the ante-chamber majestically in his clerical
dress, turned around to see who the impertinent gentleman was who thus
addressed him; but seeing his friends he went up to them quickly and
expressed delight at seeing them.

“A truce to compliments,” said Aramis; “we want to see the coadjutor,
and instantly, as we are in haste.”

“Certainly, sir—it is not such lords as you are who are allowed to wait
in the ante-chamber, only just now he has a secret conference with
Monsieur de Bruy.”

“De Bruy!” cried the friends, “’tis then useless our seeing monsieur
the coadjutor this evening,” said Aramis, “so we give it up.”

And they hastened to quit the palace, followed by Bazin, who was lavish
of bows and compliments.

“Well,” said Athos, when Aramis and he were in the boat again, “are you
beginning to be convinced that we should have done a bad turn to all
these people in arresting Mazarin?”

“You are wisdom incarnate, Athos,” Aramis replied.

What had especially been observed by the two friends was the little
interest taken by the court of France in the terrible events which had
occurred in England, which they thought should have arrested the
attention of all Europe.

In fact, aside from a poor widow and a royal orphan who wept in the
corner of the Louvre, no one appeared to be aware that Charles I. had
ever lived and that he had perished on the scaffold.

The two friends made an appointment for ten o’clock on the following
day; for though the night was well advanced when they reached the door
of the hotel, Aramis said that he had certain important visits to make
and left Athos to enter alone.

At ten o’clock the next day they met again. Athos had been out since
six o’clock.

“Well, have you any news?” Athos asked.

“Nothing. No one has seen D’Artagnan and Porthos has not appeared. Have
you anything?”

“Nothing.”

“The devil!” said Aramis.

“In fact,” said Athos, “this delay is not natural; they took the
shortest route and should have arrived before we did.”

“Add to that D’Artagnan’s rapidity in action and that he is not the man
to lose an hour, knowing that we were expecting him.”

“He expected, you will remember, to be here on the fifth.”

“And here we are at the ninth. This evening the margin of possible
delay expires.”

“What do you think should be done,” asked Athos, “if we have no news of
them to-night?”

“Pardieu! we must go and look for them.”

“All right,” said Athos.

“But Raoul?” said Aramis.

A light cloud passed over the count’s face.

“Raoul gives me much uneasiness,” he said. “He received yesterday a
message from the Prince de Condé; he went to meet him at Saint Cloud
and has not returned.”

“Have you seen Madame de Chevreuse?”

“She was not at home. And you, Aramis, you were going, I think, to
visit Madame de Longueville.”

“I did go there.”

“Well?”

“She was no longer there, but she had left her new address.”

“Where was she?”

“Guess; I give you a thousand chances.”

“How should I know where the most beautiful and active of the Frondists
was at midnight? for I presume it was when you left me that you went to
visit her.”

“At the Hotel de Ville, my dear fellow.”

“What! at the Hotel de Ville? Has she, then, been appointed provost of
merchants?”

“No; but she has become queen of Paris, ad interim, and since she could
not venture at once to establish herself in the Palais Royal or the
Tuileries, she is installed at the Hotel de Ville, where she is on the
point of giving an heir or an heiress to that dear duke.”

“You didn’t tell me of that, Aramis.”

“Really? It was my forgetfulness then; pardon me.”

“Now,” asked Athos, “what are we to do with ourselves till evening?
Here we are without occupation, it seems to me.”

“You forget, my friend, that we have work cut out for us in the
direction of Charenton; I hope to see Monsieur de Chatillon, whom I’ve
hated for a long time, there.”

“Why have you hated him?”

“Because he is the brother of Coligny.”

“Ah, true! he who presumed to be a rival of yours, for which he was
severely punished; that ought to satisfy you.”

“‘Yes, but it does not; I am rancorous—the only stigma that proves me
to be a churchman. Do you understand? You understand that you are in no
way obliged to go with me.”

“Come, now,” said Athos, “you are joking.”

“In that case, my dear friend, if you are resolved to accompany me
there is no time to lose; the drum beats; I observed cannon on the
road; I saw the citizens in order of battle on the Place of the Hotel
de Ville; certainly the fight will be in the direction of Charenton, as
the Duc de Chatillon said.”

“I supposed,” said Athos, “that last night’s conferences would modify
those warlike arrangements.”

“No doubt; but they will fight, none the less, if only to mask the
conferences.”

“Poor creatures!” said Athos, “who are going to be killed, in order
that Monsieur de Bouillon may have his estate at Sedan restored to him,
that the reversion of the admiralty may be given to the Duc de
Beaufort, and that the coadjutor may be made a cardinal.”

“Come, come, dear Athos, confess that you would not be so philosophical
if your Raoul were to be involved in this affair.”

“Perhaps you speak the truth, Aramis.”

“Well, let us go, then, where the fighting is, for that is the most
likely place to meet with D’Artagnan, Porthos, and possibly even Raoul.
Stop, there are a fine body of citizens passing; quite attractive, by
Jupiter! and their captain—see! he has the true military style.”

“What, ho!” said Grimaud.

“What?” asked Athos.

“Planchet, sir.”

“Lieutenant yesterday,” said Aramis, “captain to-day, colonel,
doubtless, to-morrow; in a fortnight the fellow will be marshal of
France.”

“Question him about the fight,” said Athos.

Planchet, prouder than ever of his new duties, deigned to explain to
the two gentlemen that he was ordered to take up his position on the
Place Royale with two hundred men, forming the rear of the army of
Paris, and to march on Charenton when necessary.

“This day will be a warm one,” said Planchet, in a warlike tone.

“No doubt,” said Aramis, “but it is far from here to the enemy.”

“Sir, the distance will be diminished,” said a subordinate.

Aramis saluted, then turning toward Athos:

“I don’t care to camp on the Place Royale with all these people,” he
said. “Shall we go forward? We shall see better what is going on.”

“And then Monsieur de Chatillon will not come to the Place Royale to
look for you. Come, then, my friend, we will go forward.”

“Haven’t you something to say to Monsieur de Flamarens on your own
account?”

“My friend,” said Athos, “I have made a resolution never to draw my
sword save when it is absolutely necessary.”

“And how long ago was that?”

“When I last drew my poniard.”

“Ah! Good! another souvenir of Monsieur Mordaunt. Well, my friend,
nothing now is lacking except that you should feel remorse for having
killed that fellow.”

“Hush!” said Athos, putting a finger on his lips, with the sad smile
peculiar to him; “let us talk no more of Mordaunt—it will bring bad
luck.” And Athos set forward toward Charenton, followed closely by
Aramis.




Chapter LXXVIII.
The Battle of Charenton.


As Athos and Aramis proceeded, and passed different companies on the
road, they became aware that they were arriving near the field of
battle.

“Ah! my friend!” cried Athos, suddenly, “where have you brought us? I
fancy I perceive around us faces of different officers in the royal
army; is not that the Duc de Chatillon himself coming toward us with
his brigadiers?”

“Good-day, sirs,” said the duke, advancing; “you are puzzled by what
you see here, but one word will explain everything. There is now a
truce and a conference. The prince, Monsieur de Retz, the Duc de
Beaufort, the Duc de Bouillon, are talking over public affairs. Now one
of two things must happen: either matters will not be arranged, or they
will be arranged, in which last case I shall be relieved of my command
and we shall still meet again.”

“Sir,” said Aramis, “you speak to the point. Allow me to ask you a
question: Where are the plenipotentiaries?”

“At Charenton, in the second house on the right on entering from the
direction of Paris.”

“And was this conference arranged beforehand?”

“No, gentlemen, it seems to be the result of certain propositions which
Mazarin made last night to the Parisians.”

Athos and Aramis exchanged smiles; for they well knew what those
propositions were, to whom they had been made and who had made them.

“And that house in which the plenipotentiaries are,” asked Athos,
“belongs to——”

“To Monsieur de Chanleu, who commands your troops at Charenton. I say
your troops, for I presume that you gentlemen are Frondeurs?”

“Yes, almost,” said Aramis.

“We are for the king and the princes,” added Athos.

“We must understand each other,” said the duke. “The king is with us
and his generals are the Duke of Orleans and the Prince de Condé,
although I must add ’tis almost impossible now to know to which party
any one belongs.”

“Yes,” answered Athos, “but his right place is in our ranks, with the
Prince de Conti, De Beaufort, D’Elbeuf, and De Bouillon; but, sir,
supposing that the conference is broken off—are you going to try to
take Charenton?”

“Such are my orders.”

“Sir, since you command the cavalry——”

“Pardon me, I am commander-in-chief.”

“So much the better. You must know all your officers—I mean those more
distinguished.”

“Why, yes, very nearly.”

“Will you then kindly tell me if you have in your command the Chevalier
d’Artagnan, lieutenant in the musketeers?”

“No, sir, he is not with us; he left Paris more than six weeks ago and
is believed to have gone on a mission to England.”

“I knew that, but I supposed he had returned.”

“No, sir; no one has seen him. I can answer positively on that point,
for the musketeers belong to our forces and Monsieur de Cambon, the
substitute for Monsieur d’Artagnan, still holds his place.”

The two friends looked at each other.

“You see,” said Athos.

“It is strange,” said Aramis.

“It is absolutely certain that some misfortune has happened to them on
the way.”

“If we have no news of them this evening, to-morrow we must start.”

Athos nodded affirmatively, then turning:

“And Monsieur de Bragelonne, a young man fifteen years of age, attached
to the Prince de Condé—has he the honor of being known to you?”
diffident in allowing the sarcastic Aramis to perceive how strong were
his paternal feelings.

“Yes, surely, he came with the prince; a charming young man; he is one
of your friends then, monsieur le comte?”

“Yes, sir,” answered Athos, agitated; “so much so that I wish to see
him if possible.”

“Quite possible, sir; do me the favor to accompany me and I will
conduct you to headquarters.”

“Halloo, there!” cried Aramis, turning around; “what a noise behind
us!”

“A body of cavaliers is coming toward us,” said Chatillon.

“I recognize the coadjutor by his Frondist hat.”

“And I the Duc de Beaufort by his white plume of ostrich feathers.”

“They are coming, full gallop; the prince is with them—ah! he is
leaving them!”

“They are beating the rappel!” cried Chatillon; “we must discover what
is going on.”

In fact, they saw the soldiers running to their arms; the trumpets
sounded; the drums beat; the Duc de Beaufort drew his sword. On his
side the prince sounded a rappel and all the officers of the royalist
army, mingling momentarily with the Parisian troops, ran to him.

“Gentlemen,” cried Chatillon, “the truce is broken, that is evident;
they are going to fight; go, then, into Charenton, for I shall begin in
a short time—there’s a signal from the prince!”

The cornet of a troop had in fact just raised the standard of the
prince.

“Farewell, till the next time we meet,” cried Chatillon, and he set
off, full gallop.

Athos and Aramis turned also and went to salute the coadjutor and the
Duc de Beaufort. As to the Duc de Bouillon, he had such a fit of gout
as obliged him to return to Paris in a litter; but his place was well
filled by the Duc d’Elbeuf and his four sons, ranged around him like a
staff. Meantime, between Charenton and the royal army was left a space
which looked ready to serve as a last resting place for the dead.

“Gentlemen,” cried the coadjutor, tightening his sash, which he wore,
after the fashion of the ancient military prelates, over his
archiepiscopal simar, “there’s the enemy approaching. Let us save them
half of their journey.”

And without caring whether he were followed or not he set off; his
regiment, which bore the name of the regiment of Corinth, from the name
of his archbishopric, darted after him and began the fight. Monsieur de
Beaufort sent his cavalry, toward Etampes and Monsieur de Chanleu, who
defended the place, was ready to resist an assault, or if the enemy
were repulsed, to attempt a sortie.

The battle soon became general and the coadjutor performed miracles of
valor. His proper vocation had always been the sword and he was
delighted whenever he could draw it from the scabbard, no matter for
whom or against whom.

Chanleu, whose fire at one time repulsed the royal regiment, thought
that the moment was come to pursue it; but it was reformed and led
again to the charge by the Duc de Chatillon in person. This charge was
so fierce, so skillfully conducted, that Chanleu was almost surrounded.
He commanded a retreat, which began, step by step, foot by foot;
unhappily, in an instant he fell, mortally wounded. De Chatillon saw
him fall and announced it in a loud voice to his men, which raised
their spirits and completely disheartened their enemies, so that every
man thought only of his own safety and tried to gain the trenches,
where the coadjutor was trying to reform his disorganized regiment.

Suddenly a squadron of cavalry galloped up to encounter the royal
troops, who were entering, pele-mele, the intrenchments with the
fugitives. Athos and Aramis charged at the head of their squadrons;
Aramis with sword and pistol in his hands, Athos with his sword in his
scabbard, his pistol in his saddle-bags; calm and cool as if on the
parade, except that his noble and beautiful countenance became sad as
he saw slaughtered so many men who were sacrificed on the one side to
the obstinacy of royalty and on the other to the personal rancor of the
princes. Aramis, on the contrary, struck right and left and was almost
delirious with excitement. His bright eyes kindled, and his mouth, so
finely formed, assumed a wicked smile; every blow he aimed was sure,
and his pistol finished the deed—annihilated the wounded wretch who
tried to rise again.

On the opposite side two cavaliers, one covered with a gilt cuirass,
the other wearing simply a buff doublet, from which fell the sleeves of
a vest of blue velvet, charged in front. The cavalier in the gilt
cuirass fell upon Aramis and struck a blow that Aramis parried with his
wonted skill.

“Ah! ’tis you, Monsieur de Chatillon,” cried the chevalier; “welcome to
you—I expected you.”

“I hope I have not made you wait too long, sir,” said the duke; “at all
events, here I am.”

“Monsieur de Chatillon,” cried Aramis, taking from his saddle-bags a
second pistol, “I think if your pistols have been discharged you are a
dead man.”

“Thank God, sir, they are not!”

And the duke, pointing his pistol at Aramis, fired. But Aramis bent his
head the instant he saw the duke’s finger press the trigger and the
ball passed without touching him.

“Oh! you’ve missed me,” cried Aramis, “but I swear to Heaven! I will
not miss you.”

“If I give you time!” cried the duke, spurring on his horse and rushing
upon him with his drawn sword.

Aramis awaited him with that terrible smile which was peculiar to him
on such occasions, and Athos, who saw the duke advancing toward Aramis
with the rapidity of lightning, was just going to cry out, “Fire! fire,
then!” when the shot was fired. De Chatillon opened his arms and fell
back on the crupper of his horse.

The ball had entered his breast through a notch in the cuirass.

“I am a dead man,” he said, and fell from his horse to the ground.

“I told you this, I am now grieved I have kept my word. Can I be of any
use to you?”

Chatillon made a sign with his hand and Aramis was about to dismount
when he received a violent shock; ’twas a thrust from a sword, but his
cuirass turned aside the blow.

He turned around and seized his new antagonist by the wrist, when he
started back, exclaiming, “Raoul!”

“Raoul?” cried Athos.

The young man recognized at the same instant the voices of his father
and the Chevalier d’Herblay; two officers in the Parisian forces rushed
at that instant on Raoul, but Aramis protected him with his sword.

“My prisoner!” he cried.

Athos took his son’s horse by the bridle and led him forth out of the
melee.

At this crisis of the battle, the prince, who had been seconding De
Chatillon in the second line, appeared in the midst of the fight; his
eagle eye made him known and his blows proclaimed the hero.

On seeing him, the regiment of Corinth, which the coadjutor had not
been able to reorganize in spite of all his efforts, threw itself into
the midst of the Parisian forces, put them into confusion and
re-entered Charenton flying. The coadjutor, dragged along with his
fugitive forces, passed near the group formed by Athos, Raoul and
Aramis. Aramis could not in his jealousy avoid being pleased at the
coadjutor’s misfortune, and was about to utter some bon mot more witty
than correct, when Athos stopped him.

“On, on!” he cried, “this is no moment for compliments; or rather,
back, for the battle seems to be lost by the Frondeurs.”

“It is a matter of indifference to me,” said Aramis; “I came here only
to meet De Chatillon; I have met him, I am contented; ’tis something to
have met De Chatillon in a duel!”

“And besides, we have a prisoner,” said Athos, pointing to Raoul.

The three cavaliers continued their road on full gallop.

“What were you doing in the battle, my friend?” inquired Athos of the
youth; “’twas not your right place, I think, as you were not equipped
for an engagement!”

“I had no intention of fighting to-day, sir; I was charged, indeed,
with a mission to the cardinal and had set out for Rueil, when, seeing
Monsieur de Chatillon charge, an invincible desire possessed me to
charge at his side. It was then that he told me two cavaliers of the
Parisian army were seeking me and named the Comte de la Fere.”

“What! you knew we were there and yet wished to kill your friend the
chevalier?”

“I did not recognize the chevalier in armor, sir!” said Raoul,
blushing; “though I might have known him by his skill and coolness in
danger.”

“Thank you for the compliment, my young friend,” replied Aramis, “we
can see from whom you learned courtesy. Then you were going to Rueil?”

“Yes! I have a despatch from the prince to his eminence.”

“You must still deliver it,” said Athos.

“No false generosity, count! the fate of our friends, to say nothing of
our own, is perhaps in that very despatch.”

“This young man must not, however, fail in his duty,” said Athos.

“In the first place, count, this youth is our prisoner; you seem to
forget that. What I propose to do is fair in war; the vanquished must
not be dainty in the choice of means. Give me the despatch, Raoul.”

The young man hesitated and looked at Athos as if seeking to read in
his eyes a rule of conduct.

“Give him the despatch, Raoul! you are the chevalier’s prisoner.”

Raoul gave it up reluctantly; Aramis instantly seized and read it.

“You,” he said, “you, who are so trusting, read and reflect that there
is something in this letter important for us to see.”

Athos took the letter, frowning, but an idea that he should find
something in this letter about D’Artagnan conquered his unwillingness
to read it.

“My lord, I shall send this evening to your eminence in order to
reinforce the troop of Monsieur de Comminges, the ten men you demand.
They are good soldiers, fit to confront the two violent adversaries
whose address and resolution your eminence is fearful of.”

“Oh!” cried Athos.

“Well,” said Aramis, “what think you about these two enemies whom it
requires, besides Comminges’s troop, ten good soldiers to confront; are
they not as like as two drops of water to D’Artagnan and Porthos?”

“We’ll search Paris all day long,” said Athos, “and if we have no news
this evening we will return to the road to Picardy; and I feel no doubt
that, thanks to D’Artagnan’s ready invention, we shall then find some
clew which will solve our doubts.”

“Yes, let us search Paris and especially inquire of Planchet if he has
yet heard from his former master.”

“That poor Planchet! You speak of him very much at your ease, Aramis;
he has probably been killed. All those fighting citizens went out to
battle and they have been massacred.”

It was, then, with a sentiment of uneasiness whether Planchet, who
alone could give them information, was alive or dead, that the friends
returned to the Place Royale; to their great surprise they found the
citizens still encamped there, drinking and bantering each other,
although, doubtless, mourned by their families, who thought they were
at Charenton in the thickest of the fighting.

Athos and Aramis again questioned Planchet, but he had seen nothing of
D’Artagnan; they wished to take Planchet with them, but he could not
leave his troop, who at five o’clock returned home, saying that they
were returning from the battle, whereas they had never lost sight of
the bronze equestrian statue of Louis XIII.




Chapter LXXIX.
The Road to Picardy.


On leaving Paris, Athos and Aramis well knew that they would be
encountering great danger; but we know that for men like these there
could be no question of danger. Besides, they felt that the
_dénouement_ of this second Odyssey was at hand and that there remained
but a single effort to make.

Besides, there was no tranquillity in Paris itself. Provisions began to
fail, and whenever one of the Prince de Conti’s generals wished to gain
more influence he got up a little popular tumult, which he put down
again, and thus for the moment gained a superiority over his
colleagues.

In one of these risings, the Duc de Beaufort pillaged the house and
library of Mazarin, in order to give the populace, as he put it,
something to gnaw at. Athos and Aramis left Paris after this
coup-d’etat, which took place on the very evening of the day in which
the Parisians had been beaten at Charenton.

They quitted Paris, beholding it abandoned to extreme want, bordering
on famine; agitated by fear, torn by faction. Parisians and Frondeurs
as they were, the two friends expected to find the same misery, the
same fears, the same intrigue in the enemy’s camp; but what was their
surprise, after passing Saint Denis, to hear that at Saint Germain
people were singing and laughing, and leading generally cheerful lives.
The two gentlemen traveled by byways in order not to encounter the
Mazarinists scattered about the Isle of France, and also to escape the
Frondeurs, who were in possession of Normandy and who never failed to
conduct captives to the Duc de Longueville, in order that he might
ascertain whether they were friends or foes. Having escaped these
dangers, they returned by the main road to Boulogne, at Abbeville, and
followed it step by step, examining every track.

Nevertheless, they were still in a state of uncertainty. Several inns
were visited by them, several innkeepers questioned, without a single
clew being given to guide their inquiries, when at Montreuil Athos felt
upon the table that something rough was touching his delicate fingers.
He turned up the cloth and found these hieroglyphics carved upon the
wood with a knife:

“Port.... D’Art.... 2d February.”

“This is capital!” said Athos to Aramis, “we were to have slept here,
but we cannot—we must push on.” They rode forward and reached
Abbeville. There the great number of inns puzzled them; they could not
go to all; how could they guess in which those whom they were seeking
had stayed?

“Trust me,” said Aramis, “do not expect to find anything in Abbeville.
If we had only been looking for Porthos, Porthos would have stationed
himself in one of the finest hotels and we could easily have traced
him. But D’Artagnan is devoid of such weaknesses. Porthos would have
found it very difficult even to make him see that he was dying of
hunger; he has gone on his road as inexorable as fate and we must seek
him somewhere else.”

They continued their route. It had now become a weary and almost
hopeless task, and had it not been for the threefold motives of honor,
friendship and gratitude, implanted in their hearts, our two travelers
would have given up many a time their rides over the sand, their
interrogatories of the peasantry and their close inspection of faces.

They proceeded thus to Peronne.

Athos began to despair. His noble nature felt that their ignorance was
a sort of reflection upon them. They had not looked carefully enough
for their lost friends. They had not shown sufficient pertinacity in
their inquiries. They were willing and ready to retrace their steps,
when, in crossing the suburb which leads to the gates of the town, upon
a white wall which was at the corner of a street turning around the
rampart, Athos cast his eyes upon a drawing in black chalk, which
represented, with the awkwardness of a first attempt, two cavaliers
riding furiously; one of them carried a roll of paper on which were
written these words: “They are following us.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Athos, “here it is, as clear as day; pursued as he was,
D’Artagnan would not have tarried here five minutes had he been pressed
very closely, which gives us hopes that he may have succeeded in
escaping.”

Aramis shook his head.

“Had he escaped we should either have seen him or have heard him spoken
of.”

“You are right, Aramis, let us travel on.”

To describe the impatience and anxiety of these two friends would be
impossible. Uneasiness took possession of the tender, constant heart of
Athos, and fearful forecasts were the torment of the impulsive Aramis.
They galloped on for two or three hours as furiously as the cavaliers
on the wall. All at once, in a narrow pass, they perceived that the
road was partially barricaded by an enormous stone. It had evidently
been rolled across the pass by some arm of giant strength.

Aramis stopped.

“Oh!” he said, looking at the stone, “this is the work of either
Hercules or Porthos. Let us get down, count, and examine this rock.”

They both alighted. The stone had been brought with the evident
intention of barricading the road, but some one having perceived the
obstacle had partially turned it aside.

With the assistance of Blaisois and Grimaud the friends succeeded in
turning the stone over. Upon the side next the ground were scratched
the following words:

“Eight of the light dragoons are pursuing us. If we reach Compiegne we
shall stop at the Peacock. It is kept by a friend of ours.”

“At last we have something definite,” said Athos; “let us go to the
Peacock.”

“Yes,” answered Aramis, “but if we are to get there we must rest our
horses, for they are almost broken-winded.”

Aramis was right; they stopped at the first tavern and made each horse
swallow a double quantity of corn steeped in wine; they gave them three
hours’ rest and then set off again. The men themselves were almost dead
with fatigue, but hope supported them.

In six hours they reached Compiegne and alighted at the Peacock. The
host proved to be a worthy man, as bald as a Chinaman. They asked him
if some time ago he had not received in his house two gentlemen who
were pursued by dragoons; without answering he went out and brought in
the blade of a rapier.

“Do you know that?” he asked.

Athos merely glanced at it.

“’Tis D’Artagnan’s sword,” he said.

“Does it belong to the smaller or to the larger of the two?” asked the
host.

“To the smaller.”

“I see that you are the friends of these gentlemen.”

“Well, what has happened to them?”

“They were pursued by eight of the light dragoons, who rode into the
courtyard before they had time to close the gate.”

“Eight!” said Aramis; “it surprises me that two such heroes as Porthos
and D’Artagnan should have allowed themselves to be arrested by eight
men.”

“The eight men would doubtless have failed had they not been assisted
by twenty soldiers of the regiment of Italians in the king’s service,
who are in garrison in this town so that your friends were overpowered
by numbers.”

“Arrested, were they?” inquired Athos; “is it known why?”

“No, sir, they were carried off instantly, and had not even time to
tell me why; but as soon as they were gone I found this broken
sword-blade, as I was helping to raise two dead men and five or six
wounded ones.”

“’Tis still a consolation that they were not wounded,” said Aramis.

“Where were they taken?” asked Athos.

“Toward the town of Louvres,” was the reply.

The two friends having agreed to leave Blaisois and Grimaud at
Compiegne with the horses, resolved to take post horses; and having
snatched a hasty dinner they continued their journey to Louvres. Here
they found only one inn, in which was consumed a liqueur which
preserves its reputation to our time and which is still made in that
town.

“Let us alight here,” said Athos. “D’Artagnan will not have let slip an
opportunity of drinking a glass of this liqueur, and at the same time
leaving some trace of himself.”

They went into the town and asked for two glasses of liqueur, at the
counter—as their friends must have done before them. The counter was
covered with a plate of pewter; upon this plate was written with the
point of a large pin: “Rueil... D..”

“They went to Rueil,” cried Aramis.

“Let us go to Rueil,” said Athos.

“It is to throw ourselves into the wolf’s jaws,” said Aramis.

“Had I been as great a friend of Jonah as I am of D’Artagnan I should
have followed him even into the inside of the whale itself; and you
would have done the same, Aramis.”

“Certainly—but you make me out better than I am, dear count. Had I been
alone I should scarcely have gone to Rueil without great caution. But
where you go, I go.”

They then set off for Rueil. Here the deputies of the parliament had
just arrived, in order to enter upon those famous conferences which
were to last three weeks, and produced eventually that shameful peace,
at the conclusion of which the prince was arrested. Rueil was crowded
with advocates, presidents and councillors, who came from the
Parisians, and, on the side of the court, with officers and guards; it
was therefore easy, in the midst of this confusion, to remain as
unobserved as any one might wish; besides, the conferences implied a
truce, and to arrest two gentlemen, even Frondeurs, at this time, would
have been an attack on the rights of the people.

The two friends mingled with the crowd and fancied that every one was
occupied with the same thought that tormented them. They expected to
hear some mention made of D’Artagnan or of Porthos, but every one was
engrossed by articles and reforms. It was the advice of Athos to go
straight to the minister.

“My friend,” said Aramis, “take care; our safety lies in our obscurity.
If we were to make ourselves known we should be sent to rejoin our
friends in some deep ditch, from which the devil himself could not take
us out. Let us try not to find them out by accident, but from our
notions. Arrested at Compiegne, they have been carried to Rueil; at
Rueil they have been questioned by the cardinal, who has either kept
them near him or sent them to Saint Germain. As to the Bastile, they
are not there, though the Bastile is especially for the Frondeurs. They
are not dead, for the death of D’Artagnan would make a sensation. As
for Porthos, I believe him to be eternal, like God, although less
patient. Do not let us despond, but wait at Rueil, for my conviction is
that they are at Rueil. But what ails you? You are pale.”

“It is this,” answered Athos, with a trembling voice.

“I remember that at the Castle of Rueil the Cardinal Richelieu had some
horrible ‘oubliettes’ constructed.”

“Oh! never fear,” said Aramis. “Richelieu was a gentleman, our equal in
birth, our superior in position. He could, like the king, touch the
greatest of us on the head, and touching them make such heads shake on
their shoulders. But Mazarin is a low-born rogue, who can at the most
take us by the collar, like an archer. Be calm—for I am sure that
D’Artagnan and Porthos are at Rueil, alive and well.”

“But,” resumed Athos, “I recur to my first proposal. I know no better
means than to act with candor. I shall seek, not Mazarin, but the
queen, and say to her, ‘Madame, restore to us your two servants and our
two friends.’”

Aramis shook his head.

“’Tis a last resource, but let us not employ it till it is imperatively
called for; let us rather persevere in our researches.”

They continued their inquiries and at last met with a light dragoon who
had formed one of the guard which had escorted D’Artagnan to Rueil.

Athos, however, perpetually recurred to his proposed interview with the
queen.

“In order to see the queen,” said Aramis, “we must first see the
cardinal; and when we have seen the cardinal—remember what I tell you,
Athos—we shall be reunited to our friends, but not in the way you wish.
Now, that way of joining them is not very attractive to me, I confess.
Let us act in freedom, that we may act well and quickly.”

“I shall go,” he said, “to the queen.”

“Well, then,” answered Aramis, “pray tell me a day or two beforehand,
that I may take that opportunity of going to Paris.”

“To whom?”

“Zounds! how do I know? perhaps to Madame de Longueville. She is
all-powerful yonder; she will help me. But send me word should you be
arrested, for then I will return directly.”

“Why do you not take your chance and be arrested with me?”

“No, I thank you.”

“Should we, by being arrested, be all four together again, we should
not, I am not sure, be twenty-four hours in prison without getting
free.”

“My friend, since I killed Chatillon, adored of the ladies of Saint
Germain, I am too great a celebrity not to fear a prison doubly. The
queen is likely to follow Mazarin’s counsels and to have me tried.”

“Do you think she loves this Italian so much as they say she does?”

“Did she not love an Englishman?”

“My friend, she is a woman.”

“No, no, you are deceived—she is a queen.”

“Dear friend, I shall sacrifice myself and go and see Anne of Austria.”

“Adieu, Athos, I am going to raise an army.”

“For what purpose?”

“To come back and besiege Rueil.”

“Where shall we meet again?”

“At the foot of the cardinal’s gallows.”

The two friends departed—Aramis to return to Paris, Athos to take
measures preparatory to an interview with the queen.




Chapter LXXX.
The Gratitude of Anne of Austria.


Athos found much less difficulty than he had expected in obtaining an
audience of Anne of Austria. It was granted, and was to take place
after her morning’s “levee,” at which, in accordance with his rights of
birth, he was entitled to be present. A vast crowd filled the
apartments of Saint Germain. Anne had never at the Louvre had so large
a court; but this crowd represented chiefly the second class of
nobility, while the Prince de Conti, the Duc de Beaufort and the
coadjutor assembled around them the first nobility of France.

The greatest possible gayety prevailed at court. The particular
characteristic of this was that more songs were made than cannons fired
during its continuance. The court made songs on the Parisians and the
Parisians on the court; and the casualties, though not mortal, were
painful, as are all wounds inflicted by the weapon of ridicule.

In the midst of this seeming hilarity, nevertheless, people’s minds
were uneasy. Was Mazarin to remain the favorite and minister of the
queen? Was he to be carried back by the wind which had blown him there?
Every one hoped so, so that the minister felt that all around him,
beneath the homage of the courtiers, lay a fund of hatred, ill
disguised by fear and interest. He felt ill at ease and at a loss what
to do.

Condé himself, whilst fighting for him, lost no opportunity of
ridiculing, of humbling him. The queen, on whom he threw himself as
sole support, seemed to him now not much to be relied upon.

When the hour appointed for the audience arrived Athos was obliged to
stay until the queen, who was waited upon by a new deputation from
Paris, had consulted with her minister as to the propriety and manner
of receiving them. All were fully engrossed with the affairs of the
day; Athos could not therefore have chosen a more inauspicious moment
to speak of his friends—poor atoms, lost in that raging whirlwind.

But Athos was a man of inflexible determination; he firmly adhered to a
purpose once formed, when it seemed to him to spring from conscience
and to be prompted by a sense of duty. He insisted on being introduced,
saying that although he was not a deputy from Monsieur de Conti, or
Monsieur de Beaufort, or Monsieur de Bouillon, or Monsieur d’Elbeuf, or
the coadjutor, or Madame de Longueville, or Broussel, or the
Parliament, and although he had come on his own private account, he
nevertheless had things to say to her majesty of the utmost importance.

The conference being finished, the queen summoned him to her cabinet.

Athos was introduced and announced by name. It was a name that too
often resounded in her majesty’s ears and too often vibrated in her
heart for Anne of Austria not to recognize it; yet she remained
impassive, looking at him with that fixed stare which is tolerated only
in women who are queens, either by the power of beauty or by the right
of birth.

“It is then a service which you propose to render us, count?” asked
Anne of Austria, after a moment’s silence.

“Yes, madame, another service,” said Athos, shocked that the queen did
not seem to recognize him.

Athos had a noble heart, and made, therefore, but a poor courtier.

Anne frowned. Mazarin, who was sitting at a table folding up papers, as
if he had only been a secretary of state, looked up.

“Speak,” said the queen.

Mazarin turned again to his papers.

“Madame,” resumed Athos, “two of my friends, named D’Artagnan and
Monsieur du Vallon, sent to England by the cardinal, suddenly
disappeared when they set foot on the shores of France; no one knows
what has become of them.”

“Well?” said the queen.

“I address myself, therefore, first to the benevolence of your majesty,
that I may know what has become of my friends, reserving to myself, if
necessary, the right of appealing hereafter to your justice.”

“Sir,” replied Anne, with a degree of haughtiness which to certain
persons became impertinence, “this is the reason that you trouble me in
the midst of so many absorbing concerns! an affair for the police!
Well, sir, you ought to know that we no longer have a police, since we
are no longer at Paris.”

“I think your majesty will have no need to apply to the police to know
where my friends are, but that if you will deign to interrogate the
cardinal he can reply without any further inquiry than into his own
recollections.”

“But, God forgive me!” cried Anne, with that disdainful curl of the
lips peculiar to her, “I believe that you are yourself interrogating.”

“Yes, madame, here I have a right to do so, for it concerns Monsieur
d’Artagnan—-d’Artagnan,” he repeated, in such a manner as to bow the
regal brow with recollections of the weak and erring woman.

The cardinal saw that it was now high time to come to the assistance of
Anne.

“Sir,” he said, “I can tell you what is at present unknown to her
majesty. These individuals are under arrest. They disobeyed orders.”

“I beg of your majesty, then,” said Athos, calmly and not replying to
Mazarin, “to quash these arrests of Messieurs d’Artagnan and du
Vallon.”

“What you ask is merely an affair of discipline and does not concern
me,” said the queen.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan never made such an answer as that when the service
of your majesty was concerned,” said Athos, bowing with great dignity.
He was going toward the door when Mazarin stopped him.

“You, too, have been in England, sir?” he said, making a sign to the
queen, who was evidently going to issue a severe order.

“I was a witness of the last hours of Charles I. Poor king! culpable,
at the most, of weakness, how cruelly punished by his subjects! Thrones
are at this time shaken and it is to little purpose for devoted hearts
to serve the interests of princes. This is the second time that
Monsieur d’Artagnan has been in England. He went the first time to save
the honor of a great queen; the second, to avert the death of a great
king.”

“Sir,” said Anne to Mazarin, with an accent from which daily habits of
dissimulation could not entirely chase the real expression, “see if we
can do something for these gentlemen.”

“I wish to do, madame, all that your majesty pleases.”

“Do what Monsieur de la Fere requests; that is your name, is it not,
sir?”

“I have another name, madame—I am called Athos.”

“Madame,” said Mazarin, with a smile, “you may rest easy; your wishes
shall be fulfilled.”

“You hear, sir?” said the queen.

“Yes, madame, I expected nothing less from the justice of your majesty.
May I not go and see my friends?”

“Yes, sir, you shall see them. But, apropos, you belong to the Fronde,
do you not?”

“Madame, I serve the king.”

“Yes, in your own way.”

“My way is the way of all gentlemen, and I know only one way,” answered
Athos, haughtily.

“Go, sir, then,” said the queen; “you have obtained what you wish and
we know all we desire to know.”

Scarcely, however, had the tapestry closed behind Athos when she said
to Mazarin:

“Cardinal, desire them to arrest that insolent fellow before he leaves
the court.”

“Your majesty,” answered Mazarin, “desires me to do only what I was
going to ask you to let me do. These bravoes who resuscitate in our
epoch the traditions of another reign are troublesome; since there are
two of them already there, let us add a third.”

Athos was not altogether the queen’s dupe, but he was not a man to run
away on suspicion—above all, when distinctly told that he should see
his friends again. He waited, then, in the ante-chamber with
impatience, till he should be conducted to them.

He walked to the window and looked into the court. He saw the
deputation from the Parisians enter it; they were coming to assign the
definitive place for the conference and to make their bow to the queen.
A very imposing escort awaited them without the gates.

Athos was looking on attentively, when some one touched him softly on
the shoulder.

“Ah! Monsieur de Comminges,” he said.

“Yes, count, and charged with a commission for which I beg of you to
accept my excuses.”

“What is it?”

“Be so good as to give me up your sword, count.”

Athos smiled and opened the window.

“Aramis!” he cried.

A gentleman turned around. Athos fancied he had seen him among the
crowd. It was Aramis. He bowed with great friendship to the count.

“Aramis,” cried Athos, “I am arrested.”

“Good,” replied Aramis, calmly.

“Sir,” said Athos, turning to Comminges and giving him politely his
sword by the hilt, “here is my sword; have the kindness to keep it
safely for me until I quit my prison. I prize it—it was given to my
ancestor by King Francis I. In his time they armed gentlemen, not
disarmed them. Now, whither do you conduct me?”

“Into my room first,” replied Comminges; “the queen will ultimately
decide your place of domicile.”

Athos followed Comminges without saying a single word.




Chapter LXXXI.
Cardinal Mazarin as King.


The arrest produced no sensation, indeed was almost unknown, and
scarcely interrupted the course of events. To the deputation it was
formally announced that the queen would receive it.

Accordingly, it was admitted to the presence of Anne, who, silent and
lofty as ever, listened to the speeches and complaints of the deputies;
but when they had finished their harangues not one of them could say,
so calm remained her face, whether or no she had heard them.

On the other hand, Mazarin, present at that audience, heard very well
what those deputies demanded. It was purely and simply his removal, in
terms clear and precise.

The discourse being finished, the queen remained silent.

“Gentlemen,” said Mazarin, “I join with you in supplicating the queen
to put an end to the miseries of her subjects. I have done all in my
power to ameliorate them and yet the belief of the public, you say, is
that they proceed from me, an unhappy foreigner, who has been unable to
please the French. Alas! I have never been understood, and no wonder. I
succeeded a man of the most sublime genius that ever upheld the sceptre
of France. The memory of Richelieu annihilates me. In vain—were I an
ambitious man—should I struggle against such remembrances as he has
left; but that I am not ambitious I am going to prove to you. I own
myself conquered. I shall obey the wishes of the people. If Paris has
injuries to complain of, who has not some wrongs to be redressed? Paris
has been sufficiently punished; enough blood has flowed, enough misery
has humbled a town deprived of its king and of justice. ’Tis not for
me, a private individual, to disunite a queen from her kingdom. Since
you demand my resignation, I retire.”

“Then,” said Aramis, in his neighbor’s ear, “the conferences are over.
There is nothing to do but to send Monsieur Mazarin to the most distant
frontier and to take care that he does not return even by that, nor any
other entrance into France.”

“One instant, sir,” said the man in a gown, whom he addressed; “a
plague on’t! how fast you go! one may soon see that you’re a soldier.
There’s the article of remunerations and indemnifications to be
discussed and set to rights.”

“Chancellor,” said the queen, turning to Seguier, our old acquaintance,
“you will open the conferences. They can take place at Rueil. The
cardinal has said several things which have agitated me, therefore I
will not speak more fully now. As to his going or staying, I feel too
much gratitude to the cardinal not to leave him free in all his
actions; he shall do what he wishes to do.”

A transient pallor overspread the speaking countenance of the prime
minister; he looked at the queen with anxiety. Her face was so
passionless, that he, as every one else present, was incapable of
reading her thoughts.

“But,” added the queen, “in awaiting the cardinal’s decision let there
be, if you please, a reference to the king only.”

The deputies bowed and left the room.

“What!” exclaimed the queen, when the last of them had quitted the
apartment, “you would yield to these limbs of the law—these advocates?”

“To promote your majesty’s welfare, madame,” replied Mazarin, fixing
his penetrating eyes on the queen, “there is no sacrifice that I would
not make.”

Anne dropped her head and fell into one of those reveries so habitual
with her. A recollection of Athos came into her mind. His fearless
deportment, his words, so firm, yet dignified, the shades which by one
word he had evoked, recalled to her the past in all its intoxication of
poetry and romance, youth, beauty, the eclat of love at twenty years of
age, the bloody death of Buckingham, the only man whom she had ever
really loved, and the heroism of those obscure champions who had saved
her from the double hatred of Richelieu and the king.

Mazarin looked at her, and whilst she deemed herself alone and freed
from the world of enemies who sought to spy into her secret thoughts,
he read her thoughts in her countenance, as one sees in a transparent
lake clouds pass—reflections, like thoughts, of the heavens.

“Must we, then,” asked Anne of Austria, “yield to the storm, buy peace,
and patiently and piously await better times?”

Mazarin smiled sarcastically at this speech, which showed that she had
taken the minister’s proposal seriously.

Anne’s head was bent down—she had not seen the Italian’s smile; but
finding that her question elicited no reply she looked up.

“Well, you do not answer, cardinal, what do you think about it?”

“I am thinking, madame, of the allusion made by that insolent
gentleman, whom you have caused to be arrested, to the Duke of
Buckingham—to him whom you allowed to be assassinated—to the Duchess de
Chevreuse, whom you suffered to be exiled—to the Duc de Beaufort, whom
you imprisoned; but if he made allusion to me it was because he is
ignorant of the relation in which I stand to you.”

Anne drew up, as she always did, when anything touched her pride. She
blushed, and that she might not answer, clasped her beautiful hands
till her sharp nails almost pierced them.

“That man has sagacity, honor and wit, not to mention likewise that he
is a man of undoubted resolution. You know something about him, do you
not, madame? I shall tell him, therefore, and in doing so I shall
confer a personal favor on him, how he is mistaken in regard to me.
What is proposed to me would be, in fact, almost an abdication, and an
abdication requires reflection.”

“An abdication?” repeated Anne; “I thought, sir, that it was kings
alone who abdicated!”

“Well,” replied Mazarin, “and am I not almost a king—king, indeed, of
France? Thrown over the foot of the royal bed, my simar, madame, looks
not unlike the mantle worn by kings.”

This was one of the humiliations which Mazarin made Anne undergo more
frequently than any other, and one that bowed her head with shame.
Queen Elizabeth and Catherine II. of Russia are the only two monarchs
of their set on record who were at once sovereigns and lovers. Anne of
Austria looked with a sort of terror at the threatening aspect of the
cardinal—his physiognomy in such moments was not destitute of a certain
grandeur.

“Sir,” she replied, “did I not say, and did you not hear me say to
those people, that you should do as you pleased?”

“In that case,” said Mazarin, “I think it must please me best to
remain; not only on account of my own interest, but for your safety.”

“Remain, then, sir; nothing can be more agreeable to me; only do not
allow me to be insulted.”

“You are referring to the demands of the rebels and to the tone in
which they stated them? Patience! They have selected a field of battle
on which I am an abler general than they—that of a conference. No, we
shall beat them by merely temporizing. They want food already. They
will be ten times worse off in a week.”

“Ah, yes! Good heavens! I know it will end in that way; but it is not
they who taunt me with the most wounding reproaches, but——”

“I understand; you mean to allude to the recollections perpetually
revived by these three gentlemen. However, we have them safe in prison,
and they are just sufficiently culpable for us to keep them in prison
as long as we find it convenient. One only is still not in our power
and braves us. But, devil take him! we shall soon succeed in sending
him to join his boon companions. We have accomplished more difficult
things than that. In the first place I have as a precaution shut up at
Rueil, near me, under my own eyes, within reach of my hand, the two
most intractable ones. To-day the third will be there also.”

“As long as they are in prison all will be well,” said Anne, “but one
of these days they will get out.”

“Yes, if your majesty releases them.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Anne, following the train of her own thoughts on such
occasions, “one regrets Paris!”

“Why so?”

“On account of the Bastile, sir, which is so strong and so secure.”

“Madame, these conferences will bring us peace; when we have peace we
shall regain Paris; with Paris, the Bastile, and our four bullies shall
rot therein.”

Anne frowned slightly when Mazarin, in taking leave, kissed her hand.

Mazarin, after this half humble, half gallant attention, went away.
Anne followed him with her eyes, and as he withdrew, at every step he
took, a disdainful smile was seen playing, then gradually burst upon
her lips.

“I once,” she said, “despised the love of a cardinal who never said ‘I
shall do,’ but, ‘I have done so and so.’ That man knew of retreats more
secure than Rueil, darker and more silent even than the Bastile.
Degenerate world!”




Chapter LXXXII.
Precautions.


After quitting Anne, Mazarin took the road to Rueil, where he usually
resided; in those times of disturbance he went about with numerous
followers and often disguised himself. In military dress he was,
indeed, as we have stated, a very handsome man.

In the court of the old Chateau of Saint Germain he entered his coach,
and reached the Seine at Chatou. The prince had supplied him with fifty
light horse, not so much by way of guard as to show the deputies how
readily the queen’s generals dispersed their troops and to prove that
they might be safely scattered at pleasure. Athos, on horseback,
without his sword and kept in sight by Comminges, followed the cardinal
in silence. Grimaud, finding that his master had been arrested, fell
back into the ranks near Aramis, without saying a word and as if
nothing had happened.

Grimaud had, indeed, during twenty-two years of service, seen his
master extricate himself from so many difficulties that nothing less
than Athos’s imminent death was likely to make him uneasy.

At the branching off of the road toward Paris, Aramis, who had followed
in the cardinal’s suite, turned back. Mazarin went to the right hand
and Aramis could see the prisoner disappear at the turning of the
avenue. Athos, at the same moment, moved by a similar impulse, looked
back also. The two friends exchanged a simple inclination of the head
and Aramis put his finger to his hat, as if to bow, Athos alone
comprehending by that signal that he had some project in his head.

Ten minutes afterward Mazarin entered the court of that chateau which
his predecessor had built for him at Rueil; as he alighted, Comminges
approached him.

“My lord,” he asked, “where does your eminence wish Monsieur Comte de
la Fere to be lodged?”

“In the pavilion of the orangery, of course, in front of the pavilion
where the guard is. I wish every respect to be shown the count,
although he is the prisoner of her majesty the queen.”

“My lord,” answered Comminges, “he begs to be taken to the place where
Monsieur d’Artagnan is confined—that is, in the hunting lodge, opposite
the orangery.”

Mazarin thought for an instant.

Comminges saw that he was undecided.

“’Tis a very strong post,” he resumed, “and we have forty good men,
tried soldiers, having no connection with Frondeurs nor any interest in
the Fronde.”

“If we put these three men together, Monsieur Comminges,” said Mazarin,
“we must double the guard, and we are not rich enough in fighting men
to commit such acts of prodigality.”

Comminges smiled; Mazarin read and construed that smile.

“You do not know these men, Monsieur Comminges, but I know them, first
personally, also by hearsay. I sent them to carry aid to King Charles
and they performed prodigies to save him; had it not been for an
adverse destiny, that beloved monarch would this day have been among
us.”

“But since they served your eminence so well, why are they, my lord
cardinal, in prison?”

“In prison?” said Mazarin, “and when has Rueil been a prison?”

“Ever since there were prisoners in it,” answered Comminges.

“These gentlemen, Comminges, are not prisoners,” returned Mazarin, with
his ironical smile, “only guests; but guests so precious that I have
put a grating before each of their windows and bolts to their doors,
that they may not refuse to continue my visitors. So much do I esteem
them that I am going to make the Comte de la Fere a visit, that I may
converse with him tete-a-tete, and that we may not be disturbed at our
interview you must conduct him, as I said before, to the pavilion of
the orangery; that, you know, is my daily promenade. Well, while taking
my walk I will call on him and we will talk. Although he professes to
be my enemy I have sympathy for him, and if he is reasonable perhaps we
shall arrange matters.”

Comminges bowed, and returned to Athos, who was awaiting with apparent
calmness, but with real anxiety, the result of the interview.

“Well?” he said to the lieutenant.

“Sir,” replied Comminges, “it seems that it is impossible.”

“Monsieur de Comminges,” said Athos, “I have been a soldier all my life
and I know the force of orders; but outside your orders there is a
service you can render me.”

“I will do it with all my heart,” said Comminges; “for I know who you
are and what service you once performed for her majesty; I know, too,
how dear to you is the young man who came so valiantly to my aid when
that old rogue of a Broussel was arrested. I am entirely at your
service, except only for my orders.”

“Thank you, sir; what I am about to ask will not compromise you in any
degree.”

“If it should even compromise me a little,” said Monsieur de Comminges,
with a smile, “still make your demand. I don’t like Mazarin any better
than you do. I serve the queen and that draws me naturally into the
service of the cardinal; but I serve the one with joy and the other
against my will. Speak, then, I beg of you; I wait and listen.”

“Since there is no harm,” said Athos, “in my knowing that D’Artagnan is
here, I presume there will be none in his knowing that I am here.”

“I have received no orders on that point.”

“Well, then, do me the kindness to give him my regards and tell him
that I am his neighbor. Tell him also what you have just told me—that
Mazarin has placed me in the pavilion of the orangery in order to make
me a visit, and assure him that I shall take advantage of this honor he
proposes to accord to me to obtain from him some amelioration of our
captivity.”

“Which cannot last,” interrupted Comminges; “the cardinal said so;
there is no prison here.”

“But there are oubliettes!” replied Athos, smiling.

“Oh! that’s a different thing; yes, I know there are traditions of that
sort,” said Comminges. “It was in the time of the other cardinal, who
was a great nobleman; but our Mazarin—impossible! an Italian adventurer
would not dare to go such lengths with such men as ourselves.
Oubliettes are employed as a means of kingly vengeance, and a low-born
fellow such as he is would not have recourse to them. Your arrest is
known, that of your friends will soon be known; and all the nobility of
France would demand an explanation of your disappearance. No, no, be
easy on that score. I will, however, inform Monsieur d’Artagnan of your
arrival here.”

Comminges then led the count to a room on the ground floor of a
pavilion, at the end of the orangery. They passed through a courtyard
as they went, full of soldiers and courtiers. In the centre of this
court, in the form of a horseshoe, were the buildings occupied by
Mazarin, and at each wing the pavilion (or smaller building), where
D’Artagnan was confined, and that, level with the orangery, where Athos
was to be. From the ends of these two wings extended the park.

Athos, when he reached his appointed room, observed through the
gratings of his window, walls and roofs; and was told, on inquiry, by
Comminges, that he was looking on the back of the pavilion where
D’Artagnan was confined.

“Yes, ’tis too true,” said Comminges, “’tis almost a prison; but what a
singular fancy this is of yours, count—you, who are the very flower of
our nobility—to squander your valor and loyalty amongst these upstarts,
the Frondists! Really, count, if ever I thought that I had a friend in
the ranks of the royal army, it was you. A Frondeur! you, the Comte de
la Fere, on the side of Broussel, Blancmesnil and Viole! For shame!
you, a Frondeur!”

“On my word of honor,” said Athos, “one must be either a Mazarinist or
a Frondeur. For a long time I had these words whispered in my ears, and
I chose the latter; at any rate, it is a French word. And now, I am a
Frondeur—not of Broussel’s party, nor of Blancmesnil’s, nor am I with
Viole; but with the Duc de Beaufort, the Ducs de Bouillon and d’Elbeuf;
with princes, not with presidents, councillors and low-born lawyers.
Besides, what a charming outlook it would have been to serve the
cardinal! Look at that wall—without a single window—which tells you
fine things about Mazarin’s gratitude!”

“Yes,” replied De Comminges, “more especially if it could reveal how
Monsieur d’Artagnan for this last week has been anathematizing him.”

“Poor D’Artagnan’” said Athos, with the charming melancholy that was
one of the traits of his character, “so brave, so good, so terrible to
the enemies of those he loves. You have two unruly prisoners there,
sir.”

“Unruly,” Comminges smiled; “you wish to terrify me, I suppose. When he
came here, Monsieur D’Artagnan provoked and braved the soldiers and
inferior officers, in order, I suppose, to have his sword back. That
mood lasted some time; but now he’s as gentle as a lamb and sings
Gascon songs, which make one die of laughing.”

“And Du Vallon?” asked Athos.

“Ah, he’s quite another sort of person—a formidable gentleman, indeed.
The first day he broke all the doors in with a single push of his
shoulder; and I expected to see him leave Rueil in the same way as
Samson left Gaza. But his temper cooled down, like his friend’s; he not
only gets used to his captivity, but jokes about it.”

“So much the better,” said Athos.

“Do you think anything else was to be expected of them?” asked
Comminges, who, putting together what Mazarin had said of his prisoners
and what the Comte de la Fere had said, began to feel a degree of
uneasiness.

Athos, on the other hand, reflected that this recent gentleness of his
friends most certainly arose from some plan formed by D’Artagnan.
Unwilling to injure them by praising them too highly, he replied:
“They? They are two hotheads—the one a Gascon, the other from Picardy;
both are easily excited, but they quiet down immediately. You have had
a proof of that in what you have just related to me.”

This, too, was the opinion of Comminges, who withdrew somewhat
reassured. Athos remained alone in the vast chamber, where, according
to the cardinal’s directions, he was treated with all the courtesy due
to a nobleman. He awaited Mazarin’s promised visit to get some light on
his present situation.




Chapter LXXXIII.
Strength and Sagacity.


Now let us pass the orangery to the hunting lodge. At the extremity of
the courtyard, where, close to a portico formed of Ionic columns, were
the dog kennels, rose an oblong building, the pavilion of the orangery,
a half circle, inclosing the court of honor. It was in this pavilion,
on the ground floor, that D’Artagnan and Porthos were confined,
suffering interminable hours of imprisonment in a manner suitable to
each different temperament.

D’Artagnan was pacing to and fro like a caged tiger; with dilated eyes,
growling as he paced along by the bars of a window looking upon the
yard of servant’s offices.

Porthos was ruminating over an excellent dinner he had just demolished.

The one seemed to be deprived of reason, yet he was meditating. The
other seemed to meditate, yet he was more than half asleep. But his
sleep was a nightmare, which might be guessed by the incoherent manner
in which he sometimes snored and sometimes snorted.

“Look,” said D’Artagnan, “day is declining. It must be nearly four
o’clock. We have been in this place nearly eighty-three hours.”

“Hem!” muttered Porthos, with a kind of pretense of answering.

“Did you hear, eternal sleeper?” cried D’Artagnan, irritated that any
one could doze during the day, when he had the greatest difficulty in
sleeping during the night.

“What?” said Porthos.

“I say we have been here eighty-three hours.”

“’Tis your fault,” answered Porthos.

“How, my fault?”

“Yes, I offered you escape.”

“By pulling out a bar and pushing down a door?”

“Certainly.”

“Porthos, men like us can’t go out from here purely and simply.”

“Faith!” said Porthos, “as for me, I could go out with that purity and
that simplicity which it seems to me you despise too much.”

D’Artagnan shrugged his shoulders.

“And besides,” he said, “going out of this chamber isn’t all.”

“Dear friend,” said Porthos, “you appear to be in a somewhat better
humor to-day than you were yesterday. Explain to me why going out of
this chamber isn’t everything.”

“Because, having neither arms nor password, we shouldn’t take fifty
steps in the court without knocking against a sentinel.”

“Very well,” said Porthos, “we will kill the sentinel and we shall have
his arms.”

“Yes, but before we can kill him—and he will be hard to kill, that
Swiss—he will shriek out and the whole picket will come, and we shall
be taken like foxes, we, who are lions, and thrown into some dungeon,
where we shall not even have the consolation of seeing this frightful
gray sky of Rueil, which no more resembles the sky of Tarbes than the
moon is like the sun. Lack-a-day! if we only had some one to instruct
us about the physical and moral topography of this castle. Ah! when one
thinks that for twenty years, during which time I did not know what to
do with myself, it never occurred to me to come to study Rueil.”

“What difference does that make?” said Porthos. “We shall go out all
the same.”

“Do you know, my dear fellow, why master pastrycooks never work with
their hands?”

“No,” said Porthos, “but I should be glad to be informed.”

“It is because in the presence of their pupils they fear that some of
their tarts or creams may turn out badly cooked.”

“What then?”

“Why, then they would be laughed at, and a master pastrycook must never
be laughed at.”

“And what have master pastrycooks to do with us?”

“We ought, in our adventures, never to be defeated or give any one a
chance to laugh at us. In England, lately, we failed, we were beaten,
and that is a blemish on our reputation.”

“By whom, then, were we beaten?” asked Porthos.

“By Mordaunt.”

“Yes, but we have drowned Monsieur Mordaunt.”

“That is true, and that will redeem us a little in the eyes of
posterity, if posterity ever looks at us. But listen, Porthos: though
Monsieur Mordaunt was a man not to be despised, Mazarin is not less
strong than he, and we shall not easily succeed in drowning him. We
must, therefore, watch and play a close game; for,” he added with a
sigh, “we two are equal, perhaps, to eight others; but we are not equal
to the four that you know of.”

“That is true,” said Porthos, echoing D’Artagnan’s sigh.

“Well, Porthos, follow my examples; walk back and forth till some news
of our friends reaches us or till we are visited by a good idea. But
don’t sleep as you do all the time; nothing dulls the intellect like
sleep. As to what may lie before us, it is perhaps less serious than we
at first thought. I don’t believe that Monsieur de Mazarin thinks of
cutting off our heads, for heads are not taken off without previous
trial; a trial would make a noise, and a noise would get the attention
of our friends, who would check the operations of Monsieur de Mazarin.”

“How well you reason!” said Porthos, admiringly.

“Well, yes, pretty well,” replied D’Artagnan; “and besides, you see, if
they put us on trial, if they cut off our heads, they must meanwhile
either keep us here or transfer us elsewhere.”

“Yes, that is inevitable,” said Porthos.

“Well, it is impossible but that Master Aramis, that keen-scented
bloodhound, and Athos, that wise and prudent nobleman, will discover
our retreat. Then, believe me, it will be time to act.”

“Yes, we will wait. We can wait the more contentedly, that it is not
absolutely bad here, but for one thing, at least.”

“What is that?”

“Did you observe, D’Artagnan, that three days running they have brought
us braised mutton?”

“No; but if it occurs a fourth time I shall complain of it, so never
mind.”

“And then I feel the loss of my house, ’tis a long time since I visited
my castles.”

“Forget them for a time; we shall return to them, unless Mazarin razes
them to the ground.”

“Do you think that likely?”

“No, the other cardinal would have done so, but this one is too mean a
fellow to risk it.”

“You reconcile me, D’Artagnan.”

“Well, then, assume a cheerful manner, as I do; we must joke with the
guards, we must gain the good-will of the soldiers, since we can’t
corrupt them. Try, Porthos, to please them more than you are wont to do
when they are under our windows. Thus far you have done nothing but
show them your fist; and the more respectable your fist is, Porthos,
the less attractive it is. Ah, I would give much to have five hundred
louis, only.”

“So would I,” said Porthos, unwilling to be behind D’Artagnan in
generosity; “I would give as much as a hundred pistoles.”

The two prisoners were at this point of their conversation when
Comminges entered, preceded by a sergeant and two men, who brought
supper in a basket with two handles, filled with basins and plates.

“What!” exclaimed Porthos, “mutton again?”

“My dear Monsieur de Comminges,” said D’Artagnan, “you will find that
my friend, Monsieur du Vallon, will go to the most fatal lengths if
Cardinal Mazarin continues to provide us with this sort of meat; mutton
every day.”

“I declare,” said Porthos, “I shall eat nothing if they do not take it
away.”

“Remove the mutton,” cried Comminges; “I wish Monsieur du Vallon to sup
well, more especially as I have news to give him that will improve his
appetite.”

“Is Mazarin dead?” asked Porthos.

“No; I am sorry to tell you he is perfectly well.”

“So much the worse,” said Porthos.

“What is that news?” asked D’Artagnan. “News in prison is a fruit so
rare that I trust, Monsieur de Comminges, you will excuse my
impatience—the more eager since you have given us to understand that
the news is good.”

“Should you be glad to hear that the Comte de la Fere is well?” asked
De Comminges.

D’Artagnan’s penetrating gray eyes were opened to the utmost.

“Glad!” he cried; “I should be more than glad! Happy—beyond measure!”

“Well, I am desired by him to give you his compliments and to say that
he is in good health.”

D’Artagnan almost leaped with joy. A quick glance conveyed his thought
to Porthos: “If Athos knows where we are, if he opens communication
with us, before long Athos will act.”

Porthos was not very quick to understand the language of glances, but
now since the name of Athos had suggested to him the same idea, he
understood.

“Do you say,” asked the Gascon, timidly, “that the Comte de la Fere has
commissioned you to give his compliments to Monsieur du Vallon and
myself?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Then you have seen him?”

“Certainly I have.”

“Where? if I may ask without indiscretion.”

“Near here,” replied De Comminges, smiling; “so near that if the
windows which look on the orangery were not stopped up you could see
him from where you are.”

“He is wandering about the environs of the castle,” thought D’Artagnan.
Then he said aloud:

“You met him, I dare say, in the park—hunting, perhaps?”

“No; nearer, nearer still. Look, behind this wall,” said De Comminges,
knocking against the wall.

“Behind this wall? What is there, then, behind this wall? I was brought
here by night, so devil take me if I know where I am.”

“Well,” said Comminges, “suppose one thing.”

“I will suppose anything you please.”

“Suppose there were a window in this wall.”

“Well?”

“From that window you would see Monsieur de la Fere at his.”

“The count, then, is in the chateau?”

“Yes.”

“For what reason?”

“The same as yourself.”

“Athos—a prisoner?”

“You know well,” replied De Comminges, “that there are no prisoners at
Rueil, because there is no prison.”

“Don’t let us play upon words, sir. Athos has been arrested.”

“Yesterday, at Saint Germain, as he came out from the presence of the
queen.”

The arms of D’Artagnan fell powerless by his side. One might have
supposed him thunderstruck; a paleness ran like a cloud over his dark
skin, but disappeared immediately.

“A prisoner?” he reiterated.

“A prisoner,” repeated Porthos, quite dejected.

Suddenly D’Artagnan looked up and in his eyes there was a gleam which
scarcely even Porthos observed; but it died away and he appeared more
sorrowful than before.

“Come, come,” said Comminges, who, since D’Artagnan, on the day of
Broussel’s arrest, had saved him from the hands of the Parisians, had
entertained a real affection for him, “don’t be unhappy; I never
thought of bringing you bad news. Laugh at the chance which has brought
your friend near to you and Monsieur du Vallon, instead of being in the
depths of despair about it.”

But D’Artagnan was still in a desponding mood.

“And how did he look?” asked Porthos, who, perceiving that D’Artagnan
had allowed the conversation to drop, profited by it to put in a word
or two.

“Very well, indeed, sir,” replied Comminges; “at first, like you, he
seemed distressed; but when he heard that the cardinal was going to pay
him a visit this very evening——”

“Ah!” cried D’Artagnan, “the cardinal is about to visit the Comte de la
Fere?”

“Yes; and the count desired me to tell you that he should take
advantage of this visit to plead for you and for himself.”

“Ah! our dear count!” said D’Artagnan.

“A fine thing, indeed!” grunted Porthos. “A great favor! Zounds!
Monsieur the Comte de la Fere, whose family is allied to the
Montmorency and the Rohan, is easily the equal of Monsieur de Mazarin.”

“No matter,” said D’Artagnan, in his most wheedling tone. “On
reflection, my dear Du Vallon, it is a great honor for the Comte de la
Fere, and gives good reason to hope. In fact, it seems to me so great
an honor for a prisoner that I think Monsieur de Comminges must be
mistaken.”

“What? I am mistaken?”

“Monsieur de Mazarin will not come to visit the Comte de la Fere, but
the Comte de la Fere will be sent for to visit him.”

“No, no, no,” said Comminges, who made a point of having the facts
appear exactly as they were, “I clearly understood what the cardinal
said to me. He will come and visit the Comte de la Fere.”

D’Artagnan tried to gather from the expression of his eyes whether
Porthos understood the importance of that visit, but Porthos did not
even look toward him.

“It is, then, the cardinal’s custom to walk in his orangery?” asked
D’Artagnan.

“Every evening he shuts himself in there. That, it seems, is where he
meditates on state affairs.”

“In that case,” said D’Artagnan, “I begin to believe that Monsieur de
la Fere will receive the visit of his eminence; he will, of course,
have an escort.”

“Yes—two soldiers.”

“And will he talk thus of affairs in presence of two strangers?”

“The soldiers are Swiss, who understand only German. Besides, according
to all probability they will wait at the door.”

D’Artagnan made a violent effort over himself to keep his face from
being too expressive.

“Let the cardinal take care of going alone to visit the Comte de la
Fere,” said D’Artagnan; “for the count must be furious.”

Comminges began to laugh. “Oh, oh! why, really, one would say that you
four were anthropaphagi! The count is an affable man; besides, he is
unarmed; at the first word from his eminence the two soldiers about him
would run to his assistance.”

“Two soldiers,” said D’Artagnan, seeming to remember something, “two
soldiers, yes; that, then, is why I hear two men called every evening
and see them walking sometimes for half an hour, under my window.”

“That is it; they are waiting for the cardinal, or rather for Bernouin,
who comes to call them when the cardinal goes out.”

“Fine-looking men, upon my word!” said D’Artagnan.

“They belong to the regiment that was at Lens, which the prince
assigned to the cardinal.”

“Ah, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, as if to sum up in a word all that
conversation, “if only his eminence would relent and grant to Monsieur
de la Fere our liberty.”

“I wish it with all my heart,” said Comminges.

“Then, if he should forget that visit, you would find no inconvenience
in reminding him of it?”

“Not at all.”

“Ah, that gives me more confidence.”

This skillful turn of the conversation would have seemed a sublime
manoeuvre to any one who could have read the Gascon’s soul.

“Now,” said D’Artagnan, “I’ve one last favor to ask of you, Monsieur de
Comminges.”

“At your service, sir.”

“You will see the count again?”

“To-morrow morning.”

“Will you remember us to him and ask him to solicit for me the same
favor that he will have obtained?”

“You want the cardinal to come here?”

“No; I know my place and am not so presumptuous. Let his eminence do me
the honor to give me a hearing; that is all I want.”

“Oh!” muttered Porthos, shaking his head, “never should I have thought
this of him! How misfortune humbles a man!”

“I promise you it shall be done,” answered De Comminges.

“Tell the count that I am well; that you found me sad, but resigned.”

“I am pleased, sir, to hear that.”

“And the same, also, for Monsieur du Vallon——”

“Not for me,” cried Porthos; “I am not by any means resigned.”

“But you will be resigned, my friend.”

“Never!”

“He will become so, monsieur; I know him better than he knows himself.
Be silent, dear Du Vallon, and resign yourself.”

“Adieu, gentlemen,” said De Comminges; “sleep well!”

“We will try.”

De Comminges went away, D’Artagnan remaining apparently in the same
attitude of humble resignation; but scarcely had he departed when he
turned and clasped Porthos in his arms with an expression not to be
doubted.

“Oh!” cried Porthos; “what’s the matter now? Have you gone mad, my dear
friend?”

“What is the matter?” returned D’Artagnan; “we are saved!”

“I don’t see that at all,” answered Porthos. “I think we are all taken
prisoners, except Aramis, and that our chances of getting out are
lessened since one more of us is caught in Mazarin’s mousetrap.”

“Which is far too strong for two of us, but not strong enough for three
of us,” returned D’Artagnan.

“I don’t understand,” said Porthos.

“Never mind; let’s sit down to table and take something to strengthen
us for the night.”

“What are we to do, then, to-night?”

“To travel—perhaps.”

“But——”

“Sit down, dear friend, to table. When one is eating, ideas flow
easily. After supper, when they are perfected, I will communicate my
plans to you.”

So Porthos sat down to table without another word and ate with an
appetite that did honor to the confidence that was ever inspired in him
by D’Artagnan’s inventive imagination.




Chapter LXXXIV.
Strength and Sagacity—Continued.


Supper was eaten in silence, but not in sadness; for from time to time
one of those sweet smiles which were habitual to him in moments of
good-humor illumined the face of D’Artagnan. Not a scintilla of these
was lost on Porthos; and at every one he uttered an exclamation which
betrayed to his friend that he had not lost sight of the idea which
possessed his brain.

At dessert D’Artagnan reposed in his chair, crossed one leg over the
other and lounged about like a man perfectly at his ease.

Porthos rested his chin on his hands, placed his elbows on the table
and looked at D’Artagnan with an expression of confidence which
imparted to that colossus an admirable appearance of good-fellowship.

“Well?” said D’Artagnan, at last.

“Well!” repeated Porthos.

“You were saying, my dear friend——”

“No; I said nothing.”

“Yes; you were saying you wished to leave this place.”

“Ah, indeed! the will was never wanting.”

“To get away you would not mind, you added, knocking down a door or a
wall.”

“’Tis true—I said so, and I say it again.”

“And I answered you, Porthos, that it was not a good plan; that we
couldn’t go a hundred steps without being recaptured, because we were
without clothes to disguise ourselves and arms to defend ourselves.”

“That is true; we should need clothes and arms.”

“Well,” said D’Artagnan, rising, “we have them, friend Porthos, and
even something better.”

“Bah!” said Porthos, looking around.

“Useless to look; everything will come to us when wanted. At about what
time did we see the two Swiss guards walking yesterday?”

“An hour after sunset.”

“If they go out to-day as they did yesterday we shall have the honor,
then, of seeing them in half an hour?”

“In a quarter of an hour at most.”

“Your arm is still strong enough, is it not, Porthos?”

Porthos unbuttoned his sleeve, raised his shirt and looked complacently
on his strong arm, as large as the leg of any ordinary man.

“Yes, indeed,” said he, “I believe so.”

“So that you could without trouble convert these tongs into a hoop and
yonder shovel into a corkscrew?”

“Certainly.” And the giant took up these two articles, and without any
apparent effort produced in them the metamorphoses suggested by his
companion.

“There!” he cried.

“Capital!” exclaimed the Gascon. “Really, Porthos, you are a gifted
individual!”

“I have heard speak,” said Porthos, “of a certain Milo of Crotona, who
performed wonderful feats, such as binding his forehead with a cord and
bursting it—of killing an ox with a blow of his fist and carrying it
home on his shoulders, et cetera. I used to learn all these feat by
heart yonder, down at Pierrefonds, and I have done all that he did
except breaking a cord by the corrugation of my temples.”

“Because your strength is not in your head, Porthos,” said his friend.

“No; it is in my arms and shoulders,” answered Porthos with gratified
naivete.

“Well, my dear friend, let us approach the window and there you can
match your strength against that of an iron bar.”

Porthos went to the window, took a bar in his hands, clung to it and
bent it like a bow; so that the two ends came out of the sockets of
stone in which for thirty years they had been fixed.

“Well! friend, the cardinal, although such a genius, could never have
done that.”

“Shall I take out any more of them?” asked Porthos.

“No; that is sufficient; a man can pass through that.”

Porthos tried, and passed the upper portion of his body through.

“Yes,” he said.

“Now pass your arm through this opening.”

“Why?”

“You will know presently—pass it.”

Porthos obeyed with military promptness and passed his arm through the
opening.

“Admirable!” said D’Artagnan.

“The scheme goes forward, it seems.”

“On wheels, dear friend.”

“Good! What shall I do now?”

“Nothing.”

“It is finished, then?”

“No, not yet.”

“I should like to understand,” said Porthos.

“Listen, my dear friend; in two words you will know all. The door of
the guardhouse opens, as you see.”

“Yes, I see.”

“They are about to send into our court, which Monsieur de Mazarin
crosses on his way to the orangery, the two guards who attend him.”

“There they are, coming out.”

“If only they close the guardhouse door! Good! They close it.”

“What, then?”

“Silence! They may hear us.”

“I don’t understand it at all.”

“As you execute you will understand.”

“And yet I should have preferred——”

“You will have the pleasure of the surprise.”

“Ah, that is true.”

“Hush!”

Porthos remained silent and motionless.

In fact, the two soldiers advanced on the side where the window was,
rubbing their hands, for it was cold, it being the month of February.

At this moment the door of the guardhouse was opened and one of the
soldiers was summoned away.

“Now,” said D’Artagnan, “I am going to call this soldier and talk to
him. Don’t lose a word of what I’m going to say to you, Porthos.
Everything lies in the execution.”

“Good, the execution of plots is my forte.”

“I know it well. I depend on you. Look, I shall turn to the left, so
that the soldier will be at your right, as soon as he mounts on the
bench to talk to us.”

“But supposing he doesn’t mount?”

“He will; rely upon it. As soon as you see him get up, stretch out your
arm and seize him by the neck. Then, raising him up as Tobit raised the
fish by the gills, you must pull him into the room, taking care to
squeeze him so tight that he can’t cry out.”

“Oh!” said Porthos. “Suppose I happen to strangle him?”

“To be sure there would only be a Swiss the less in the world; but you
will not do so, I hope. Lay him down here; we’ll gag him and tie him—no
matter where—somewhere. So we shall get from him one uniform and a
sword.”

“Marvelous!” exclaimed Porthos, looking at the Gascon with the most
profound admiration.

“Pooh!” replied D’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Porthos, recollecting himself, “but one uniform and one
sword will not suffice for two.”

“Well; but there’s his comrade.”

“True,” said Porthos.

“Therefore, when I cough, stretch out your arm.”

“Good!”

The two friends then placed themselves as they had agreed, Porthos
being completely hidden in an angle of the window.

“Good-evening, comrade,” said D’Artagnan in his most fascinating voice
and manner.

“Good-evening, sir,” answered the soldier, in a strong provincial
accent.

“’Tis not too warm to walk,” resumed D’Artagnan.

“No, sir.”

“And I think a glass of wine will not be disagreeable to you?”

“A glass of wine will be extremely welcome.”

“The fish bites—the fish bites!” whispered the Gascon to Porthos.

“I understand,” said Porthos.

“A bottle, perhaps?”

“A whole bottle? Yes, sir.”

“A whole bottle, if you will drink my health.”

“Willingly,” answered the soldier.

“Come, then, and take it, friend,” said the Gascon.

“With all my heart. How convenient that there’s a bench here. Egad! one
would think it had been placed here on purpose.”

“Get on it; that’s it, friend.”

And D’Artagnan coughed.

That instant the arm of Porthos fell. His hand of iron grasped, quick
as lightning, firm as a pair of blacksmith’s pincers, the soldier’s
throat. He raised him, almost stifling him as he drew him through the
aperture, at the risk of flaying him in the passage. He then laid him
down on the floor, where D’Artagnan, after giving him just time enough
to draw his breath, gagged him with his long scarf; and the moment he
had done so began to undress him with the promptitude and dexterity of
a man who had learned his business on the field of battle. Then the
soldier, gagged and bound, was placed upon the hearth, the fire of
which had been previously extinguished by the two friends.

“Here’s a sword and a dress,” said Porthos.

“I take them,” said D’Artagnan, “for myself. If you want another
uniform and sword you must play the same trick over again. Stop! I see
the other soldier issue from the guardroom and come toward us.”

“I think,” replied Porthos, “it would be imprudent to attempt the same
manoeuvre again; it is said that no man can succeed twice in the same
way, and a failure would be ruinous. No; I will go down, seize the man
unawares and bring him to you ready gagged.”

“That is better,” said the Gascon.

“Be ready,” said Porthos, as he slipped through the opening.

He did as he said. Porthos seized his opportunity, caught the next
soldier by his neck, gagged him and pushed him like a mummy through the
bars into the room, and entered after him. Then they undressed him as
they had done the first, laid him on their bed and bound him with the
straps which composed the bed—the bedstead being of oak. This operation
proved as great a success as the first.

“There,” said D’Artagnan, “this is capital! Now let me try on the dress
of yonder chap. Porthos, I doubt if you can wear it; but should it be
too tight, never mind, you can wear the breastplate and the hat with
the red feathers.”

It happened, however, that the second soldier was a Swiss of gigantic
proportions, so, save that some few of the seams split, his uniform
fitted Porthos perfectly.

They then dressed themselves.

“’Tis done!” they both exclaimed at once. “As to you, comrades,” they
said to the men, “nothing will happen to you if you are discreet; but
if you stir you are dead men.”

The soldiers were complaisant; they had found the grasp of Porthos
pretty powerful and that it was no joke to fight against it.

“Now,” said D’Artagnan, “you wouldn’t be sorry to understand the plot,
would you, Porthos?”

“Well, no, not very.”

“Well, then, we shall go down into the court.”

“Yes.”

“We shall take the place of those two fellows.”

“Well?”

“We will walk back and forth.”

“That’s a good idea, for it isn’t warm.”

“In a moment the valet-de-chambre will call the guard, as he did
yesterday and the day before.”

“And we shall answer?”

“No, on the contrary, we shall not answer.”

“As you please; I don’t insist on answering.”

“We will not answer, then; we will simply settle our hats on our heads
and we will escort his eminence.”

“Where shall we escort him?”

“Where he is going—to visit Athos. Do you think Athos will be sorry to
see us?”

“Oh!” cried Porthos, “oh! I understand.”

“Wait a little, Porthos, before crying out; for, on my word, you
haven’t reached the end,” said the Gascon, in a jesting tone.

“What is to happen?” said Porthos.

“Follow me,” replied D’Artagnan. “The man who lives to see shall see.”

And slipping through the aperture, he alighted in the court. Porthos
followed him by the same road, but with more difficulty and less
diligence. They could hear the two soldiers shivering with fear, as
they lay bound in the chamber.

Scarcely had the two Frenchmen touched the ground when a door opened
and the voice of the valet-de-chambre called out:

“Make ready!”

At the same moment the guardhouse was opened and a voice called out:

“La Bruyere and Du Barthois! March!”

“It seems that I am named La Bruyere,” remarked D’Artagnan.

“And I, Du Barthois,” added Porthos.

“Where are you?” asked the valet-de-chambre, whose eyes, dazzled by the
light, could not clearly distinguish our heroes in the gloom.

“Here we are,” said the Gascon.

“What say you to that, Monsieur du Vallon?” he added in a low tone to
Porthos.

“If it but lasts, most capital,” responded Porthos.

These two newly enlisted soldiers marched gravely after the
valet-de-chambre, who opened the door of the vestibule, then another
which seemed to be that of a waiting-room, and showing them two stools:

“Your orders are very simple,” he said; “don’t allow anybody, except
one person, to enter here. Do you hear—not a single creature! Obey that
person implicitly. On your return you cannot make a mistake. You have
only to wait here till I release you.”

D’Artagnan was known to this valet-de-chambre, who was no other than
Bernouin, and he had during the last six or eight months introduced the
Gascon a dozen times to the cardinal. The Gascon, therefore, instead of
answering, growled out “Ja! Ja!” in the most German and the least
Gascon accent possible.

As for Porthos, on whom D’Artagnan had impressed the necessity of
absolute silence and who did not even now begin to comprehend the
scheme of his friend, which was to follow Mazarin in his visit to
Athos, he was simply mute. All that he was allowed to say, in case of
emergencies, was the proverbial Der Teufel!

Bernouin shut the door and went away. When Porthos heard the key turn
in the lock he began to be alarmed, lest they should only have
exchanged one prison for another.

“Porthos, my friend,” said D’Artagnan, “don’t distrust Providence! Let
me meditate and consider.”

“Meditate and consider as much as you like,” replied Porthos, who was
now quite out of humor at seeing things take this turn.

“We have walked eight paces,” whispered D’Artagnan, “and gone up six
steps, so hereabouts is the pavilion called the pavilion of the
orangery. The Comte de la Fere cannot be far off, only the doors are
locked.”

“That is a slight difficulty,” said Porthos, “and a good push with the
shoulders——”

“For God’s sake, Porthos my friend, reserve your feats of strength, or
they will not have, when needed, the honor they deserve. Have you not
heard that some one is coming here?”

“Yes.”

“Well, that some one will open the doors.”

“But, my dear fellow, if that some one recognizes us, if that some one
cries out, we are lost; for you don’t propose, I imagine, that I shall
kill that man of the church. That might do if we were dealing with
Englishmen or Germans.”

“Oh, may God keep me from it, and you, too!” said D’Artagnan. “The
young king would, perhaps, show us some gratitude; but the queen would
never forgive us, and it is she whom we have to consider. And then,
besides, the useless blood! never! no, never! I have my plan; let me
carry it out and we shall laugh.”

“So much the better,” said Porthos; “I feel some need of it.”

“Hush!” said D’Artagnan; “the some one is coming.”

The sound of a light step was heard in the vestibule. The hinges of the
door creaked and a man appeared in the dress of a cavalier, wrapped in
a brown cloak, with a lantern in one hand and a large beaver hat pulled
down over his eyes.

Porthos effaced himself against the wall, but he could not render
himself invisible; and the man in the cloak said to him, giving him his
lantern:

“Light the lamp which hangs from the ceiling.”

Then addressing D’Artagnan:

“You know the watchword?” he said.

“Ja!” replied the Gascon, determined to confine himself to this
specimen of the German tongue.

“Tedesco!” answered the cavalier; “va bene.”

And advancing toward the door opposite to that by which he came in, he
opened it and disappeared behind it, shutting it as he went.

“Now,” asked Porthos, “what are we to do?”

“Now we shall make use of your shoulder, friend Porthos, if this door
proves to be locked. Everything in its proper time, and all comes right
to those who know how to wait patiently. But first barricade the first
door well; then we will follow yonder cavalier.”

The two friends set to work and crowded the space before the door with
all the furniture in the room, as not only to make the passage
impassable, but so to block the door that by no means could it open
inward.

“There!” said D’Artagnan, “we can’t be overtaken. Come! forward!”




Chapter LXXXV.
The Oubliettes of Cardinal Mazarin.


At first, on arriving at the door through which Mazarin had passed,
D’Artagnan tried in vain to open it, but on the powerful shoulder of
Porthos being applied to one of the panels, which gave way, D’Artagnan
introduced the point of his sword between the bolt and the staple of
the lock. The bolt gave way and the door opened.

“As I told you, everything can be attained, Porthos, women and doors,
by proceeding with gentleness.”

“You’re a great moralist, and that’s the fact,” said Porthos.

They entered; behind a glass window, by the light of the cardinal’s
lantern, which had been placed on the floor in the midst of the
gallery, they saw the orange and pomegranate trees of the Castle of
Rueil, in long lines, forming one great alley and two smaller side
alleys.

“No cardinal!” said D’Artagnan, “but only his lantern; where the devil,
then, is he?”

Exploring, however, one of the side wings of the gallery, after making
a sign to Porthos to explore the other, he saw, all at once, at his
left, a tub containing an orange tree, which had been pushed out of its
place and in its place an open aperture.

Ten men would have found difficulty in moving that tub, but by some
mechanical contrivance it had turned with the flagstone on which it
rested.

D’Artagnan, as we have said, perceived a hole in that place and in this
hole the steps of a winding staircase.

He called Porthos to look at it.

“Were our object money only,” he said, “we should be rich directly.”

“How’s that?”

“Don’t you understand, Porthos? At the bottom of that staircase lies,
probably, the cardinal’s treasury of which folk tell such wonders, and
we should only have to descend, empty a chest, shut the cardinal up in
it, double lock it, go away, carrying off as much gold as we could, put
back this orange-tree over the place, and no one in the world would
ever ask us where our fortune came from—not even the cardinal.”

“It would be a happy hit for clowns to make, but as it seems to be
unworthy of two gentlemen——” said Porthos.

“So I think; and therefore I said, ‘Were our object money only;’ but we
want something else,” replied the Gascon.

At the same moment, whilst D’Artagnan was leaning over the aperture to
listen, a metallic sound, as if some one was moving a bag of gold,
struck on his ear; he started; instantly afterward a door opened and a
light played upon the staircase.

Mazarin had left his lamp in the gallery to make people believe that he
was walking about, but he had with him a waxlight, to help him to
explore his mysterious strong box.

“Faith,” he said, in Italian, as he was reascending the steps and
looking at a bag of reals, “faith, there’s enough to pay five
councillors of parliament, and two generals in Paris. I am a great
captain—that I am! but I make war in my own way.”

The two friends were crouching down, meantime, behind a tub in the side
alley.

Mazarin came within three steps of D’Artagnan and pushed a spring in
the wall; the slab turned and the orange tree resumed its place.

Then the cardinal put out the waxlight, slipped it into his pocket, and
taking up the lantern: “Now,” he said, “for Monsieur de la Fere.”

“Very good,” thought D’Artagnan, “’tis our road likewise; we will go
together.”

All three set off on their walk, Mazarin taking the middle alley and
the friends the side ones.

The cardinal reached a second door without perceiving he was being
followed; the sand with which the alleys were covered deadened the
sound of footsteps.

He then turned to the left, down a corridor which had escaped the
attention of the two friends, but as he opened the door he paused, as
if in thought.

“Ah! Diavolo!” he exclaimed, “I forgot the recommendation of De
Comminges, who advised me to take a guard and place it at this door, in
order not to put myself at the mercy of that four-headed combination of
devils.” And with a movement of impatience he turned to retrace his
steps.

“Do not give yourself the trouble, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, with his
right foot forward, his beaver in his hand, a smile on his face, “we
have followed your eminence step by step and here we are.”

“Yes—here we are,” said Porthos.

And he made the same friendly salute as D’Artagnan.

Mazarin gazed at each of them with an affrighted stare, recognized
them, and let drop his lantern, uttering a cry of terror.

D’Artagnan picked it up; by good luck it had not been extinguished.

“Oh, what imprudence, my lord,” said D’Artagnan; “’tis not good to be
about just here without a light. Your eminence might knock against
something, or fall into a hole.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” muttered Mazarin, unable to recover from his
astonishment.

“Yes, my lord, it is I. I have the honor to present to you Monsieur du
Vallon, that excellent friend of mine, in whom your eminence had the
kindness to interest yourself formerly.”

And D’Artagnan held the lamp before the merry face of Porthos, who now
began to comprehend the affair and be very proud of the whole
undertaking.

“You were going to visit Monsieur de la Fere?” said D’Artagnan. “Don’t
let us disarrange your eminence. Be so good as to show us the way and
we will follow you.”

Mazarin was by degrees recovering his senses.

“Have you been long in the orangery?” he asked in a trembling voice,
remembering the visits he had been paying to his treasury.

Porthos opened his mouth to reply; D’Artagnan made him a sign, and his
mouth, remaining silent, gradually closed.

“This moment come, my lord,” said D’Artagnan.

Mazarin breathed again. His fears were now no longer for his hoard, but
for himself. A sort of smile played on his lips.

“Come,” he said, “you have me in a snare, gentlemen. I confess myself
conquered. You wish to ask for liberty, and—I give it you.”

“Oh, my lord!” answered D’Artagnan, “you are too good; as to our
liberty, we have that; we want to ask something else of you.”

“You have your liberty?” repeated Mazarin, in terror.

“Certainly; and on the other hand, my lord, you have lost it, and now,
in accordance with the law of war, sir, you must buy it back again.”

Mazarin felt a shiver run through him—a chill even to his heart’s core.
His piercing look was fixed in vain on the satirical face of the Gascon
and the unchanging countenance of Porthos. Both were in shadow and the
Sybil of Cuma herself could not have read them.

“To purchase back my liberty?” said the cardinal.

“Yes, my lord.”

“And how much will that cost me, Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“Zounds, my lord, I don’t know yet. We must ask the Comte de la Fere
the question. Will your eminence deign to open the door which leads to
the count’s room, and in ten minutes all will be settled.”

Mazarin started.

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “your eminence sees that we wish to act
with all formality and due respect; but I must warn you that we have no
time to lose; open the door then, my lord, and be so good as to
remember, once for all, that on the slightest attempt to escape or the
faintest cry for help, our position being very critical indeed, you
must not be angry with us if we go to extremities.”

“Be assured,” answered Mazarin, “that I shall attempt nothing; I give
you my word of honor.”

D’Artagnan made a sign to Porthos to redouble his watchfulness; then
turning to Mazarin:

“Now, my lord, let us enter, if you please.”




Chapter LXXXVI.
Conferences.


Mazarin turned the lock of a double door, on the threshold of which
they found Athos ready to receive his illustrious guests according to
the notice Comminges had given him.

On perceiving Mazarin he bowed.

“Your eminence,” he said, “might have dispensed with your attendants;
the honor bestowed on me is too great for me to be unmindful of it.”

“And so, my dear count,” said D’Artagnan, “his eminence didn’t actually
insist on our attending him; it is Du Vallon and I who have insisted,
and even in a manner somewhat impolite, perhaps, so great was our
longing to see you.”

At that voice, that mocking tone, and that familiar gesture, accenting
voice and tone, Athos made a bound of surprise.

“D’Artagnan! Porthos!” he exclaimed.

“My very self, dear friend.”

“Me, also!” repeated Porthos.

“What means this?” asked the count.

“It means,” replied Mazarin, trying to smile and biting his lips in the
attempt, “that our parts are changed, and that instead of these
gentlemen being my prisoners I am theirs; but, gentlemen, I warn you,
unless you kill me, your victory will be of very short duration; people
will come to the rescue.”

“Ah! my lord!” cried the Gascon, “don’t threaten! ’tis a bad example.
We are so good and gentle to your eminence. Come, let us put aside all
rancor and talk pleasantly.”

“There’s nothing I wish more,” replied Mazarin. “But don’t think
yourselves in a better position than you are. In ensnaring me you have
fallen into the trap yourselves. How are you to get away from here?
remember the soldiers and sentinels who guard these doors. Now, I am
going to show you how sincere I am.”

“Good,” thought D’Artagnan; “we must look about us; he’s going to play
us a trick.”

“I offered you your liberty,” continued the minister; “will you take
it? Before an hour has passed you will be discovered, arrested, obliged
to kill me, which would be a crime unworthy of loyal gentlemen like
you.”

“He is right,” thought Athos.

And, like every other reflection passing in a mind that entertained
none but noble thoughts, this feeling was expressed in his eyes.

“And therefore,” said D’Artagnan, to clip the hope which Athos’s tacit
adhesion had imparted to Mazarin, “we shall not proceed to that
violence save in the last extremity.”

“If on the contrary,” resumed Mazarin, “you accept your liberty——”

“Why you, my lord, might take it away from us in less than five minutes
afterward; and from my knowledge of you I believe you will so take it
away from us.”

“No—on the faith of a cardinal. You do not believe me?”

“My lord, I never believe cardinals who are not priests.”

“Well, on the faith of a minister.”

“You are no longer a minister, my lord; you are a prisoner.”

“Then, on the honor of a Mazarin, as I am and ever shall be, I hope,”
said the cardinal.

“Hem,” replied D’Artagnan. “I have heard speak of a Mazarin who had not
much religion when his oaths were in question. I fear he may have been
an ancestor of your eminence.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan, you are a great wit and I am really sorry to be
on bad terms with you.”

“My lord, let us come to terms; I ask nothing better.”

“Very well,” said Mazarin, “if I place you in security, in a manner
evident, palpable——”

“Ah! that is another thing,” said Porthos.

“Let us see,” said Athos.

“Let us see,” said D’Artagnan.

“In the first place, do you accept?” asked the cardinal.

“Unfold your plan, my lord, and we will see.”

“Take notice that you are shut up—captured.”

“You well know, my lord, that there always remains to us a last
resource.”

“What?”

“That of dying together.”

Mazarin shuddered.

“Listen,” he said; “at the end of yonder corridor is a door, of which I
have the key, it leads into the park. Go, and take this key with you;
you are active, vigorous, and you have arms. At a hundred steps, on
turning to the left, you will find the wall of the park; get over it,
and in three leaps you will be on the road and free.”

“Ah! by Jove, my lord,” said D’Artagnan, “you have well said, but these
are only words. Where is the key you speak of?”

“Here it is.”

“Ah, my lord! You will conduct us yourself, then, to that door?”

“Very willingly, if it be necessary to reassure you,” answered the
minister, and Mazarin, who was delighted to get off so cheaply, led the
way, in high spirits, to the corridor and opened the door.

It led into the park, as the three fugitives perceived by the night
breeze which rushed into the corridor and blew the wind into their
faces.

“The devil!” exclaimed the Gascon, “’tis a dreadful night, my lord. We
don’t know the locality, and shall never find the wall. Since your
eminence has come so far, come a few steps further; conduct us, my
lord, to the wall.”

“Be it so,” replied the cardinal; and walking in a straight line he
went to the wall, at the foot of which they all four arrived at the
same instant.

“Are you satisfied, gentlemen?” asked Mazarin.

“I think so, indeed; we should be hard to please if we were not. Deuce
take it! three poor gentlemen escorted by a prince of the church! Ah!
apropos, my lord! you remarked that we were all active, vigorous and
armed.”

“Yes.”

“You are mistaken. Monsieur du Vallon and I are the only two who are
armed. The count is not; and should we meet with one of your patrol we
must defend ourselves.”

“’Tis true.”

“Where can we find another sword?” asked Porthos.

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, “will lend his, which is of no use to him,
to the Comte de la Fere.”

“Willingly,” said the cardinal; “I will even ask the count to keep it
for my sake.”

“I promise you, my lord, never to part with it,” replied Athos.

“Well, well,” cried D’Artagnan, “this reconciliation is truly touching;
have you not tears in your eyes, Porthos?”

“Yes,” said Porthos; “but I do not know if it is feeling or the wind
that makes me weep; I think it is the wind.”

“Now climb up, Athos, quickly,” said D’Artagnan. Athos, assisted by
Porthos, who lifted him up like a feather, arrived at the top.

“Now, jump down, Athos.”

Athos jumped and disappeared on the other side of the wall.

“Are you on the ground?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Yes.”

“Without accident?”

“Perfectly safe and sound.”

“Porthos, whilst I get up, watch the cardinal. No, I don’t want your
help, watch the cardinal.”

“I am watching,” said Porthos. “Well?”

“You are right; it is more difficult than I thought. Lend me your
back—but don’t let the cardinal go.”

Porthos lent him his back and D’Artagnan was soon on the summit of the
wall, where he seated himself.

Mazarin pretended to laugh.

“Are you there?” asked Porthos.

“Yes, my friend; and now——”

“Now, what?” asked Porthos.

“Now give me the cardinal up here; if he makes any noise stifle him.”

Mazarin wished to call out, but Porthos held him tight and passed him
to D’Artagnan, who seized him by the neck and made him sit down by him;
then in a menacing tone, he said:

“Sir! jump directly down, close to Monsieur de la Fere, or, on the
honor of a gentleman, I’ll kill you!”

“Monsieur, monsieur,” cried Mazarin, “you are breaking your word to
me!”

“I—did I promise you anything, my lord?”

Mazarin groaned.

“You are free,” he said, “through me; your liberty was my ransom.”

“Agreed; but the ransom of that immense treasure buried under the
gallery, to which one descends on pushing a spring hidden in the wall,
which causes a tub to turn, revealing a staircase—must not one speak of
that a little, my lord?”

“Diavolo!” cried Mazarin, almost choked, and clasping his hands; “I am
a lost and ruined man!”

But without listening to his protestations of alarm, D’Artagnan slipped
him gently down into the arms of Athos, who stood immovable at the
bottom of the wall.

Porthos next made an effort which shook the solid wall, and by the aid
of his friend’s hand gained the summit.

“I didn’t understand it all,” he said, “but I understand now; how droll
it is!”

“You think so? so much the better; but that it may prove
laughter-worthy even to the end, let us not lose time.” And he jumped
off the wall.

Porthos did the same.

“Attend to monsieur le cardinal, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan; “for
myself, I will reconnoitre.”

The Gascon then drew his sword and marched as avant guard.

“My lord,” he said, “which way do we go? Think well of your reply, for
should your eminence be mistaken, there might ensue most grave results
for all of us.”

“Along the wall, sir,” said Mazarin, “there will be no danger of losing
yourselves.”

The three friends hastened on, but in a short time were obliged to
slacken the pace. The cardinal could not keep up with them, though with
every wish to do so.

Suddenly D’Artagnan touched something warm, which moved.

“Stop! a horse!” he cried; “I have found a horse!”

“And I, likewise,” said Athos.

“I, too,” said Porthos, who, faithful to the instructions, still held
the cardinal’s arm.

“There’s luck, my lord! just as you were complaining of being tired and
obliged to walk.”

But as he spoke the barrel of a pistol was presented at his breast and
these words were pronounced:

“Touch it not!”

“Grimaud!” he cried; “Grimaud! what art thou about? Why, thou art
posted here by Heaven!”

“No, sir,” said the honest servant, “it was Monsieur Aramis who posted
me here to take care of the horses.”

“Is Aramis here?”

“Yes, sir; he has been here since yesterday.”

“What are you doing?”

“On the watch——”

“What! Aramis here?” cried Athos.

“At the lesser gate of the castle; he’s posted there.”

“Are you a large party?”

“Sixty.”

“Let him know.”

“This moment, sir.”

And believing that no one could execute the commission better than
himself, Grimaud set off at full speed; whilst, enchanted at being all
together again, the friends awaited his return.

There was no one in the whole group in a bad humor except Cardinal
Mazarin.




Chapter LXXXVII.
Thinking that Porthos will be at last a Baron, and D’Artagnan a
Captain.


At the expiration of ten minutes Aramis arrived, accompanied by Grimaud
and eight or ten followers. He was excessively delighted and threw
himself into his friends’ arms.

“You are free, my brothers! free without my aid! and I shall have
succeeded in doing nothing for you in spite of all my efforts.”

“Do not be unhappy, dear friend, on that account; if you have done
nothing as yet, you will do something soon,” replied Athos.

“I had well concerted my plans,” pursued Aramis; “the coadjutor gave me
sixty men; twenty guard the walls of the park, twenty the road from
Rueil to Saint Germain, twenty are dispersed in the woods. Thus I was
able, thanks to the strategic disposition of my forces, to intercept
two couriers from Mazarin to the queen.”

Mazarin listened intently.

“But,” said D’Artagnan, “I trust that you honorably sent them back to
monsieur le cardinal!”

“Ah, yes!” said Aramis, “toward him I should be very likely to practice
such delicacy of sentiment! In one of the despatches the cardinal
declares to the queen that the treasury is empty and that her majesty
has no more money. In the other he announces that he is about to
transport his prisoners to Melun, since Rueil seemed to him not
sufficiently secure. You can understand, dear friend, with what hope I
was inspired by that last letter. I placed myself in ambuscade with my
sixty men; I encircled the castle; the riding horses I entrusted to
Grimaud and I awaited your coming out, which I did not expect till
to-morrow, and I didn’t hope to free you without a skirmish. You are
free to-night, without fighting; so much the better! How did you manage
to escape that scoundrel Mazarin? You must have much reason to complain
of him.”

“Not very much,” said D’Artagnan.

“Really!”

“I might even say that we have some reason to praise him.”

“Impossible!”

“Yes, really; it is owing to him that we are free.”

“Owing to him?”

“Yes, he had us conducted into the orangery by Monsieur Bernouin, his
valet-de-chambre, and from there we followed him to visit the Comte de
la Fere. Then he offered us our liberty and we accepted it. He even
went so far as to show us the way out; he led us to the park wall,
which we climbed over without accident, and then we fell in with
Grimaud.”

“Well!” exclaimed Aramis, “this will reconcile me to him; but I wish he
were here that I might tell him that I did not believe him capable of
so noble an act.”

“My lord,” said D’Artagnan, no longer able to contain himself, “allow
me to introduce to you the Chevalier d’Herblay, who wishes—as you may
have heard—to offer his congratulations to your eminence.”

And he retired, discovering Mazarin, who was in great confusion, to the
astonished gaze of Aramis.

“Ho! ho!” exclaimed the latter, “the cardinal! a glorious prize!
Halloo! halloo! friends! to horse! to horse!”

Several horsemen ran quickly to him.

“Zounds!” cried Aramis, “I may have done some good; so, my lord, deign
to receive my most respectful homage! I will lay a wager that ’twas
that Saint Christopher, Porthos, who performed this feat! Apropos! I
forgot——” and he gave some orders in a low voice to one of the
horsemen.

“I think it will be wise to set off,” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes; but I am expecting some one, a friend of Athos.”

“A friend!” exclaimed the count.

“And here he comes, by Jupiter! galloping through the bushes.”

“The count! the count!” cried a young voice that made Athos start.

“Raoul! Raoul!” he ejaculated.

For one moment the young man forgot his habitual respect—he threw
himself on his father’s neck.

“Look, my lord cardinal,” said Aramis, “would it not have been a pity
to have separated men who love each other as we love? Gentlemen,” he
continued, addressing the cavaliers, who became more and more numerous
every instant; “gentlemen, encircle his eminence, that you may show him
the greater honor. He will, indeed give us the favor of his company;
you will, I hope, be grateful for it; Porthos, do not lose sight of his
eminence.”

Aramis then joined Athos and D’Artagnan, who were consulting together.

“Come,” said D’Artagnan, after a conference of five minutes’ duration,
“let us begin our journey.”

“Where are we to go?” asked Porthos.

“To your house, dear Porthos, at Pierrefonds; your fine chateau is
worthy of affording its princely hospitality to his eminence; it is,
likewise, well situated—neither too near Paris, nor too far from it; we
can establish a communication between it and the capital with great
facility. Come, my lord, you shall be treated like a prince, as you
are.”

“A fallen prince!” exclaimed Mazarin, piteously.

“The chances of war,” said Athos, “are many, but be assured we shall
take no improper advantage of them.”

“No, but we shall make use of them,” said D’Artagnan.

The rest of the night was employed by these cavaliers in traveling with
the wonderful rapidity of former days. Mazarin, still sombre and
pensive, permitted himself to be dragged along in this way; it looked a
race of phantoms. At dawn twelve leagues had been passed without
drawing rein; half the escort were exhausted and several horses fell
down.

“Horses, nowadays, are not what they were formerly,” observed Porthos;
“everything degenerates.”

“I have sent Grimaud to Dammartin,” said Aramis. “He is to bring us
five fresh horses—one for his eminence, four for us. We, at least, must
keep close to monseigneur; the rest of the start will rejoin us later.
Once beyond Saint Denis we shall have nothing to fear.”

Grimaud, in fact, brought back five horses. The nobleman to whom he
applied, being a friend of Porthos, was very ready, not to sell them,
as was proposed, but to lend them. Ten minutes later the escort stopped
at Ermenonville, but the four friends went on with well sustained
ardor, guarding Mazarin carefully. At noon they rode into the avenue of
Pierrefonds.

“Ah!” said Mousqueton, who had ridden by the side of D’Artagnan without
speaking a word on the journey, “you may think what you will, sir, but
I can breathe now for the first time since my departure from
Pierrefonds;” and he put his horse to a gallop to announce to the other
servants the arrival of Monsieur du Vallon and his friends.

“We are four of us,” said D’Artagnan; “we must relieve each other in
mounting guard over my lord and each of us must watch three hours at a
time. Athos is going to examine the castle, which it will be necessary
to render impregnable in case of siege; Porthos will see to the
provisions and Aramis to the troops of the garrison. That is to say,
Athos will be chief engineer, Porthos purveyor-in-general, and Aramis
governor of the fortress.”

Meanwhile, they gave up to Mazarin the handsomest room in the chateau.

“Gentlemen,” he said, when he was in his room, “you do not expect, I
presume, to keep me here a long time incognito?”

“No, my lord,” replied the Gascon; “on the contrary, we think of
announcing very soon that we have you here.”

“Then you will be besieged.”

“We expect it.”

“And what shall you do?”

“Defend ourselves. Were the late Cardinal Richelieu alive he would tell
you a certain story of the Bastion Saint Gervais, which we four, with
our four lackeys and twelve dead men, held out against a whole army.”

“Such feats, sir, are done once—and never repeated.”

“However, nowadays there’s no need of so much heroism. To-morrow the
army of Paris will be summoned, the day after it will be here! The
field of battle, instead, therefore, of being at Saint Denis or at
Charenton, will be near Compiegne or Villars-Cotterets.”

“The prince will vanquish you, as he has always done.”

“’Tis possible; my lord; but before an engagement ensues we shall move
your eminence to another castle belonging to our friend Du Vallon, who
has three. We will not expose your eminence to the chances of war.”

“Come,” answered Mazarin, “I see it will be necessary for me to
capitulate.”

“Before a siege?”

“Yes; the conditions will be better than afterward.”

“Ah, my lord! as to conditions, you would soon see how moderate and
reasonable we are!”

“Come, now, what are your conditions?”

“Rest yourself first, my lord, and we—we will reflect.”

“I do not need rest, gentlemen; I need to know whether I am among
enemies or friends.”

“Friends, my lord! friends!”

“Well, then, tell me at once what you want, that I may see if any
arrangement be possible. Speak, Comte de la Fere!”

“My lord,” replied Athos, “for myself I have nothing to demand. For
France, were I to specify my wishes, I should have too much. I beg you
to excuse me and propose to the chevalier.”

And Athos, bowing, retired and remained leaning against the
mantelpiece, a spectator of the scene.

“Speak, then, chevalier!” said the cardinal. “What do you want? Nothing
ambiguous, if you please. Be clear, short and precise.”

“As for me,” replied Aramis, “I have in my pocket the very programme of
the conditions which the deputation—of which I formed one—went
yesterday to Saint Germain to impose on you. Let us consider first the
ancient rights. The demands in that programme must be granted.”

“We were almost agreed on those,” replied Mazarin; “let us pass on to
private and personal stipulations.”

“You suppose, then, that there are some?” said Aramis, smiling.

“I do not suppose that you will all be quite so disinterested as
Monsieur de la Fere,” replied the cardinal, bowing to Athos.

“My lord, you are right, and I am glad to see that you do justice to
the count at last. The count has a mind above vulgar desires and
earthly passions. He is a proud soul—he is a man by himself! You are
right—he is worth us all, and we avow it to you!”

“Aramis,” said Athos, “are you jesting?”

“No, no, dear friend; I state only what we all know. You are right; it
is not you alone this matter concerns, but my lord and his unworthy
servant, myself.”

“Well, then, what do you require besides the general conditions before
recited?”

“I require, my lord, that Normandy should be given to Madame de
Longueville, with five hundred thousand francs and full absolution. I
require that his majesty should deign to be godfather to the child she
has just borne; and that my lord, after having been present at the
christening, should go to proffer his homage to our Holy Father the
Pope.”

“That is, you wish me to lay aside my ministerial functions, to quit
France and be an exile.”

“I wish his eminence to become pope on the first opportunity, allowing
me then the right of demanding full indulgences for myself and my
friends.”

Mazarin made a grimace which was quite indescribable, and then turned
to D’Artagnan.

“And you, sir?” he said.

“I, my lord,” answered the Gascon, “I differ from Monsieur d’Herblay
entirely as to the last point, though I agree with him on the first.
Far from wishing my lord to quit Paris, I hope he will stay there and
continue to be prime minister, as he is a great statesman. I shall try
also to help him to down the Fronde, but on one condition—that he
sometimes remembers the king’s faithful servants and gives the first
vacant company of musketeers to a man that I could name. And you,
Monsieur du Vallon——”

“Yes, you, sir! Speak, if you please,” said Mazarin.

“As for me,” answered Porthos, “I wish my lord cardinal, in order to do
honor to my house, which gives him an asylum, would in remembrance of
this adventure erect my estate into a barony, with a promise to confer
that order on one of my particular friends, whenever his majesty next
creates peers.”

“You know, sir, that before receiving the order one must submit
proofs.”

“My friends will submit them. Besides, should it be necessary,
monseigneur will show him how that formality may be avoided.”

Mazarin bit his lips; the blow was direct and he replied rather dryly:

“All this appears to me to be ill conceived, disjointed, gentlemen; for
if I satisfy some I shall displease others. If I stay in Paris I cannot
go to Rome; if I became pope I could not continue to be prime minister;
and it is only by continuing prime minister that I can make Monsieur
d’Artagnan a captain and Monsieur du Vallon a baron.”

“True,” said Aramis, “so, as I am in a minority, I withdraw my
proposition, so far as it relates to the voyage to Rome and
monseigneur’s resignation.”

“I am to remain minister, then?” said Mazarin.

“You remain minister; that is understood,” said D’Artagnan; “France
needs you.”

“And I desist from my pretensions,” said Aramis. “His eminence will
continue to be prime minister and her majesty’s favorite, if he will
grant to me and my friends what we demand for France and for
ourselves.”

“Occupy yourselves with your own affairs, gentlemen, and let France
settle matters as she will with me,” resumed Mazarin.

“Ho! ho!” replied Aramis. “The Frondeurs will have a treaty and your
eminence must sign it before us, promising at the same time to obtain
the queen’s consent to it.”

“I can answer only for myself,” said Mazarin. “I cannot answer for the
queen. Suppose her majesty refuses?”

“Oh!” said D’Artagnan, “monseigneur knows very well that her majesty
refuses him nothing.”

“Here, monseigneur,” said Aramis, “is the treaty proposed by the
deputation of Frondeurs. Will your eminence please read and examine?”

“I am acquainted with it.”

“Sign it, then.”

“Reflect, gentlemen, that a signature given under circumstances like
the present might be regarded as extorted by violence.”

“Monseigneur will be at hand to testify that it was freely given.”

“Suppose I refuse?”

“Then,” said D’Artagnan, “your eminence must expect the consequences of
a refusal.”

“Would you dare to touch a cardinal?”

“You have dared, my lord, to imprison her majesty’s musketeers.”

“The queen will revenge me, gentlemen.”

“I do not think so, although inclination might lead her to do so, but
we shall take your eminence to Paris, and the Parisians will defend
us.”

“How uneasy they must be at this moment at Rueil and Saint Germain,”
said Aramis. “How they must be asking, ‘Where is the cardinal?’ ‘What
has become of the minister?’ ‘Where has the favorite gone?’ How they
must be looking for monseigneur in all corners! What comments must be
made; and if the Fronde knows that monseigneur has disappeared, how the
Fronde must triumph!”

“It is frightful,” murmured Mazarin.

“Sign the treaty, then, monseigneur,” said Aramis.

“Suppose the queen should refuse to ratify it?”

“Ah! nonsense!” cried D’Artagnan, “I can manage so that her majesty
will receive me well; I know an excellent method.”

“What?”

“I shall take her majesty the letter in which you tell her that the
finances are exhausted.”

“And then?” asked Mazarin, turning pale.

“When I see her majesty embarrassed, I shall conduct her to Rueil, make
her enter the orangery and show her a certain spring which turns a
box.”

“Enough, sir,” muttered the cardinal, “you have said enough; where is
the treaty?”

“Here it is,” replied Aramis. “Sign, my lord,” and he gave him a pen.

Mazarin arose, walked some moments, thoughtful, but not dejected.

“And when I have signed,” he said, “what is to be my guarantee?”

“My word of honor, sir,” said Athos.

Mazarin started, turned toward the Comte de la Fere, and looking for an
instant at that grand and honest countenance, took the pen.

“It is sufficient, count,” he said, and signed the treaty.

“And now, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” he said, “prepare to set off for Saint
Germain and take a letter from me to the queen.”




Chapter LXXXVIII.
Shows how with Threat and Pen more is effected than by the Sword.


D’Artagnan knew his part well; he was aware that opportunity has a
forelock only for him who will take it and he was not a man to let it
go by him without seizing it. He soon arranged a prompt and certain
manner of traveling, by sending relays of horses to Chantilly, so that
he might be in Paris in five or six hours. But before setting out he
reflected that for a lad of intelligence and experience he was in a
singular predicament, since he was proceeding toward uncertainty and
leaving certainty behind him.

“In fact,” he said, as he was about to mount and start on his dangerous
mission, “Athos, for generosity, is a hero of romance; Porthos has an
excellent disposition, but is easily influenced; Aramis has a
hieroglyphic countenance, always illegible. What will come out of those
three elements when I am no longer present to combine them? The
deliverance of the cardinal, perhaps. Now, the deliverance of the
cardinal would be the ruin of our hopes; and our hopes are thus far the
only recompense we have for labors in comparison with which those of
Hercules were pygmean.”

He went to find Aramis.

“You, my dear Chevalier d’Herblay,” he said, “are the Fronde incarnate.
Mistrust Athos, therefore, who will not prosecute the affairs of any
one, even his own. Mistrust Porthos, especially, who, to please the
count whom he regards as God on earth, will assist him in contriving
Mazarin’s escape, if Mazarin has the wit to weep or play the
chivalric.”

Aramis smiled; his smile was at once cunning and resolute.

“Fear nothing,” he said; “I have my conditions to impose. My private
ambition tends only to the profit of him who has justice on his side.”

“Good!” thought D’Artagnan: “in this direction I am satisfied.” He
pressed Aramis’s hand and went in search of Porthos.

“Friend,” he said, “you have worked so hard with me toward building up
our fortune, that, at the moment when we are about to reap the fruits
of our labours, it would be a ridiculous piece of silliness in you to
allow yourself to be controlled by Aramis, whose cunning you know—a
cunning which, we may say between ourselves, is not always without
egotism; or by Athos, a noble and disinterested man, but blase, who,
desiring nothing further for himself, doesn’t sympathize with the
desires of others. What should you say if either of these two friends
proposed to you to let Mazarin go?”

“Why, I should say that we had too much trouble in taking him to let
him off so easily.”

“Bravo, Porthos! and you would be right, my friend; for in losing him
you would lose your barony, which you have in your grasp, to say
nothing of the fact that, were he once out of this, Mazarin would have
you hanged.”

“Do you think so?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Then I would kill him rather than let him go.”

“And you would act rightly. There is no question, you understand,
provided we secure our own interests, of securing those of the
Frondeurs; who, besides, don’t understand political matters as we old
soldiers do.”

“Never fear, dear friend,” said Porthos. “I shall see you through the
window as you mount your horse; I shall follow you with my eyes as long
as you are in sight; then I shall place myself at the cardinal’s door—a
door with glass windows. I shall see everything, and at the least
suspicious sign I shall begin to exterminate.”

“Bravo!” thought D’Artagnan; “on this side I think the cardinal will be
well guarded.” He pressed the hand of the lord of Pierrefonds and went
in search of Athos.

“My dear Athos,” he said, “I am going away. I have only one thing to
say to you. You know Anne of Austria; the captivity of Mazarin alone
guarantees my life; if you let him go I am a dead man.”

“I needed nothing less than that consideration, my dear D’Artagnan, to
persuade myself to adopt the role of jailer. I give you my word that
you will find the cardinal where you leave him.”

“This reassures me more than all the royal signatures,” thought
D’Artagnan. “Now that I have the word of Athos I can set out.”

D’Artagnan started alone on his journey, without other escort than his
sword, and with a simple passport from Mazarin to secure his admission
to the queen’s presence. Six hours after he left Pierrefonds he was at
Saint Germain.

The disappearance of Mazarin was not as yet generally known. Anne of
Austria was informed of it and concealed her uneasiness from every one.
In the chamber of D’Artagnan and Porthos the two soldiers had been
found bound and gagged. On recovering the use of their limbs and
tongues they could, of course, tell nothing but what they knew—that
they had been seized, stripped and bound. But as to what had been done
by Porthos and D’Artagnan afterward they were as ignorant as all the
inhabitants of the chateau.

Bernouin alone knew a little more than the others. Bernouin, seeing
that his master did not return and hearing the stroke of midnight, had
made an examination of the orangery. The first door, barricaded with
furniture, had aroused in him certain suspicions, but without
communicating his suspicions to any one he had patiently worked his way
into the midst of all that confusion. Then he came to the corridor, all
the doors of which he found open; so, too, was the door of Athos’s
chamber and that of the park. From the latter point it was easy to
follow tracks on the snow. He saw that these tracks tended toward the
wall; on the other side he found similar tracks, then footprints of
horses and then signs of a troop of cavalry which had moved away in the
direction of Enghien. He could no longer cherish any doubt that the
cardinal had been carried off by the three prisoners, since the
prisoners had disappeared at the same time; and he had hastened to
Saint Germain to warn the queen of that disappearance.

Anne had enforced the utmost secrecy and had disclosed the event to no
one except the Prince de Condé, who had sent five or six hundred
horsemen into the environs of Saint Germain with orders to bring in any
suspicious person who was going away from Rueil, in whatsoever
direction it might be.

Now, since D’Artagnan did not constitute a body of horsemen, since he
was alone, since he was not going away from Rueil and was going to
Saint Germain, no one paid any attention to him and his journey was not
obstructed in any way.

On entering the courtyard of the old chateau the first person seen by
our ambassador was Maitre Bernouin in person, who, standing on the
threshold, awaited news of his vanished master.

At the sight of D’Artagnan, who entered the courtyard on horseback,
Bernouin rubbed his eyes and thought he must be mistaken. But
D’Artagnan made a friendly sign to him with his head, dismounted, and
throwing his bridle to a lackey who was passing, he approached the
valet-de-chambre with a smile on his lips.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the latter, like a man who has the
nightmare and talks in his sleep, “Monsieur d’Artagnan!”

“Himself, Monsieur Bernouin.”

“And why have you come here?”

“To bring news of Monsieur de Mazarin—the freshest news there is.”

“What has become of him, then?”

“He is as well as you and I.”

“Nothing bad has happened to him, then?”

“Absolutely nothing. He felt the need of making a trip in the Ile de
France, and begged us—the Comte de la Fere and Monsieur du Vallon—to
accompany him. We were too devoted servants to refuse him a request of
that sort. We set out last evening and here we are.”

“Here you are.”

“His eminence had something to communicate to her majesty, something
secret and private—a mission that could be confided only to a sure
man—and so has sent me to Saint Germain. And therefore, my dear
Monsieur Bernouin, if you wish to do what will be pleasing to your
master, announce to her majesty that I have come, and tell her with
what purpose.”

Whether he spoke seriously or in jest, since it was evident that under
existing circumstances D’Artagnan was the only man who could relieve
the queen’s uneasiness, Bernouin went without hesitation to announce to
her this strange embassy; and as he had foreseen, the queen gave orders
to introduce Monsieur d’Artagnan at once.

D’Artagnan approached the sovereign with every mark of profound
respect, and having fallen on his knees presented to her the cardinal’s
letter

It was, however, merely a letter of introduction. The queen read it,
recognized the writing, and, since there were no details in it of what
had occurred, asked for particulars. D’Artagnan related everything with
that simple and ingenuous air which he knew how to assume on occasions.
The queen, as he went on, looked at him with increasing astonishment.
She could not comprehend how a man could conceive such an enterprise
and still less how he could have the audacity to disclose it to her
whose interest and almost duty it was to punish him.

“How, sir!” she cried, as D’Artagnan finished, “you dare to tell me the
details of your crime—to give me an account of your treason!”

“Pardon, madame, but I think that either I have expressed myself badly
or your majesty has imperfectly understood me. There is here no
question of crime or treason. Monsieur de Mazarin held us in prison,
Monsieur du Vallon and myself, because we could not believe that he had
sent us to England to quietly look on while they cut off the head of
Charles I., brother-in-law of the late king, your husband, the consort
of Madame Henrietta, your sister and your guest, and because we did all
that we could do to save the life of the royal martyr. We were then
convinced, my friend and I, that there was some error of which we were
the victims, and that an explanation was called for between his
eminence and ourselves. Now, that an explanation may bear fruit, it is
necessary that it should be quietly conducted, far from noise and
interruption. We have therefore taken away monsieur le cardinal to my
friend’s chateau and there we have come to an understanding. Well,
madame, it proved to be as we had supposed; there was a mistake.
Monsieur de Mazarin had thought that we had rendered service to General
Cromwell, instead of King Charles, which would have been a disgrace,
rebounding from us to him, and from him to your majesty—a dishonor
which would have tainted the royalty of your illustrious son. We were
able to prove the contrary, and that proof we are ready to give to your
majesty, calling in support of it the august widow weeping in the
Louvre, where your royal munificence has provided for her a home. That
proof satisfied him so completely that, as a sign of satisfaction, he
has sent me, as your majesty may see, to consider with you what
reparation should be made to gentlemen unjustly treated and wrongfully
persecuted.”

“I listen to you, and I wonder at you, sir,” said the queen. “In fact,
I have rarely seen such excess of impudence.”

“Your majesty, on your side,” said D’Artagnan, “is as much mistaken as
to our intentions as the Cardinal Mazarin has always been.”

“You are in error, sir,” answered the queen. “I am so little mistaken
that in ten minutes you shall be arrested, and in an hour I shall set
off at the head of my army to release my minister.”

“I am sure your majesty will not commit such an act of imprudence,
first, because it would be useless and would produce the most
disastrous results. Before he could be possibly set free the cardinal
would be dead; and indeed, so convinced is he of this, that he
entreated me, should I find your majesty disposed to act in this way,
to do all I could to induce you to change your resolution.”

“Well, then, I will content myself with arresting you!”

“Madame, the possibility of my arrest has been foreseen, and should I
not have returned by to-morrow, at a certain hour the next day the
cardinal will be brought to Paris and delivered to the parliament.”

“It is evident, sir, that your position has kept you out of relation to
men and affairs; otherwise you would know that since we left Paris
monsieur le cardinal has returned thither five or six times; that he
has there met De Beaufort, De Bouillon, the coadjutor and D’Elbeuf and
that not one of them had any desire to arrest him.”

“Your pardon, madame, I know all that. And therefore my friends will
conduct monsieur le cardinal neither to De Beaufort, nor to De
Bouillon, nor to the coadjutor, nor to D’Elbeuf. These gentlemen wage
war on private account, and in buying them up, by granting them what
they wished, monsieur le cardinal has made a good bargain. He will be
delivered to the parliament, members of which can, of course, be
bought, but even Monsieur de Mazarin is not rich enough to buy the
whole body.”

“I think,” returned Anne of Austria, fixing upon him a glance, which in
any woman’s face would have expressed disdain, but in a queen’s, spread
terror to those she looked upon, “nay, I perceive you dare to threaten
the mother of your sovereign.”

“Madame,” replied D’Artagnan, “I threaten simply and solely because I
am obliged to do so. Believe me, madame, as true a thing as it is that
a heart beats in this bosom—a heart devoted to you—believe that you
have been the idol of our lives; that we have, as you well know—good
Heaven!—risked our lives twenty times for your majesty. Have you, then,
madame, no compassion for your servants who for twenty years have
vegetated in obscurity, without betraying in a single sigh the solemn
and sacred secrets they have had the honor to share with you? Look at
me, madame—at me, whom you accuse of speaking loud and threateningly.
What am I? A poor officer, without fortune, without protection, without
a future, unless the eye of my queen, which I have sought so long,
rests on me for a moment. Look at the Comte de la Fere, a type of
nobility, a flower of chivalry. He has taken part against his queen, or
rather, against her minister. He has not been unreasonably exacting, it
seems to me. Look at Monsieur du Vallon, that faithful soul, that arm
of steel, who for twenty years has awaited the word from your lips
which will make him in rank what he is in sentiment and in courage.
Consider, in short, your people who love you and who yet are famished,
who have no other wish than to bless you, and who, nevertheless—no, I
am wrong, your subjects, madame, will never curse you; say one word to
them and all will be ended—peace succeed war, joy tears, and happiness
to misfortune!”

Anne of Austria looked with wonderment on the warlike countenance of
D’Artagnan, which betrayed a singular expression of deep feeling.

“Why did you not say all this before you took action, sir?” she said.

“Because, madame, it was necessary to prove to your majesty one thing
of which you doubted—-that is, that we still possess amongst us some
valor and are worthy of some consideration at your hands.”

“And that valor would shrink from no undertaking, according to what I
see.”

“It has hesitated at nothing in the past; why, then, should it be less
daring in the future?”

“Then, in case of my refusal, this valor, should a struggle occur, will
even go the length of carrying me off in the midst of my court, to
deliver me into the hands of the Fronde, as you propose to deliver my
minister?”

“We have not thought about it yet, madame,” answered D’Artagnan, with
that Gascon effrontery which had in him the appearance of naivete; “but
if we four had resolved upon it we should do it most certainly.”

“I ought,” muttered Anne to herself, “by this time to remember that
these men are giants.”

“Alas, madame!” exclaimed D’Artagnan, “this proves to me that not till
to-day has your majesty had a just idea of us.”

“Perhaps,” said Anne; “but that idea, if at last I have it——”

“Your majesty will do us justice. In doing us justice you will no
longer treat us as men of vulgar stamp. You will see in me an
ambassador worthy of the high interests he is authorized to discuss
with his sovereign.”

“Where is the treaty?”

“Here it is.”

Anne of Austria cast her eyes upon the treaty that D’Artagnan presented
to her.

“I do not see here,” she said, “anything but general conditions; the
interests of the Prince de Conti or of the Ducs de Beaufort, de
Bouillon and d’Elbeuf and of the coadjutor, are herein consulted; but
with regard to yours?”

“We do ourselves justice, madame, even in assuming the high position
that we have. We do not think ourselves worthy to stand near such great
names.”

“But you, I presume, have decided to assert your pretensions viva
voce?”

“I believe you, madame, to be a great and powerful queen, and that it
will be unworthy of your power and greatness if you do not recompense
the arms which will bring back his eminence to Saint Germain.”

“It is my intention so to do; come, let us hear you. Speak.”

“He who has negotiated these matters (forgive me if I begin by speaking
of myself, but I must claim that importance which has been given to me,
not assumed by me) he who has arranged matters for the return of the
cardinal, ought, it appears to me, in order that his reward may not be
unworthy of your majesty, to be made commandant of the guards—an
appointment something like that of captain of the musketeers.”

“’Tis the appointment Monsieur de Tréville held, you ask of me.”

“The place, madame, is vacant, and although ’tis a year since Monsieur
de Tréville has left it, it has not been filled.”

“But it is one of the principal military appointments in the king’s
household.”

“Monsieur de Tréville was but a younger son of a simple Gascon family,
like me, madame; he occupied that post for twenty years.”

“You have an answer ready for everything,” replied the queen, and she
took from her bureau a document, which she filled up and signed.

“Undoubtedly, madame,” said D’Artagnan, taking the document and bowing,
“this is a noble reward; but everything in the world is unstable, and
the man who happened to fall into disgrace with your majesty might lose
this office to-morrow.”

“What more do you want?” asked the queen, coloring, as she found that
she had to deal with a mind as subtle as her own.

“A hundred thousand francs for this poor captain of musketeers, to be
paid whenever his services shall no longer be acceptable to your
majesty.”

Anne hesitated.

“To think of the Parisians,” soliloquized D’Artagnan, “offering only
the other day, by an edict of the parliament, six hundred thousand
francs to any man soever who would deliver up the cardinal to them,
dead or alive—if alive, in order to hang him; if dead, to deny him the
rites of Christian burial!”

“Come,” said Anne, “’tis reasonable, since you only ask from a queen
the sixth of what the parliament has proposed;” and she signed an order
for a hundred thousand francs.

“Now, then,” she said, “what next?”

“Madame, my friend Du Vallon is rich and has therefore nothing in the
way of fortune to desire; but I think I remember that there was a
question between him and Monsieur Mazarin as to making his estate a
barony. Nay, it must have been a promise.”

“A country clown,” said Anne of Austria, “people will laugh.”

“Let them,” answered D’Artagnan. “But I am sure of one thing—that those
who laugh at him in his presence will never laugh a second time.”

“Here goes the barony.” said the queen; she signed a patent.

“Now there remains the chevalier, or the Abbé d’Herblay, as your
majesty pleases.”

“Does he wish to be a bishop?”

“No, madame, something easier to grant.”

“What?”

“It is that the king should deign to stand godfather to the son of
Madame de Longueville.”

The queen smiled.

“Monsieur de Longueville is of royal blood, madame,” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said the queen; “but his son?”

“His son, madame, must be, since the husband of the son’s mother is.”

“And your friend has nothing more to ask for Madame de Longueville?”

“No, madame, for I presume that the king, standing godfather to him,
could do no less than present him with five hundred thousand francs,
giving his father, also, the government of Normandy.”

“As to the government of Normandy,” replied the queen, “I think I can
promise; but with regard to the present, the cardinal is always telling
me there is no more money in the royal coffers.”

“We shall search for some, madame, and I think we can find a little,
and if your majesty approves, we will seek for some together.”

“What next?”

“What next, madame?”

“Yes.”

“That is all.”

“Haven’t you, then, a fourth companion?”

“Yes, madame, the Comte de la Fere.”

“What does he ask?”

“Nothing.”

“There is in the world, then, one man who, having the power to ask,
asks—nothing!”

“There is the Comte de la Fere, madame. The Comte de la Fere is not a
man.”

“What is he, then?”

“The Comte de la Fere is a demi-god.”

“Has he not a son, a young man, a relative, a nephew, of whom Comminges
spoke to me as being a brave boy, and who, with Monsieur de Chatillon,
brought the standards from Lens?”

“He has, as your majesty has said, a ward, who is called the Vicomte de
Bragelonne.”

“If that young man should be appointed to a regiment what would his
guardian say?”

“Perhaps he would accept.”

“Perhaps?”

“Yes, if your majesty herself should beg him to accept.”

“He must be indeed a strange man. Well, we will reflect and perhaps we
will beg him. Are you satisfied, sir?”

“There is one thing the queen has not signed—her assent to the treaty.”

“Of what use to-day? I will sign it to-morrow.”

“I can assure her majesty that if she does not sign to-day she will not
have time to sign to-morrow. Consent, then, I beg you, madame, to write
at the bottom of this schedule, which has been drawn up by Mazarin, as
you see:

“‘I consent to ratify the treaty proposed by the Parisians.’”

Anne was caught, she could not draw back—she signed; but scarcely had
she done so when pride burst forth and she began to weep.

D’Artagnan started on seeing these tears. Since that period of history
queens have shed tears, like other women.

The Gascon shook his head, these tears from royalty melted his heart.

“Madame,” he said, kneeling, “look upon the unhappy man at your feet.
He begs you to believe that at a gesture of your majesty everything
will be possible to him. He has faith in himself; he has faith in his
friends; he wishes also to have faith in his queen. And in proof that
he fears nothing, that he counts on nothing, he will restore Monsieur
de Mazarin to your majesty without conditions. Behold, madame! here are
the august signatures of your majesty’s hand; if you think you are
right in giving them to me, you shall do so, but from this very moment
you are free from any obligation to keep them.”

And D’Artagnan, full of splendid pride and manly intrepidity, placed in
Anne’s hands, in a bundle, the papers that he had one by one won from
her with so much difficulty.

There are moments—for if everything is not good, everything in this
world is not bad—in which the most rigid and the coldest soul is
softened by the tears of strong emotion, heart-arraigning sentiment:
one of these momentary impulses actuated Anne. D’Artagnan, when he gave
way to his own feelings—which were in accordance with those of the
queen—had accomplished more than the most astute diplomacy could have
attempted. He was therefore instantly recompensed, either for his
address or for his sensibility, whichever it might be termed.

“You were right, sir,” said Anne. “I misunderstood you. There are the
acts signed; I deliver them to you without compulsion. Go and bring me
back the cardinal as soon as possible.”

“Madame,” faltered D’Artagnan, “’tis twenty years ago—I have a good
memory—since I had the honor behind a piece of tapestry in the Hotel de
Ville, of kissing one of those lovely hands.”

“There is the other,” replied the queen; “and that the left hand should
not be less liberal than the right,” she drew from her finger a diamond
similar to the one formerly given to him, “take and keep this ring in
remembrance of me.

“Madame,” said D’Artagnan, rising, “I have only one thing more to wish,
which is, that the next thing you ask from me, shall be—my life.”

And with this conclusion—a way peculiar to himself—he rose and left the
room.

“I never rightly understood those men,” said the queen, as she watched
him retiring from her presence; “and it is now too late, for in a year
the king will be of age.”

In twenty-four hours D’Artagnan and Porthos conducted Mazarin to the
queen; and the one received his commission, the other his patent of
nobility.

On the same day the Treaty of Paris was signed, and it was everywhere
announced that the cardinal had shut himself up for three days in order
to draw it up with the greatest care.

Here is what each of the parties concerned gained by that treaty:

Monsieur de Conti received Damvilliers, and having made his proofs as
general, he succeeded in remaining a soldier, instead of being made
cardinal. Moreover, something had been said of a marriage with
Mazarin’s niece. The idea was welcomed by the prince, to whom it was of
little importance whom he married, so long as he married some one.

The Duc de Beaufort made his entrance at court, receiving ample
reparation for the wrongs he had suffered, and all the honor due to his
rank. Full pardon was accorded to those who had aided in his escape. He
received also the office of admiral, which had been held by his father,
the Duc de Vendome and an indemnity for his houses and castles,
demolished by the Parliament of Bretagne.

The Duc de Bouillon received domains of a value equal to that of his
principality of Sedan, and the title of prince, granted to him and to
those belonging to his house.

The Duc de Longueville gained the government of Pont-de-l’Arche, five
hundred thousand francs for his wife and the honor of seeing her son
held at the baptismal font by the young king and Henrietta of England.

Aramis stipulated that Bazin should officiate at that ceremony and that
Planchet should furnish the christening sugar plums.

The Duc d’Elbeuf obtained payment of certain sums due to his wife, one
hundred thousand francs for his eldest son and twenty-five thousand for
each of the three others.

The coadjutor alone obtained nothing. They promised, indeed, to
negotiate with the pope for a cardinal’s hat for him; but he knew how
little reliance should be placed on such promises, made by the queen
and Mazarin. Quite contrary to the lot of Monsieur de Conti, unable to
be cardinal, he was obliged to remain a soldier.

And therefore, when all Paris was rejoicing in the expected return of
the king, appointed for the next day, Gondy alone, in the midst of the
general happiness, was dissatisfied; he sent for the two men whom he
was wont to summon when in especially bad humor. Those two men were the
Count de Rochefort and the mendicant of Saint Eustache. They came with
their usual promptness, and the coadjutor spent with them a part of the
night.




Chapter LXXXIX.
Difficult for Kings to return to the Capitals of their Kingdoms.


Whilst D’Artagnan and Porthos were engaged in conducting the cardinal
to Saint Germain, Athos and Aramis returned to Paris.

Each had his own particular visit to make.

Aramis rushed to the Hotel de Ville, where Madame de Longueville was
sojourning. The duchess loudly lamented the announcement of peace. War
had made her a queen; peace brought her abdication. She declared that
she would never assent to the treaty and that she wished eternal war.

But when Aramis had presented that peace to her in a true light—that is
to say, with all its advantages; when he had pointed out to her, in
exchange for the precarious and contested royalty of Paris, the
viceroyalty of Font-de-l’Arche, in other words, of all Normandy; when
he had rung in her ears the five hundred thousand francs promised by
the cardinal; when he had dazzled her eyes with the honor bestowed on
her by the king in holding her child at the baptismal font, Madame de
Longueville contended no longer, except as is the custom with pretty
women to contend, and defended herself only to surrender at last.

Aramis made a presence of believing in the reality of her opposition
and was unwilling to deprive himself in his own view of the credit of
her conversion.

“Madame,” he said, “you have wished to conquer the prince your
brother—that is to say, the greatest captain of the age; and when women
of genius wish anything they always succeed in attaining it. You have
succeeded; the prince is beaten, since he can no longer fight. Now
attach him to our party. Withdraw him gently from the queen, whom he
does not like, from Mazarin, whom he despises. The Fronde is a comedy,
of which the first act only is played. Let us wait for a dénouement—for
the day when the prince, thanks to you, shall have turned against the
court.”

Madame de Longueville was persuaded. This Frondist duchess trusted so
confidently to the power of her fine eyes, that she could not doubt
their influence even over Monsieur de Condé; and the chronicles of the
time aver that her confidence was justified.

Athos, on quitting Aramis, went to Madame de Chevreuse. Here was
another frondeuse to persuade, and she was even less open to conviction
than her younger rival. There had been no stipulation in her favor.
Monsieur de Chevreuse had not been appointed governor of a province,
and if the queen should consent to be godmother it could be only of her
grandson or granddaughter. At the first announcement of peace Madame de
Chevreuse frowned, and in spite of all the logic of Athos to show her
that a prolonged war would have been impracticable, contended in favor
of hostilities.

“My fair friend,” said Athos, “allow me to tell you that everybody is
tired of war. You will get yourself exiled, as you did in the time of
Louis XIII. Believe me, we have passed the time of success in intrigue,
and your fine eyes are not destined to be eclipsed by regretting Paris,
where there will always be two queens as long as you are there.”

“Oh,” cried the duchess, “I cannot make war alone, but I can avenge
myself on that ungrateful queen and most ambitious favorite-on the
honor of a duchess, I will avenge myself.”

“Madame,” replied Athos, “do not injure the Vicomte de Bragelonne—do
not ruin his prospects. Alas! excuse my weakness! There are moments
when a man grows young again in his children.”

The duchess smiled, half tenderly, half ironically.

“Count,” she said, “you are, I fear, gained over to the court. I
suppose you have a blue ribbon in your pocket?”

“Yes, madame; I have that of the Garter, which King Charles I. gave me
some days before he died.”

“Come, I am growing an old woman!” said the duchess, pensively.

Athos took her hand and kissed it. She sighed, as she looked at him.

“Count,” she said, “Bragelonne must be a charming place. You are a man
of taste. You have water—woods—flowers there?”

She sighed again and leaned her charming head, gracefully reclined, on
her hand, still beautiful in form and color.

“Madame!” exclaimed Athos, “what were you saying just now about growing
old? Never have I seen you look so young, so beautiful!”

The duchess shook her head.

“Does Monsieur de Bragelonne remain in Paris?” she inquired.

“What think you of it?” inquired Athos.

“Leave him with me,” replied the duchess.

“No, madame; if you have forgotten the history of Oedipus, I, at least,
remember it.”

“Really, sir, you are delightful, and I should like to spend a month at
Bragelonne.”

“Are you not afraid of making people envious of me, duchess?” replied
Athos.

“No, I shall go incognito, count, under the name of Marie Michon.”

“You are adorable, madame.”

“But do not keep Raoul with you.”

“Why not?”

“Because he is in love.”

“He! he is quite a child!”

“And ’tis a child he loves.”

Athos became thoughtful.

“You are right, duchess. This singular passion for a child of seven may
some day make him very unhappy. There is to be war in Flanders. He
shall go thither.”

“And at his return you will send him to me. I will arm him against
love.”

“Alas, madame!” exclaimed Athos, “to-day love is like war—the
breastplate is becoming useless.”

Raoul entered at this moment; he came to announce that the solemn
entrance of the king, queen, and her ministers was to take place on the
ensuing day.

The next day, in fact, at daybreak, the court made preparations to quit
Saint Germain.

Meanwhile, the queen every hour had been sending for D’Artagnan.

“I hear,” she said, “that Paris is not quiet. I am afraid for the
king’s safety; place yourself close to the coach door on the right.”

“Reassure yourself, madame, I will answer for the king’s safety.”

As he left the queen’s presence Bernouin summoned him to the cardinal.

“Sir,” said Mazarin to him “an emeute is spoken of in Paris. I shall be
on the king’s left and as I am the chief person threatened, remain at
the coach door to the left.”

“Your eminence may be perfectly easy,” replied D’Artagnan; “they will
not touch a hair of your head.”

“Deuce take it!” he thought to himself, “how can I take care of both?
Ah! plague on’t, I will guard the king and Porthos shall guard the
cardinal.”

This arrangement pleased every one. The queen had confidence in the
courage of D’Artagnan, which she knew, and the cardinal in the strength
of Porthos, which he had experienced.

The royal procession set out for Paris. Guitant and Comminges, at the
head of the guards, marched first; then came the royal carriage, with
D’Artagnan on one side, Porthos on the other; then the musketeers, for
two and twenty years staunch friends of D’Artagnan. During twenty he
had been lieutenant, their captain since the night before.

The cortege proceeded to Notre Dame, where a Te Deum was chanted. All
Paris were in the streets. The Swiss were drawn up along the road, but
as the road was long, they were placed at six or eight feet distant
from each other and one deep only. This force was therefore wholly
insufficient, and from time to time the line was broken through by the
people and was formed again with difficulty. Whenever this occurred,
although it proceeded only from goodwill and a desire to see the king
and queen, Anne looked at D’Artagnan anxiously.

Mazarin, who had dispensed a thousand louis to make the people cry
“Long live Mazarin,” and who had accordingly no confidence in
acclamations bought at twenty pistoles each, kept one eye on Porthos;
but that gigantic body-guard replied to the look with his great bass
voice, “Be tranquil, my lord,” and Mazarin became more and more
composed.

At the Palais Royal, the crowd, which had flowed in from the adjacent
street was still greater; like an impetuous mob, a wave of human beings
came to meet the carriage and rolled tumultuously into the Rue Saint
Honore.

When the procession reached the palace, loud cries of “Long live their
majesties!” resounded. Mazarin leaned out of the window. One or two
shouts of “Long live the cardinal” saluted his shadow; but instantly
hisses and yells stifled them remorselessly. Mazarin turned pale and
shrank back in the coach.

“Low-born fellows!” ejaculated Porthos.

D’Artagnan said nothing, but twirled his mustache with a peculiar
gesture which showed that his fine Gascon humor was awake.

Anne of Austria bent down and whispered in the young king’s ear:

“Say something gracious to Monsieur d’Artagnan, my son.”

The young king leaned toward the door.

“I have not said good-morning to you, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” he said;
“nevertheless, I have remarked you. It was you who were behind my
bed-curtains that night the Parisians wished to see me asleep.”

“And if the king permits me,” returned the Gascon, “I shall be near him
always when there is danger to be encountered.”

“Sir,” said Mazarin to Porthos, “what would you do if the crowd fell
upon us?”

“Kill as many as I could, my lord.”

“Hem! brave as you are and strong as you are, you could not kill them
all.”

“’Tis true,” answered Porthos, rising on his saddle, in order that he
might appraise the immense crowd, “there are a lot of them.”

“I think I should like the other fellow better than this one,” said
Mazarin to himself, and he threw himself back in his carriage.

The queen and her minister, more especially the latter, had reason to
feel anxious. The crowd, whilst preserving an appearance of respect and
even of affection for the king and queen regent, began to be
tumultuous. Reports were whispered about, like certain sounds which
announce, as they whistle from wave to wave, the coming storm—and when
they pass athwart a multitude, presage an emeute.

D’Artagnan turned toward the musketeers and made a sign imperceptible
to the crowd, but very easily understood by that chosen regiment, the
flower of the army.

The ranks closed firmly in and a kind of majestic tremor ran from man
to man.

At the Barriere des Sergents the procession was obliged to stop.
Comminges left the head of the escort and went to the queen’s carriage.
Anne questioned D’Artagnan by a look. He answered in the same language.

“Proceed,” she said.

Comminges returned to his post. An effort was made and the living
barrier was violently broken through.

Some complaints arose from the crowd and were addressed this time to
the king as well as the minister.

“Onward!” cried D’Artagnan, in a loud voice.

“Onward!” cried Porthos.

But as if the multitude had waited only for this demonstration to burst
out, all the sentiments of hostility that possessed it exploded
simultaneously. Cries of “Down with Mazarin!” “Death to the cardinal!”
resounded on all sides.

At the same time through the streets of Grenelle, Saint Honore, and Du
Coq, a double stream of people broke the feeble hedge of Swiss guards
and came like a whirlwind even to the very legs of Porthos’s horse and
that of D’Artagnan.

This new eruption was more dangerous than the others, being composed of
armed men. It was plain that it was not the chance combination of those
who had collected a number of the malcontents at the same spot, but a
concerted organized attack.

Each of these mobs was led by a chief, one of whom appeared to belong,
not to the people, but to the honorable corporation of mendicants, and
the other, notwithstanding his affected imitation of the people, might
easily be discerned to be a gentleman. Both were evidently stimulated
by the same impulse.

There was a shock which was perceived even in the royal carriage.
Myriads of hoarse cries, forming one vast uproar, were heard, mingled
with guns firing.

“Ho! Musketeers!” cried D’Artagnan.

The escort divided into two files. One of them passed around to the
right of the carriage, the other to the left. One went to support
D’Artagnan, the other Porthos. Then came a skirmish, the more terrible
because it had no definite object; the more melancholy, because those
engaged in it knew not for whom they were fighting. Like all popular
movements, the shock given by the rush of this mob was formidable. The
musketeers, few in number, not being able, in the midst of this crowd,
to make their horses wheel around, began to give way. D’Artagnan
offered to lower the blinds of the royal carriage, but the young king
stretched out his arm, saying:

“No, sir! I wish to see everything.”

“If your majesty wishes to look out—well, then, look!” replied
D’Artagnan. And turning with that fury which made him so formidable, he
rushed toward the chief of the insurgents, a man who, with a huge sword
in his hand, was trying to hew a passage to the coach door through the
musketeers.

“Make room!” cried D’Artagnan. “Zounds! give way!”

At these words the man with a pistol and sword raised his head, but it
was too late. The blow was sped by D’Artagnan; the rapier had pierced
his bosom.

“Ah! confound it!” cried the Gascon, trying in vain, too late, to
retract the thrust. “What the devil are you doing here, count?”

“Accomplishing my destiny,” replied Rochefort, falling on one knee. “I
have already got up again after three stabs from you, I shall never
rise after this fourth.”

“Count!” said D’Artagnan, with some degree of emotion, “I struck
without knowing that it was you. I am sorry, if you die, that you
should die with sentiments of hatred toward me.”

Rochefort extended his hand to D’Artagnan, who took it. The count
wished to speak, but a gush of blood stifled him. He stiffened in the
last convulsions of death and expired.

“Back, people!” cried D’Artagnan, “your leader is dead; you have no
longer any business here.”

Indeed, as if De Rochefort had been the very soul of the attack, the
crowd who had followed and obeyed him took to flight on seeing him
fall. D’Artagnan charged, with a party of musketeers, up the Rue du
Coq, and the portion of the mob he assailed disappeared like smoke,
dispersing near the Place Saint Germain-l’Auxerrois and taking the
direction of the quays.

D’Artagnan returned to help Porthos, if Porthos needed help; but
Porthos, for his part, had done his work as conscientiously as
D’Artagnan. The left of the carriage was as well cleared as the right,
and they drew up the blind of the window which Mazarin, less heroic
than the king, had taken the precaution to lower.

Porthos looked very melancholy.

“What a devil of a face you have, Porthos! and what a strange air for a
victor!”

“But you,” answered Porthos, “seem to me agitated.”

“There’s a reason! Zounds! I have just killed an old friend.”

“Indeed!” replied Porthos, “who?”

“That poor Count de Rochefort.”

“Well! exactly like me! I have just killed a man whose face is not
unknown to me. Unluckily, I hit him on the head and immediately his
face was covered with blood.”

“And he said nothing as he died?”

“Yes; he exclaimed, ‘Oh!’”

“I suppose,” answered D’Artagnan, laughing, “if he only said that, it
did not enlighten you much.”

“Well, sir!” cried the queen.

“Madame, the passage is quite clear and your majesty can continue your
road.”

In fact, the procession arrived, in safety at Notre Dame, at the front
gate of which all the clergy, with the coadjutor at their head, awaited
the king, the queen and the minister, for whose happy return they
chanted a Te Deum.

As the service was drawing to a close a boy entered the church in great
excitement, ran to the sacristy, dressed himself quickly in the choir
robes, and cleaving, thanks to that uniform, the crowd that filled the
temple, approached Bazin, who, clad in his blue robe, was standing
gravely in his place at the entrance to the choir.

Bazin felt some one pulling his sleeve. He lowered to earth his eyes,
beatifically raised to Heaven, and recognized Friquet.

“Well, you rascal, what is it? How do you dare to disturb me in the
exercise of my functions?” asked the beadle.

“Monsieur Bazin,” said Friquet, “Monsieur Maillard—you know who he is,
he gives holy water at Saint Eustache——”

“Well, go on.”

“Well, he received in the scrimmage a sword stroke on the head. That
great giant who was there gave it to him.”

“In that case,” said Bazin, “he must be pretty sick.”

“So sick that he is dying, and he wants to confess to the coadjutor,
who, they say, has power to remit great sins.”

“And does he imagine that the coadjutor will put himself out for him?”

“To be sure; the coadjutor has promised.”

“Who told you that?”

“Monsieur Maillard himself.”

“You have seen him, then?”

“Certainly; I was there when he fell.”

“What were you doing there?”

“I was shouting, ‘Down with Mazarin!’ ‘Death to the cardinal!’ ‘The
Italian to the gallows!’ Isn’t that what you would have me shout?”

“Be quiet, you rascal!” said Bazin, looking uneasily around.

“So that he told me, that poor Monsieur Maillard, ‘Go find the
coadjutor, Friquet, and if you bring him to me you shall be my heir.’
Say, then, Father Bazin—the heir of Monsieur Maillard, the giver of
holy water at Saint Eustache! Hey! I shall have nothing to do but to
fold my arms! All the same, I should like to do him that service—what
do you say to it?”

“I will tell the coadjutor,” said Bazin.

In fact, he slowly and respectfully approached the prelate and spoke to
him privately a few words, to which the latter responded by an
affirmative sign. He then returned with the same slow step and said:

“Go and tell the dying man that he must be patient. Monseigneur will be
with him in an hour.”

“Good!” said Friquet, “my fortune is made.”

“By the way,” said Bazin, “where was he carried?”

“To the tower Saint Jacques la Boucherie;” and delighted with the
success of his embassy, Friquet started off at the top of his speed.

When the Te Deum was over, the coadjutor, without stopping to change
his priestly dress, took his way toward that old tower which he knew so
well. He arrived in time. Though sinking from moment to moment, the
wounded man was not yet dead. The door was opened to the coadjutor of
the room in which the mendicant was suffering.

A moment later Friquet went out, carrying in his hand a large leather
bag; he opened it as soon as he was outside the chamber and to his
great astonishment found it full of gold. The mendicant had kept his
word and made Friquet his heir.

“Ah! Mother Nanette!” cried Friquet, suffocating; “ah! Mother Nanette!”

He could say no more; but though he hadn’t strength to speak he had
enough for action. He rushed headlong to the street, and like the Greek
from Marathon who fell in the square at Athens, with his laurel in his
hand, Friquet reached Councillor Broussel’s threshold, and then fell
exhausted, scattering on the floor the louis disgorged by his leather
bag.

Mother Nanette began by picking up the louis; then she picked up
Friquet.

In the meantime the cortege returned to the Palais Royal.

“That Monsieur d’Artagnan is a very brave man, mother,” said the young
king.

“Yes, my son; and he rendered very important services to your father.
Treat him kindly, therefore, in the future.”

“Captain,” said the young king to D’Artagnan, on descending from the
carriage, “the queen has charged me to invite you to dinner to-day—you
and your friend the Baron du Vallon.”

That was a great honor for D’Artagnan and for Porthos. Porthos was
delighted; and yet during the entire repast he seemed to be
preoccupied.

“What was the matter with you, baron?” D’Artagnan said to him as they
descended the staircase of the Palais Royal. “You seemed at dinner to
be anxious about something.”

“I was trying,” said Porthos, “to recall where I had seen that
mendicant whom I must have killed.”

“And you couldn’t remember?”

“No.”

“Well, search, my friend, search; and when you have found, you will
tell me, will you not?”

“Pardieu!” said Porthos.




Chapter XC.
Conclusion.


On going home, the two friends found a letter from Athos, who desired
them to meet him at the Grand Charlemagne on the following day.

The friends went to bed early, but neither of them slept. When we
arrive at the summit of our wishes, success has usually the power to
drive away sleep on the first night after the fulfilment of long
cherished hopes.

The next day at the appointed hour they went to see Athos and found him
and Aramis in traveling costume.

“What!” cried Porthos, “are we all going away, then? I also have made
my preparations this morning.”

“Oh, heavens! yes,” said Aramis. “There’s nothing to do in Paris now
there’s no Fronde. The Duchess de Longueville has invited me to pass a
few days in Normandy, and has deputed me, while her son is being
baptized, to go and prepare her residence at Rouen; after which, if
nothing new occurs, I shall go and bury myself in my convent at
Noisy-le-Sec.”

“And I,” said Athos, “am returning to Bragelonne. You know, dear
D’Artagnan, I am nothing more than a good honest country gentleman.
Raoul has no fortune other than I possess, poor child! and I must take
care of it for him, since I only lend him my name.”

“And Raoul—what shall you do with him?”

“I leave him with you, my friend. War has broken out in Flanders. You
shall take him with you there. I am afraid that remaining at Blois
would be dangerous to his youthful mind. Take him and teach him to be
as brave and loyal as you are yourself.”

“Then,” replied D’Artagnan, “though I shall not have you, Athos, at all
events I shall have that dear fair-haired head by me; and though he’s
but a boy, yet, since your soul lives again in him, dear Athos, I shall
always fancy that you are near me, sustaining and encouraging me.”

The four friends embraced with tears in their eyes.

Then they departed, without knowing whether they would ever see each
other again.

D’Artagnan returned to the Rue Tiquetonne with Porthos, still possessed
by the wish to find out who the man was that he had killed. On arriving
at the Hotel de la Chevrette they found the baron’s equipage all ready
and Mousqueton on his saddle.

“Come, D’Artagnan,” said Porthos, “bid adieu to your sword and go with
me to Pierrefonds, to Bracieux, or to Du Vallon. We will grow old
together and talk of our companions.”

“No!” replied D’Artagnan, “deuce take it, the campaign is going to
begin; I wish to be there, I expect to get something by it.”

“What do you expect to get?”

“Why, I expect to be made Marechal of France!”

“Ha! ha!” cried Porthos, who was not completely taken in by
D’Artagnan’s Gasconades.

“Come my brother, go with me,” added D’Artagnan, “and I will see that
you are made a duke!”

“No,” answered Porthos, “Mouston has no desire to fight; besides, they
have erected a triumphal arch for me to enter my barony, which will
kill my neighbors with envy.”

“To that I can say nothing,” returned D’Artagnan, who knew the vanity
of the new baron. “Then, here’s to our next merry meeting!”

“Adieu, dear captain,” said Porthos, “I shall always be happy to
welcome you to my barony.”

“Yes, yes, when the campaign is over,” replied the Gascon.

“His honor’s equipage is waiting,” said Mousqueton.

The two friends, after a cordial pressure of the hands, separated.
D’Artagnan was standing at the door looking after Porthos with a
mournful gaze, when the baron, after walking scarcely more than twenty
paces, returned—stood still—struck his forehead with his finger and
exclaimed:

“I recollect!”

“What?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“Who the beggar was that I killed.”

“Ah! indeed! and who was he?”

“’Twas that low fellow, Bonacieux.”

And Porthos, enchanted at having relieved his mind, rejoined Mousqueton
and they disappeared around an angle of the street. D’Artagnan stood
for an instant, mute, pensive and motionless; then, as he went in, he
saw the fair Madeleine, his hostess, standing on the threshold.

“Madeleine,” said the Gascon, “give me your apartment on the first
floor; now that I am a captain in the royal musketeers I must make an
appearance; nevertheless, reserve my old room on the fifth story for
me; one never knows what may happen.”






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY YEARS AFTER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Great Gatsby
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Great Gatsby

Author: F. Scott Fitzgerald

Release date: January 17, 2021 [eBook #64317]
                Most recently updated: February 2, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Alex Cabal for the Standard Ebooks project, based on a transcription produced for Project Gutenberg Australia.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT GATSBY ***




                           The Great Gatsby
                                  by
                          F. Scott Fitzgerald


                           Table of Contents

I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX


                              Once again
                                  to
                                 Zelda


  Then wear the gold hat, if that will move her;
  If you can bounce high, bounce for her too,
  Till she cry “Lover, gold-hatted, high-bouncing lover,
  I must have you!”

  Thomas Parke d’Invilliers


                                  I

In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice
that I’ve been turning over in my mind ever since.

“Whenever you feel like criticizing anyone,” he told me, “just
remember that all the people in this world haven’t had the advantages
that you’ve had.”

He didn’t say any more, but we’ve always been unusually communicative
in a reserved way, and I understood that he meant a great deal more
than that. In consequence, I’m inclined to reserve all judgements, a
habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made me
the victim of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick to
detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal
person, and so it came about that in college I was unjustly accused of
being a politician, because I was privy to the secret griefs of wild,
unknown men. Most of the confidences were unsought—frequently I have
feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile levity when I realized by
some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on
the horizon; for the intimate revelations of young men, or at least
the terms in which they express them, are usually plagiaristic and
marred by obvious suppressions. Reserving judgements is a matter of
infinite hope. I am still a little afraid of missing something if I
forget that, as my father snobbishly suggested, and I snobbishly
repeat, a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out
unequally at birth.

And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to the admission
that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the
wet marshes, but after a certain point I don’t care what it’s founded
on. When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted
the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I
wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the
human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was
exempt from my reaction—Gatsby, who represented everything for which I
have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of
successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some
heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related
to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten
thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that
flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the
“creative temperament”—it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a
romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and
which it is not likely I shall ever find again. No—Gatsby turned out
all right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust
floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my
interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this Middle
Western city for three generations. The Carraways are something of a
clan, and we have a tradition that we’re descended from the Dukes of
Buccleuch, but the actual founder of my line was my grandfather’s
brother, who came here in fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil
War, and started the wholesale hardware business that my father
carries on today.

I never saw this great-uncle, but I’m supposed to look like him—with
special reference to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs in
father’s office. I graduated from New Haven in 1915, just a quarter of
a century after my father, and a little later I participated in that
delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War. I enjoyed the
counter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being
the warm centre of the world, the Middle West now seemed like the
ragged edge of the universe—so I decided to go East and learn the bond
business. Everybody I knew was in the bond business, so I supposed it
could support one more single man. All my aunts and uncles talked it
over as if they were choosing a prep school for me, and finally said,
“Why—ye-es,” with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance
me for a year, and after various delays I came East, permanently, I
thought, in the spring of twenty-two.

The practical thing was to find rooms in the city, but it was a warm
season, and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly
trees, so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a
house together in a commuting town, it sounded like a great idea. He
found the house, a weather-beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a
month, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington, and
I went out to the country alone. I had a dog—at least I had him for a
few days until he ran away—and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman, who
made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to
herself over the electric stove.

It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more
recently arrived than I, stopped me on the road.

“How do you get to West Egg village?” he asked helplessly.

I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I was a guide,
a pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually conferred on me the
freedom of the neighbourhood.

And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the
trees, just as things grow in fast movies, I had that familiar
conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer.

There was so much to read, for one thing, and so much fine health to
be pulled down out of the young breath-giving air. I bought a dozen
volumes on banking and credit and investment securities, and they
stood on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint,
promising to unfold the shining secrets that only Midas and Morgan and
Maecenas knew. And I had the high intention of reading many other
books besides. I was rather literary in college—one year I wrote a
series of very solemn and obvious editorials for the Yale News—and now
I was going to bring back all such things into my life and become
again that most limited of all specialists, the “well-rounded man.”
This isn’t just an epigram—life is much more successfully looked at
from a single window, after all.

It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a house in one of
the strangest communities in North America. It was on that slender
riotous island which extends itself due east of New York—and where
there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of
land. Twenty miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in
contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most
domesticated body of salt water in the Western hemisphere, the great
wet barnyard of Long Island Sound. They are not perfect ovals—like the
egg in the Columbus story, they are both crushed flat at the contact
end—but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual
wonder to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a more
interesting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular
except shape and size.

I lived at West Egg, the—well, the less fashionable of the two, though
this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre and not a little
sinister contrast between them. My house was at the very tip of the
egg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two huge
places that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on
my right was a colossal affair by any standard—it was a factual
imitation of some Hôtel de Ville in Normandy, with a tower on one
side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble
swimming pool, and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was
Gatsby’s mansion. Or, rather, as I didn’t know Mr. Gatsby, it was a
mansion inhabited by a gentleman of that name. My own house was an
eyesore, but it was a small eyesore, and it had been overlooked, so I
had a view of the water, a partial view of my neighbour’s lawn, and
the consoling proximity of millionaires—all for eighty dollars a
month.

Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable East Egg
glittered along the water, and the history of the summer really begins
on the evening I drove over there to have dinner with the Tom
Buchanans. Daisy was my second cousin once removed, and I’d known Tom
in college. And just after the war I spent two days with them in
Chicago.

Her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of
the most powerful ends that ever played football at New Haven—a
national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an acute
limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savours of
anticlimax. His family were enormously wealthy—even in college his
freedom with money was a matter for reproach—but now he’d left Chicago
and come East in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for
instance, he’d brought down a string of polo ponies from Lake
Forest. It was hard to realize that a man in my own generation was
wealthy enough to do that.

Why they came East I don’t know. They had spent a year in France for
no particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully
wherever people played polo and were rich together. This was a
permanent move, said Daisy over the telephone, but I didn’t believe
it—I had no sight into Daisy’s heart, but I felt that Tom would drift
on forever seeking, a little wistfully, for the dramatic turbulence of
some irrecoverable football game.

And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I drove over to East
Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house
was even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful red-and-white
Georgian Colonial mansion, overlooking the bay. The lawn started at
the beach and ran towards the front door for a quarter of a mile,
jumping over sundials and brick walks and burning gardens—finally when
it reached the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though
from the momentum of its run. The front was broken by a line of French
windows, glowing now with reflected gold and wide open to the warm
windy afternoon, and Tom Buchanan in riding clothes was standing with
his legs apart on the front porch.

He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he was a sturdy
straw-haired man of thirty, with a rather hard mouth and a
supercilious manner. Two shining arrogant eyes had established
dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaning
aggressively forward. Not even the effeminate swank of his riding
clothes could hide the enormous power of that body—he seemed to fill
those glistening boots until he strained the top lacing, and you could
see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his
thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body.

His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of
fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of paternal contempt in
it, even toward people he liked—and there were men at New Haven who
had hated his guts.

“Now, don’t think my opinion on these matters is final,” he seemed to
say, “just because I’m stronger and more of a man than you are.” We
were in the same senior society, and while we were never intimate I
always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like
him with some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own.

We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.

“I’ve got a nice place here,” he said, his eyes flashing about
restlessly.

Turning me around by one arm, he moved a broad flat hand along the
front vista, including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half
acre of deep, pungent roses, and a snub-nosed motorboat that bumped
the tide offshore.

“It belonged to Demaine, the oil man.” He turned me around again,
politely and abruptly. “We’ll go inside.”

We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy-coloured space,
fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end. The
windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outside
that seemed to grow a little way into the house. A breeze blew through
the room, blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale
flags, twisting them up toward the frosted wedding-cake of the
ceiling, and then rippled over the wine-coloured rug, making a shadow
on it as wind does on the sea.

The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous
couch on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an
anchored balloon. They were both in white, and their dresses were
rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a
short flight around the house. I must have stood for a few moments
listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a
picture on the wall. Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan shut the
rear windows and the caught wind died out about the room, and the
curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly to the
floor.

The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was extended full
length at her end of the divan, completely motionless, and with her
chin raised a little, as if she were balancing something on it which
was quite likely to fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes
she gave no hint of it—indeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring
an apology for having disturbed her by coming in.

The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to rise—she leaned slightly
forward with a conscientious expression—then she laughed, an absurd,
charming little laugh, and I laughed too and came forward into the
room.

“I’m p-paralysed with happiness.”

She laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my
hand for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was
no one in the world she so much wanted to see. That was a way she
had. She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was
Baker. (I’ve heard it said that Daisy’s murmur was only to make people
lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less
charming.)

At any rate, Miss Baker’s lips fluttered, she nodded at me almost
imperceptibly, and then quickly tipped her head back again—the object
she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her
something of a fright. Again a sort of apology arose to my lips.
Almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency draws a stunned
tribute from me.

I looked back at my cousin, who began to ask me questions in her low,
thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and
down, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be
played again. Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it,
bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth, but there was an excitement
in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget:
a singing compulsion, a whispered “Listen,” a promise that she had
done gay, exciting things just a while since and that there were gay,
exciting things hovering in the next hour.

I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on my way East,
and how a dozen people had sent their love through me.

“Do they miss me?” she cried ecstatically.

“The whole town is desolate. All the cars have the left rear wheel
painted black as a mourning wreath, and there’s a persistent wail all
night along the north shore.”

“How gorgeous! Let’s go back, Tom. Tomorrow!” Then she added
irrelevantly: “You ought to see the baby.”

“I’d like to.”

“She’s asleep. She’s three years old. Haven’t you ever seen her?”

“Never.”

“Well, you ought to see her. She’s—”

Tom Buchanan, who had been hovering restlessly about the room, stopped
and rested his hand on my shoulder.

“What you doing, Nick?”

“I’m a bond man.”

“Who with?”

I told him.

“Never heard of them,” he remarked decisively.

This annoyed me.

“You will,” I answered shortly. “You will if you stay in the East.”

“Oh, I’ll stay in the East, don’t you worry,” he said, glancing at
Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for something
more. “I’d be a God damned fool to live anywhere else.”

At this point Miss Baker said: “Absolutely!” with such suddenness that
I started—it was the first word she had uttered since I came into the
room. Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned
and with a series of rapid, deft movements stood up into the room.

“I’m stiff,” she complained, “I’ve been lying on that sofa for as long
as I can remember.”

“Don’t look at me,” Daisy retorted, “I’ve been trying to get you to
New York all afternoon.”

“No, thanks,” said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in from the
pantry. “I’m absolutely in training.”

Her host looked at her incredulously.

“You are!” He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom
of a glass. “How you ever get anything done is beyond me.”

I looked at Miss Baker, wondering what it was she “got done.” I
enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-breasted girl, with
an erect carriage, which she accentuated by throwing her body backward
at the shoulders like a young cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked
back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming,
discontented face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a
picture of her, somewhere before.

“You live in West Egg,” she remarked contemptuously. “I know somebody
there.”

“I don’t know a single—”

“You must know Gatsby.”

“Gatsby?” demanded Daisy. “What Gatsby?”

Before I could reply that he was my neighbour dinner was announced;
wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine, Tom Buchanan compelled
me from the room as though he were moving a checker to another square.

Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips, the two
young women preceded us out on to a rosy-coloured porch, open toward
the sunset, where four candles flickered on the table in the
diminished wind.

“Why candles?” objected Daisy, frowning. She snapped them out with her
fingers. “In two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the year.” She
looked at us all radiantly. “Do you always watch for the longest day
of the year and then miss it? I always watch for the longest day in
the year and then miss it.”

“We ought to plan something,” yawned Miss Baker, sitting down at the
table as if she were getting into bed.

“All right,” said Daisy. “What’ll we plan?” She turned to me
helplessly: “What do people plan?”

Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her
little finger.

“Look!” she complained; “I hurt it.”

We all looked—the knuckle was black and blue.

“You did it, Tom,” she said accusingly. “I know you didn’t mean to,
but you did do it. That’s what I get for marrying a brute of a man, a
great, big, hulking physical specimen of a—”

“I hate that word ‘hulking,’ ” objected Tom crossly, “even in
kidding.”

“Hulking,” insisted Daisy.

Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively and with a
bantering inconsequence that was never quite chatter, that was as cool
as their white dresses and their impersonal eyes in the absence of all
desire. They were here, and they accepted Tom and me, making only a
polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They knew
that presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening too
would be over and casually put away. It was sharply different from the
West, where an evening was hurried from phase to phase towards its
close, in a continually disappointed anticipation or else in sheer
nervous dread of the moment itself.

“You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy,” I confessed on my second glass
of corky but rather impressive claret. “Can’t you talk about crops or
something?”

I meant nothing in particular by this remark, but it was taken up in
an unexpected way.

“Civilization’s going to pieces,” broke out Tom violently. “I’ve
gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you read The Rise
of the Coloured Empires by this man Goddard?”

“Why, no,” I answered, rather surprised by his tone.

“Well, it’s a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The idea is
if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterly
submerged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved.”

“Tom’s getting very profound,” said Daisy, with an expression of
unthoughtful sadness. “He reads deep books with long words in
them. What was that word we—”

“Well, these books are all scientific,” insisted Tom, glancing at her
impatiently. “This fellow has worked out the whole thing. It’s up to
us, who are the dominant race, to watch out or these other races will
have control of things.”

“We’ve got to beat them down,” whispered Daisy, winking ferociously
toward the fervent sun.

“You ought to live in California—” began Miss Baker, but Tom
interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.

“This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am, and you are, and you are,
and—” After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a
slight nod, and she winked at me again. “—And we’ve produced all the
things that go to make civilization—oh, science and art, and all
that. Do you see?”

There was something pathetic in his concentration, as if his
complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to him any more.
When, almost immediately, the telephone rang inside and the butler
left the porch Daisy seized upon the momentary interruption and leaned
towards me.

“I’ll tell you a family secret,” she whispered enthusiastically.
“It’s about the butler’s nose. Do you want to hear about the butler’s
nose?”

“That’s why I came over tonight.”

“Well, he wasn’t always a butler; he used to be the silver polisher
for some people in New York that had a silver service for two hundred
people. He had to polish it from morning till night, until finally it
began to affect his nose—”

“Things went from bad to worse,” suggested Miss Baker.

“Yes. Things went from bad to worse, until finally he had to give up
his position.”

For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon her
glowing face; her voice compelled me forward breathlessly as I
listened—then the glow faded, each light deserting her with lingering
regret, like children leaving a pleasant street at dusk.

The butler came back and murmured something close to Tom’s ear,
whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair, and without a word went
inside. As if his absence quickened something within her, Daisy leaned
forward again, her voice glowing and singing.

“I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a—of a rose, an
absolute rose. Doesn’t he?” She turned to Miss Baker for confirmation:
“An absolute rose?”

This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She was only
extemporizing, but a stirring warmth flowed from her, as if her heart
was trying to come out to you concealed in one of those breathless,
thrilling words. Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the table and
excused herself and went into the house.

Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously devoid of
meaning. I was about to speak when she sat up alertly and said “Sh!”
in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned murmur was audible in the
room beyond, and Miss Baker leaned forward unashamed, trying to
hear. The murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down,
mounted excitedly, and then ceased altogether.

“This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbour—” I began.

“Don’t talk. I want to hear what happens.”

“Is something happening?” I inquired innocently.

“You mean to say you don’t know?” said Miss Baker, honestly surprised.
“I thought everybody knew.”

“I don’t.”

“Why—” she said hesitantly. “Tom’s got some woman in New York.”

“Got some woman?” I repeated blankly.

Miss Baker nodded.

“She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinner time.
Don’t you think?”

Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the flutter of a
dress and the crunch of leather boots, and Tom and Daisy were back at
the table.

“It couldn’t be helped!” cried Daisy with tense gaiety.

She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and then at me, and
continued: “I looked outdoors for a minute, and it’s very romantic
outdoors. There’s a bird on the lawn that I think must be a
nightingale come over on the Cunard or White Star Line. He’s singing
away—” Her voice sang: “It’s romantic, isn’t it, Tom?”

“Very romantic,” he said, and then miserably to me: “If it’s light
enough after dinner, I want to take you down to the stables.”

The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook her head
decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact all subjects,
vanished into air. Among the broken fragments of the last five minutes
at table I remember the candles being lit again, pointlessly, and I
was conscious of wanting to look squarely at everyone, and yet to
avoid all eyes. I couldn’t guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking, but
I doubt if even Miss Baker, who seemed to have mastered a certain
hardy scepticism, was able utterly to put this fifth guest’s shrill
metallic urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament the situation
might have seemed intriguing—my own instinct was to telephone
immediately for the police.

The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again. Tom and Miss
Baker, with several feet of twilight between them, strolled back into
the library, as if to a vigil beside a perfectly tangible body, while,
trying to look pleasantly interested and a little deaf, I followed
Daisy around a chain of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In
its deep gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.

Daisy took her face in her hands as if feeling its lovely shape, and
her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet dusk. I saw that
turbulent emotions possessed her, so I asked what I thought would be
some sedative questions about her little girl.

“We don’t know each other very well, Nick,” she said suddenly. “Even
if we are cousins. You didn’t come to my wedding.”

“I wasn’t back from the war.”

“That’s true.” She hesitated. “Well, I’ve had a very bad time, Nick,
and I’m pretty cynical about everything.”

Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didn’t say any more,
and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the subject of her
daughter.

“I suppose she talks, and—eats, and everything.”

“Oh, yes.” She looked at me absently. “Listen, Nick; let me tell you
what I said when she was born. Would you like to hear?”

“Very much.”

“It’ll show you how I’ve gotten to feel about—things. Well, she was
less than an hour old and Tom was God knows where. I woke up out of
the ether with an utterly abandoned feeling, and asked the nurse right
away if it was a boy or a girl. She told me it was a girl, and so I
turned my head away and wept. ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s a
girl. And I hope she’ll be a fool—that’s the best thing a girl can be
in this world, a beautiful little fool.’

“You see I think everything’s terrible anyhow,” she went on in a
convinced way. “Everybody thinks so—the most advanced people. And I
know. I’ve been everywhere and seen everything and done everything.”
Her eyes flashed around her in a defiant way, rather like Tom’s, and
she laughed with thrilling scorn. “Sophisticated—God, I’m
sophisticated!”

The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my attention, my
belief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she had said. It made me
uneasy, as though the whole evening had been a trick of some sort to
exact a contributory emotion from me. I waited, and sure enough, in a
moment she looked at me with an absolute smirk on her lovely face, as
if she had asserted her membership in a rather distinguished secret
society to which she and Tom belonged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and Miss Baker sat at
either end of the long couch and she read aloud to him from the
Saturday Evening Post—the words, murmurous and uninflected, running
together in a soothing tune. The lamplight, bright on his boots and
dull on the autumn-leaf yellow of her hair, glinted along the paper as
she turned a page with a flutter of slender muscles in her arms.

When we came in she held us silent for a moment with a lifted hand.

“To be continued,” she said, tossing the magazine on the table, “in
our very next issue.”

Her body asserted itself with a restless movement of her knee, and she
stood up.

“Ten o’clock,” she remarked, apparently finding the time on the
ceiling. “Time for this good girl to go to bed.”

“Jordan’s going to play in the tournament tomorrow,” explained Daisy,
“over at Westchester.”

“Oh—you’re Jordan Baker.”

I knew now why her face was familiar—its pleasing contemptuous
expression had looked out at me from many rotogravure pictures of the
sporting life at Asheville and Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I had heard
some story of her too, a critical, unpleasant story, but what it was I
had forgotten long ago.

“Good night,” she said softly. “Wake me at eight, won’t you.”

“If you’ll get up.”

“I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon.”

“Of course you will,” confirmed Daisy. “In fact I think I’ll arrange a
marriage. Come over often, Nick, and I’ll sort of—oh—fling you
together. You know—lock you up accidentally in linen closets and push
you out to sea in a boat, and all that sort of thing—”

“Good night,” called Miss Baker from the stairs. “I haven’t heard a
word.”

“She’s a nice girl,” said Tom after a moment. “They oughtn’t to let
her run around the country this way.”

“Who oughtn’t to?” inquired Daisy coldly.

“Her family.”

“Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides, Nick’s
going to look after her, aren’t you, Nick? She’s going to spend lots
of weekends out here this summer. I think the home influence will be
very good for her.”

Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment in silence.

“Is she from New York?” I asked quickly.

“From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together there. Our
beautiful white—”

“Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?”
demanded Tom suddenly.

“Did I?” She looked at me. “I can’t seem to remember, but I think we
talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I’m sure we did. It sort of crept
up on us and first thing you know—”

“Don’t believe everything you hear, Nick,” he advised me.

I said lightly that I had heard nothing at all, and a few minutes
later I got up to go home. They came to the door with me and stood
side by side in a cheerful square of light. As I started my motor
Daisy peremptorily called: “Wait!

“I forgot to ask you something, and it’s important. We heard you were
engaged to a girl out West.”

“That’s right,” corroborated Tom kindly. “We heard that you were
engaged.”

“It’s a libel. I’m too poor.”

“But we heard it,” insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening up again
in a flower-like way. “We heard it from three people, so it must be
true.”

Of course I knew what they were referring to, but I wasn’t even
vaguely engaged. The fact that gossip had published the banns was one
of the reasons I had come East. You can’t stop going with an old
friend on account of rumours, and on the other hand I had no intention
of being rumoured into marriage.

Their interest rather touched me and made them less remotely
rich—nevertheless, I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove
away. It seemed to me that the thing for Daisy to do was to rush out
of the house, child in arms—but apparently there were no such
intentions in her head. As for Tom, the fact that he “had some woman
in New York” was really less surprising than that he had been
depressed by a book. Something was making him nibble at the edge of
stale ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished his
peremptory heart.

Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and in front of wayside
garages, where new red petrol-pumps sat out in pools of light, and
when I reached my estate at West Egg I ran the car under its shed and
sat for a while on an abandoned grass roller in the yard. The wind had
blown off, leaving a loud, bright night, with wings beating in the
trees and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth
blew the frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavered
across the moonlight, and, turning my head to watch it, I saw that I
was not alone—fifty feet away a figure had emerged from the shadow of
my neighbour’s mansion and was standing with his hands in his pockets
regarding the silver pepper of the stars. Something in his leisurely
movements and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn suggested
that it was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to determine what share was
his of our local heavens.

I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned him at dinner, and
that would do for an introduction. But I didn’t call to him, for he
gave a sudden intimation that he was content to be alone—he stretched
out his arms toward the dark water in a curious way, and, far as I was
from him, I could have sworn he was trembling. Involuntarily I glanced
seaward—and distinguished nothing except a single green light, minute
and far away, that might have been the end of a dock. When I looked
once more for Gatsby he had vanished, and I was alone again in the
unquiet darkness.


                                  II

About halfway between West Egg and New York the motor road hastily
joins the railroad and runs beside it for a quarter of a mile, so as
to shrink away from a certain desolate area of land. This is a valley
of ashes—a fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and
hills and grotesque gardens; where ashes take the forms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke and, finally, with a transcendent effort, of
ash-grey men, who move dimly and already crumbling through the powdery
air. Occasionally a line of grey cars crawls along an invisible track,
gives out a ghastly creak, and comes to rest, and immediately the
ash-grey men swarm up with leaden spades and stir up an impenetrable
cloud, which screens their obscure operations from your sight.

But above the grey land and the spasms of bleak dust which drift
endlessly over it, you perceive, after a moment, the eyes of Doctor T.
J. Eckleburg. The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg are blue and
gigantic—their retinas are one yard high. They look out of no face,
but, instead, from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which pass
over a nonexistent nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set
them there to fatten his practice in the borough of Queens, and then
sank down himself into eternal blindness, or forgot them and moved
away. But his eyes, dimmed a little by many paintless days, under sun
and rain, brood on over the solemn dumping ground.

The valley of ashes is bounded on one side by a small foul river, and,
when the drawbridge is up to let barges through, the passengers on
waiting trains can stare at the dismal scene for as long as half an
hour. There is always a halt there of at least a minute, and it was
because of this that I first met Tom Buchanan’s mistress.

The fact that he had one was insisted upon wherever he was known. His
acquaintances resented the fact that he turned up in popular cafés
with her and, leaving her at a table, sauntered about, chatting with
whomsoever he knew. Though I was curious to see her, I had no desire
to meet her—but I did. I went up to New York with Tom on the train one
afternoon, and when we stopped by the ash-heaps he jumped to his feet
and, taking hold of my elbow, literally forced me from the car.

“We’re getting off,” he insisted. “I want you to meet my girl.”

I think he’d tanked up a good deal at luncheon, and his determination
to have my company bordered on violence. The supercilious assumption
was that on Sunday afternoon I had nothing better to do.

I followed him over a low whitewashed railroad fence, and we walked
back a hundred yards along the road under Doctor Eckleburg’s
persistent stare. The only building in sight was a small block of
yellow brick sitting on the edge of the waste land, a sort of compact
Main Street ministering to it, and contiguous to absolutely nothing.
One of the three shops it contained was for rent and another was an
all-night restaurant, approached by a trail of ashes; the third was a
garage—Repairs. George B. Wilson. Cars bought and sold.—and I followed
Tom inside.

The interior was unprosperous and bare; the only car visible was the
dust-covered wreck of a Ford which crouched in a dim corner. It had
occurred to me that this shadow of a garage must be a blind, and that
sumptuous and romantic apartments were concealed overhead, when the
proprietor himself appeared in the door of an office, wiping his hands
on a piece of waste. He was a blond, spiritless man, anaemic, and
faintly handsome. When he saw us a damp gleam of hope sprang into his
light blue eyes.

“Hello, Wilson, old man,” said Tom, slapping him jovially on the
shoulder. “How’s business?”

“I can’t complain,” answered Wilson unconvincingly. “When are you
going to sell me that car?”

“Next week; I’ve got my man working on it now.”

“Works pretty slow, don’t he?”

“No, he doesn’t,” said Tom coldly. “And if you feel that way about it,
maybe I’d better sell it somewhere else after all.”

“I don’t mean that,” explained Wilson quickly. “I just meant—”

His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently around the garage.
Then I heard footsteps on a stairs, and in a moment the thickish
figure of a woman blocked out the light from the office door. She was
in the middle thirties, and faintly stout, but she carried her flesh
sensuously as some women can. Her face, above a spotted dress of dark
blue crêpe-de-chine, contained no facet or gleam of beauty, but there
was an immediately perceptible vitality about her as if the nerves of
her body were continually smouldering. She smiled slowly and, walking
through her husband as if he were a ghost, shook hands with Tom,
looking him flush in the eye. Then she wet her lips, and without
turning around spoke to her husband in a soft, coarse voice:

“Get some chairs, why don’t you, so somebody can sit down.”

“Oh, sure,” agreed Wilson hurriedly, and went toward the little
office, mingling immediately with the cement colour of the walls. A
white ashen dust veiled his dark suit and his pale hair as it veiled
everything in the vicinity—except his wife, who moved close to Tom.

“I want to see you,” said Tom intently. “Get on the next train.”

“All right.”

“I’ll meet you by the newsstand on the lower level.”

She nodded and moved away from him just as George Wilson emerged with
two chairs from his office door.

We waited for her down the road and out of sight. It was a few days
before the Fourth of July, and a grey, scrawny Italian child was
setting torpedoes in a row along the railroad track.

“Terrible place, isn’t it,” said Tom, exchanging a frown with Doctor
Eckleburg.

“Awful.”

“It does her good to get away.”

“Doesn’t her husband object?”

“Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister in New York. He’s so
dumb he doesn’t know he’s alive.”

So Tom Buchanan and his girl and I went up together to New York—or not
quite together, for Mrs. Wilson sat discreetly in another car. Tom
deferred that much to the sensibilities of those East Eggers who might
be on the train.

She had changed her dress to a brown figured muslin, which stretched
tight over her rather wide hips as Tom helped her to the platform in
New York. At the newsstand she bought a copy of Town Tattle and a
moving-picture magazine, and in the station drugstore some cold cream
and a small flask of perfume. Upstairs, in the solemn echoing drive
she let four taxicabs drive away before she selected a new one,
lavender-coloured with grey upholstery, and in this we slid out from
the mass of the station into the glowing sunshine. But immediately she
turned sharply from the window and, leaning forward, tapped on the
front glass.

“I want to get one of those dogs,” she said earnestly. “I want to get
one for the apartment. They’re nice to have—a dog.”

We backed up to a grey old man who bore an absurd resemblance to John
D. Rockefeller. In a basket swung from his neck cowered a dozen very
recent puppies of an indeterminate breed.

“What kind are they?” asked Mrs. Wilson eagerly, as he came to the
taxi-window.

“All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?”

“I’d like to get one of those police dogs; I don’t suppose you got
that kind?”

The man peered doubtfully into the basket, plunged in his hand and
drew one up, wriggling, by the back of the neck.

“That’s no police dog,” said Tom.

“No, it’s not exactly a police dog,” said the man with disappointment
in his voice. “It’s more of an Airedale.” He passed his hand over the
brown washrag of a back. “Look at that coat. Some coat. That’s a dog
that’ll never bother you with catching cold.”

“I think it’s cute,” said Mrs. Wilson enthusiastically. “How much is
it?”

“That dog?” He looked at it admiringly. “That dog will cost you ten
dollars.”

The Airedale—undoubtedly there was an Airedale concerned in it
somewhere, though its feet were startlingly white—changed hands and
settled down into Mrs. Wilson’s lap, where she fondled the
weatherproof coat with rapture.

“Is it a boy or a girl?” she asked delicately.

“That dog? That dog’s a boy.”

“It’s a bitch,” said Tom decisively. “Here’s your money. Go and buy
ten more dogs with it.”

We drove over to Fifth Avenue, warm and soft, almost pastoral, on the
summer Sunday afternoon. I wouldn’t have been surprised to see a great
flock of white sheep turn the corner.

“Hold on,” I said, “I have to leave you here.”

“No you don’t,” interposed Tom quickly. “Myrtle’ll be hurt if you
don’t come up to the apartment. Won’t you, Myrtle?”

“Come on,” she urged. “I’ll telephone my sister Catherine. She’s said
to be very beautiful by people who ought to know.”

“Well, I’d like to, but—”

We went on, cutting back again over the Park toward the West Hundreds.
At 158th Street the cab stopped at one slice in a long white cake of
apartment-houses. Throwing a regal homecoming glance around the
neighbourhood, Mrs. Wilson gathered up her dog and her other
purchases, and went haughtily in.

“I’m going to have the McKees come up,” she announced as we rose in
the elevator. “And, of course, I got to call up my sister, too.”

The apartment was on the top floor—a small living-room, a small
dining-room, a small bedroom, and a bath. The living-room was crowded
to the doors with a set of tapestried furniture entirely too large for
it, so that to move about was to stumble continually over scenes of
ladies swinging in the gardens of Versailles. The only picture was an
over-enlarged photograph, apparently a hen sitting on a blurred rock.
Looked at from a distance, however, the hen resolved itself into a
bonnet, and the countenance of a stout old lady beamed down into the
room. Several old copies of Town Tattle lay on the table together with
a copy of Simon Called Peter, and some of the small scandal magazines
of Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was first concerned with the dog. A reluctant
elevator boy went for a box full of straw and some milk, to which he
added on his own initiative a tin of large, hard dog biscuits—one of
which decomposed apathetically in the saucer of milk all
afternoon. Meanwhile Tom brought out a bottle of whisky from a locked
bureau door.

I have been drunk just twice in my life, and the second time was that
afternoon; so everything that happened has a dim, hazy cast over it,
although until after eight o’clock the apartment was full of cheerful
sun. Sitting on Tom’s lap Mrs. Wilson called up several people on the
telephone; then there were no cigarettes, and I went out to buy some
at the drugstore on the corner. When I came back they had both
disappeared, so I sat down discreetly in the living-room and read a
chapter of Simon Called Peter—either it was terrible stuff or the
whisky distorted things, because it didn’t make any sense to me.

Just as Tom and Myrtle (after the first drink Mrs. Wilson and I called
each other by our first names) reappeared, company commenced to arrive
at the apartment door.

The sister, Catherine, was a slender, worldly girl of about thirty,
with a solid, sticky bob of red hair, and a complexion powdered milky
white. Her eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a more
rakish angle, but the efforts of nature toward the restoration of the
old alignment gave a blurred air to her face. When she moved about
there was an incessant clicking as innumerable pottery bracelets
jingled up and down upon her arms. She came in with such a proprietary
haste, and looked around so possessively at the furniture that I
wondered if she lived here. But when I asked her she laughed
immoderately, repeated my question aloud, and told me she lived with a
girl friend at a hotel.

Mr. McKee was a pale, feminine man from the flat below. He had just
shaved, for there was a white spot of lather on his cheekbone, and he
was most respectful in his greeting to everyone in the room. He
informed me that he was in the “artistic game,” and I gathered later
that he was a photographer and had made the dim enlargement of
Mrs. Wilson’s mother which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall. His
wife was shrill, languid, handsome, and horrible. She told me with
pride that her husband had photographed her a hundred and twenty-seven
times since they had been married.

Mrs. Wilson had changed her costume some time before, and was now
attired in an elaborate afternoon dress of cream-coloured chiffon,
which gave out a continual rustle as she swept about the room. With
the influence of the dress her personality had also undergone a
change. The intense vitality that had been so remarkable in the garage
was converted into impressive hauteur. Her laughter, her gestures, her
assertions became more violently affected moment by moment, and as she
expanded the room grew smaller around her, until she seemed to be
revolving on a noisy, creaking pivot through the smoky air.

“My dear,” she told her sister in a high, mincing shout, “most of
these fellas will cheat you every time. All they think of is money. I
had a woman up here last week to look at my feet, and when she gave me
the bill you’d of thought she had my appendicitis out.”

“What was the name of the woman?” asked Mrs. McKee.

“Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking at people’s feet in their own
homes.”

“I like your dress,” remarked Mrs. McKee, “I think it’s adorable.”

Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising her eyebrow in disdain.

“It’s just a crazy old thing,” she said. “I just slip it on sometimes
when I don’t care what I look like.”

“But it looks wonderful on you, if you know what I mean,” pursued Mrs.
McKee. “If Chester could only get you in that pose I think he could
make something of it.”

We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson, who removed a strand of hair
from over her eyes and looked back at us with a brilliant smile. Mr.
McKee regarded her intently with his head on one side, and then moved
his hand back and forth slowly in front of his face.

“I should change the light,” he said after a moment. “I’d like to
bring out the modelling of the features. And I’d try to get hold of
all the back hair.”

“I wouldn’t think of changing the light,” cried Mrs. McKee. “I think
it’s—”

Her husband said “Sh!” and we all looked at the subject again,
whereupon Tom Buchanan yawned audibly and got to his feet.

“You McKees have something to drink,” he said. “Get some more ice and
mineral water, Myrtle, before everybody goes to sleep.”

“I told that boy about the ice.” Myrtle raised her eyebrows in despair
at the shiftlessness of the lower orders. “These people! You have to
keep after them all the time.”

She looked at me and laughed pointlessly. Then she flounced over to
the dog, kissed it with ecstasy, and swept into the kitchen, implying
that a dozen chefs awaited her orders there.

“I’ve done some nice things out on Long Island,” asserted Mr. McKee.

Tom looked at him blankly.

“Two of them we have framed downstairs.”

“Two what?” demanded Tom.

“Two studies. One of them I call Montauk Point—The Gulls, and the
other I call Montauk Point—The Sea.”

The sister Catherine sat down beside me on the couch.

“Do you live down on Long Island, too?” she inquired.

“I live at West Egg.”

“Really? I was down there at a party about a month ago. At a man named
Gatsby’s. Do you know him?”

“I live next door to him.”

“Well, they say he’s a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm’s. That’s
where all his money comes from.”

“Really?”

She nodded.

“I’m scared of him. I’d hate to have him get anything on me.”

This absorbing information about my neighbour was interrupted by Mrs.
McKee’s pointing suddenly at Catherine:

“Chester, I think you could do something with her,” she broke out, but
Mr. McKee only nodded in a bored way, and turned his attention to Tom.

“I’d like to do more work on Long Island, if I could get the entry.
All I ask is that they should give me a start.”

“Ask Myrtle,” said Tom, breaking into a short shout of laughter as
Mrs. Wilson entered with a tray. “She’ll give you a letter of
introduction, won’t you, Myrtle?”

“Do what?” she asked, startled.

“You’ll give McKee a letter of introduction to your husband, so he can
do some studies of him.” His lips moved silently for a moment as he
invented, “ ‘George B. Wilson at the Gasoline Pump,’ or something like
that.”

Catherine leaned close to me and whispered in my ear:

“Neither of them can stand the person they’re married to.”

“Can’t they?”

“Can’t stand them.” She looked at Myrtle and then at Tom. “What I say
is, why go on living with them if they can’t stand them? If I was them
I’d get a divorce and get married to each other right away.”

“Doesn’t she like Wilson either?”

The answer to this was unexpected. It came from Myrtle, who had
overheard the question, and it was violent and obscene.

“You see,” cried Catherine triumphantly. She lowered her voice again.
“It’s really his wife that’s keeping them apart. She’s a Catholic, and
they don’t believe in divorce.”

Daisy was not a Catholic, and I was a little shocked at the
elaborateness of the lie.

“When they do get married,” continued Catherine, “they’re going West
to live for a while until it blows over.”

“It’d be more discreet to go to Europe.”

“Oh, do you like Europe?” she exclaimed surprisingly. “I just got back
from Monte Carlo.”

“Really.”

“Just last year. I went over there with another girl.”

“Stay long?”

“No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back. We went by way of
Marseilles. We had over twelve hundred dollars when we started, but we
got gyped out of it all in two days in the private rooms. We had an
awful time getting back, I can tell you. God, how I hated that town!”

The late afternoon sky bloomed in the window for a moment like the
blue honey of the Mediterranean—then the shrill voice of Mrs. McKee
called me back into the room.

“I almost made a mistake, too,” she declared vigorously. “I almost
married a little kike who’d been after me for years. I knew he was
below me. Everybody kept saying to me: ‘Lucille, that man’s way below
you!’ But if I hadn’t met Chester, he’d of got me sure.”

“Yes, but listen,” said Myrtle Wilson, nodding her head up and down,
“at least you didn’t marry him.”

“I know I didn’t.”

“Well, I married him,” said Myrtle, ambiguously. “And that’s the
difference between your case and mine.”

“Why did you, Myrtle?” demanded Catherine. “Nobody forced you to.”

Myrtle considered.

“I married him because I thought he was a gentleman,” she said
finally. “I thought he knew something about breeding, but he wasn’t
fit to lick my shoe.”

“You were crazy about him for a while,” said Catherine.

“Crazy about him!” cried Myrtle incredulously. “Who said I was crazy
about him? I never was any more crazy about him than I was about that
man there.”

She pointed suddenly at me, and everyone looked at me accusingly. I
tried to show by my expression that I expected no affection.

“The only crazy I was was when I married him. I knew right away I made
a mistake. He borrowed somebody’s best suit to get married in, and
never even told me about it, and the man came after it one day when he
was out: ‘Oh, is that your suit?’ I said. ‘This is the first I ever
heard about it.’ But I gave it to him and then I lay down and cried to
beat the band all afternoon.”

“She really ought to get away from him,” resumed Catherine to me.
“They’ve been living over that garage for eleven years. And Tom’s the
first sweetie she ever had.”

The bottle of whisky—a second one—was now in constant demand by all
present, excepting Catherine, who “felt just as good on nothing at
all.” Tom rang for the janitor and sent him for some celebrated
sandwiches, which were a complete supper in themselves. I wanted to
get out and walk eastward toward the park through the soft twilight,
but each time I tried to go I became entangled in some wild, strident
argument which pulled me back, as if with ropes, into my chair. Yet
high over the city our line of yellow windows must have contributed
their share of human secrecy to the casual watcher in the darkening
streets, and I saw him too, looking up and wondering. I was within and
without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled by the inexhaustible
variety of life.

Myrtle pulled her chair close to mine, and suddenly her warm breath
poured over me the story of her first meeting with Tom.

“It was on the two little seats facing each other that are always the
last ones left on the train. I was going up to New York to see my
sister and spend the night. He had on a dress suit and patent leather
shoes, and I couldn’t keep my eyes off him, but every time he looked
at me I had to pretend to be looking at the advertisement over his
head. When we came into the station he was next to me, and his white
shirtfront pressed against my arm, and so I told him I’d have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when I got into
a taxi with him I didn’t hardly know I wasn’t getting into a subway
train. All I kept thinking about, over and over, was ‘You can’t live
forever; you can’t live forever.’ ”

She turned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang full of her artificial
laughter.

“My dear,” she cried, “I’m going to give you this dress as soon as I’m
through with it. I’ve got to get another one tomorrow. I’m going to
make a list of all the things I’ve got to get. A massage and a wave,
and a collar for the dog, and one of those cute little ashtrays where
you touch a spring, and a wreath with a black silk bow for mother’s
grave that’ll last all summer. I got to write down a list so I won’t
forget all the things I got to do.”

It was nine o’clock—almost immediately afterward I looked at my watch
and found it was ten. Mr. McKee was asleep on a chair with his fists
clenched in his lap, like a photograph of a man of action. Taking out
my handkerchief I wiped from his cheek the spot of dried lather that
had worried me all the afternoon.

The little dog was sitting on the table looking with blind eyes
through the smoke, and from time to time groaning faintly. People
disappeared, reappeared, made plans to go somewhere, and then lost
each other, searched for each other, found each other a few feet
away. Some time toward midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson stood
face to face discussing, in impassioned voices, whether Mrs. Wilson
had any right to mention Daisy’s name.

“Daisy! Daisy! Daisy!” shouted Mrs. Wilson. “I’ll say it whenever I
want to! Daisy! Dai—”

Making a short deft movement, Tom Buchanan broke her nose with his
open hand.

Then there were bloody towels upon the bathroom floor, and women’s
voices scolding, and high over the confusion a long broken wail of
pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and started in a daze toward the
door. When he had gone halfway he turned around and stared at the
scene—his wife and Catherine scolding and consoling as they stumbled
here and there among the crowded furniture with articles of aid, and
the despairing figure on the couch, bleeding fluently, and trying to
spread a copy of Town Tattle over the tapestry scenes of
Versailles. Then Mr. McKee turned and continued on out the door.
Taking my hat from the chandelier, I followed.

“Come to lunch some day,” he suggested, as we groaned down in the
elevator.

“Where?”

“Anywhere.”

“Keep your hands off the lever,” snapped the elevator boy.

“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. McKee with dignity, “I didn’t know I was
touching it.”

“All right,” I agreed, “I’ll be glad to.”

… I was standing beside his bed and he was sitting up between the
sheets, clad in his underwear, with a great portfolio in his hands.

“Beauty and the Beast … Loneliness … Old Grocery Horse … Brook’n
Bridge …”

Then I was lying half asleep in the cold lower level of the
Pennsylvania Station, staring at the morning Tribune, and waiting for
the four o’clock train.


                                 III

There was music from my neighbour’s house through the summer nights.
In his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the
whisperings and the champagne and the stars. At high tide in the
afternoon I watched his guests diving from the tower of his raft, or
taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two motorboats
slit the waters of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts of
foam. On weekends his Rolls-Royce became an omnibus, bearing parties
to and from the city between nine in the morning and long past
midnight, while his station wagon scampered like a brisk yellow bug to
meet all trains. And on Mondays eight servants, including an extra
gardener, toiled all day with mops and scrubbing-brushes and hammers
and garden-shears, repairing the ravages of the night before.

Every Friday five crates of oranges and lemons arrived from a
fruiterer in New York—every Monday these same oranges and lemons left
his back door in a pyramid of pulpless halves. There was a machine in
the kitchen which could extract the juice of two hundred oranges in
half an hour if a little button was pressed two hundred times by a
butler’s thumb.

At least once a fortnight a corps of caterers came down with several
hundred feet of canvas and enough coloured lights to make a Christmas
tree of Gatsby’s enormous garden. On buffet tables, garnished with
glistening hors-d’oeuvre, spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
harlequin designs and pastry pigs and turkeys bewitched to a dark
gold. In the main hall a bar with a real brass rail was set up, and
stocked with gins and liquors and with cordials so long forgotten that
most of his female guests were too young to know one from another.

By seven o’clock the orchestra has arrived, no thin five-piece affair,
but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and saxophones and viols and
cornets and piccolos, and low and high drums. The last swimmers have
come in from the beach now and are dressing upstairs; the cars from
New York are parked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and
salons and verandas are gaudy with primary colours, and hair bobbed in
strange new ways, and shawls beyond the dreams of Castile. The bar is
in full swing, and floating rounds of cocktails permeate the garden
outside, until the air is alive with chatter and laughter, and casual
innuendo and introductions forgotten on the spot, and enthusiastic
meetings between women who never knew each other’s names.

The lights grow brighter as the earth lurches away from the sun, and
now the orchestra is playing yellow cocktail music, and the opera of
voices pitches a key higher. Laughter is easier minute by minute,
spilled with prodigality, tipped out at a cheerful word. The groups
change more swiftly, swell with new arrivals, dissolve and form in the
same breath; already there are wanderers, confident girls who weave
here and there among the stouter and more stable, become for a sharp,
joyous moment the centre of a group, and then, excited with triumph,
glide on through the sea-change of faces and voices and colour under
the constantly changing light.

Suddenly one of these gypsies, in trembling opal, seizes a cocktail
out of the air, dumps it down for courage and, moving her hands like
Frisco, dances out alone on the canvas platform. A momentary hush; the
orchestra leader varies his rhythm obligingly for her, and there is a
burst of chatter as the erroneous news goes around that she is Gilda
Gray’s understudy from the Follies. The party has begun.

I believe that on the first night I went to Gatsby’s house I was one
of the few guests who had actually been invited. People were not
invited—they went there. They got into automobiles which bore them out
to Long Island, and somehow they ended up at Gatsby’s door. Once there
they were introduced by somebody who knew Gatsby, and after that they
conducted themselves according to the rules of behaviour associated
with an amusement park. Sometimes they came and went without having
met Gatsby at all, came for the party with a simplicity of heart that
was its own ticket of admission.

I had been actually invited. A chauffeur in a uniform of robin’s-egg
blue crossed my lawn early that Saturday morning with a surprisingly
formal note from his employer: the honour would be entirely Gatsby’s,
it said, if I would attend his “little party” that night. He had seen
me several times, and had intended to call on me long before, but a
peculiar combination of circumstances had prevented it—signed Jay
Gatsby, in a majestic hand.

Dressed up in white flannels I went over to his lawn a little after
seven, and wandered around rather ill at ease among swirls and eddies
of people I didn’t know—though here and there was a face I had noticed
on the commuting train. I was immediately struck by the number of
young Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a little
hungry, and all talking in low, earnest voices to solid and prosperous
Americans. I was sure that they were selling something: bonds or
insurance or automobiles. They were at least agonizingly aware of the
easy money in the vicinity and convinced that it was theirs for a few
words in the right key.

As soon as I arrived I made an attempt to find my host, but the two or
three people of whom I asked his whereabouts stared at me in such an
amazed way, and denied so vehemently any knowledge of his movements,
that I slunk off in the direction of the cocktail table—the only place
in the garden where a single man could linger without looking
purposeless and alone.

I was on my way to get roaring drunk from sheer embarrassment when
Jordan Baker came out of the house and stood at the head of the marble
steps, leaning a little backward and looking with contemptuous
interest down into the garden.

Welcome or not, I found it necessary to attach myself to someone
before I should begin to address cordial remarks to the passersby.

“Hello!” I roared, advancing toward her. My voice seemed unnaturally
loud across the garden.

“I thought you might be here,” she responded absently as I came up.
“I remembered you lived next door to—”

She held my hand impersonally, as a promise that she’d take care of me
in a minute, and gave ear to two girls in twin yellow dresses, who
stopped at the foot of the steps.

“Hello!” they cried together. “Sorry you didn’t win.”

That was for the golf tournament. She had lost in the finals the week
before.

“You don’t know who we are,” said one of the girls in yellow, “but we
met you here about a month ago.”

“You’ve dyed your hair since then,” remarked Jordan, and I started,
but the girls had moved casually on and her remark was addressed to
the premature moon, produced like the supper, no doubt, out of a
caterer’s basket. With Jordan’s slender golden arm resting in mine, we
descended the steps and sauntered about the garden. A tray of
cocktails floated at us through the twilight, and we sat down at a
table with the two girls in yellow and three men, each one introduced
to us as Mr. Mumble.

“Do you come to these parties often?” inquired Jordan of the girl
beside her.

“The last one was the one I met you at,” answered the girl, in an
alert confident voice. She turned to her companion: “Wasn’t it for
you, Lucille?”

It was for Lucille, too.

“I like to come,” Lucille said. “I never care what I do, so I always
have a good time. When I was here last I tore my gown on a chair, and
he asked me my name and address—inside of a week I got a package from
Croirier’s with a new evening gown in it.”

“Did you keep it?” asked Jordan.

“Sure I did. I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too big in the
bust and had to be altered. It was gas blue with lavender beads. Two
hundred and sixty-five dollars.”

“There’s something funny about a fellow that’ll do a thing like that,”
said the other girl eagerly. “He doesn’t want any trouble with
anybody.”

“Who doesn’t?” I inquired.

“Gatsby. Somebody told me—”

The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.

“Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once.”

A thrill passed over all of us. The three Mr. Mumbles bent forward and
listened eagerly.

“I don’t think it’s so much that,” argued Lucille sceptically; “It’s
more that he was a German spy during the war.”

One of the men nodded in confirmation.

“I heard that from a man who knew all about him, grew up with him in
Germany,” he assured us positively.

“Oh, no,” said the first girl, “it couldn’t be that, because he was in
the American army during the war.” As our credulity switched back to
her she leaned forward with enthusiasm. “You look at him sometimes
when he thinks nobody’s looking at him. I’ll bet he killed a man.”

She narrowed her eyes and shivered. Lucille shivered. We all turned
and looked around for Gatsby. It was testimony to the romantic
speculation he inspired that there were whispers about him from those
who had found little that it was necessary to whisper about in this
world.

The first supper—there would be another one after midnight—was now
being served, and Jordan invited me to join her own party, who were
spread around a table on the other side of the garden. There were
three married couples and Jordan’s escort, a persistent undergraduate
given to violent innuendo, and obviously under the impression that
sooner or later Jordan was going to yield him up her person to a
greater or lesser degree. Instead of rambling, this party had
preserved a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself the function
of representing the staid nobility of the countryside—East Egg
condescending to West Egg and carefully on guard against its
spectroscopic gaiety.

“Let’s get out,” whispered Jordan, after a somehow wasteful and
inappropriate half-hour; “this is much too polite for me.”

We got up, and she explained that we were going to find the host: I
had never met him, she said, and it was making me uneasy. The
undergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy way.

The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded, but Gatsby was not
there. She couldn’t find him from the top of the steps, and he wasn’t
on the veranda. On a chance we tried an important-looking door, and
walked into a high Gothic library, panelled with carved English oak,
and probably transported complete from some ruin overseas.

A stout, middle-aged man, with enormous owl-eyed spectacles, was
sitting somewhat drunk on the edge of a great table, staring with
unsteady concentration at the shelves of books. As we entered he
wheeled excitedly around and examined Jordan from head to foot.

“What do you think?” he demanded impetuously.

“About what?”

He waved his hand toward the bookshelves.

“About that. As a matter of fact you needn’t bother to ascertain. I
ascertained. They’re real.”

“The books?”

He nodded.

“Absolutely real—have pages and everything. I thought they’d be a nice
durable cardboard. Matter of fact, they’re absolutely real.  Pages
and—Here! Lemme show you.”

Taking our scepticism for granted, he rushed to the bookcases and
returned with Volume One of the Stoddard Lectures.

“See!” he cried triumphantly. “It’s a bona-fide piece of printed
matter. It fooled me. This fella’s a regular Belasco. It’s a
triumph. What thoroughness! What realism! Knew when to stop,
too—didn’t cut the pages. But what do you want? What do you expect?”

He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on its shelf,
muttering that if one brick was removed the whole library was liable
to collapse.

“Who brought you?” he demanded. “Or did you just come? I was brought.
Most people were brought.”

Jordan looked at him alertly, cheerfully, without answering.

“I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt,” he continued. “Mrs. Claud
Roosevelt. Do you know her? I met her somewhere last night. I’ve been
drunk for about a week now, and I thought it might sober me up to sit
in a library.”

“Has it?”

“A little bit, I think. I can’t tell yet. I’ve only been here an hour.
Did I tell you about the books? They’re real. They’re—”

“You told us.”

We shook hands with him gravely and went back outdoors.

There was dancing now on the canvas in the garden; old men pushing
young girls backward in eternal graceless circles, superior couples
holding each other tortuously, fashionably, and keeping in the
corners—and a great number of single girls dancing individually or
relieving the orchestra for a moment of the burden of the banjo or the
traps. By midnight the hilarity had increased. A celebrated tenor had
sung in Italian, and a notorious contralto had sung in jazz, and
between the numbers people were doing “stunts” all over the garden,
while happy, vacuous bursts of laughter rose toward the summer sky. A
pair of stage twins, who turned out to be the girls in yellow, did a
baby act in costume, and champagne was served in glasses bigger than
finger-bowls. The moon had risen higher, and floating in the Sound was
a triangle of silver scales, trembling a little to the stiff, tinny
drip of the banjoes on the lawn.

I was still with Jordan Baker. We were sitting at a table with a man
of about my age and a rowdy little girl, who gave way upon the
slightest provocation to uncontrollable laughter. I was enjoying
myself now. I had taken two finger-bowls of champagne, and the scene
had changed before my eyes into something significant, elemental, and
profound.

At a lull in the entertainment the man looked at me and smiled.

“Your face is familiar,” he said politely. “Weren’t you in the First
Division during the war?”

“Why yes. I was in the Twenty-eighth Infantry.”

“I was in the Sixteenth until June nineteen-eighteen. I knew I’d seen
you somewhere before.”

We talked for a moment about some wet, grey little villages in France.
Evidently he lived in this vicinity, for he told me that he had just
bought a hydroplane, and was going to try it out in the morning.

“Want to go with me, old sport? Just near the shore along the Sound.”

“What time?”

“Any time that suits you best.”

It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his name when Jordan looked
around and smiled.

“Having a gay time now?” she inquired.

“Much better.” I turned again to my new acquaintance. “This is an
unusual party for me. I haven’t even seen the host. I live over
there—” I waved my hand at the invisible hedge in the distance, “and
this man Gatsby sent over his chauffeur with an invitation.”

For a moment he looked at me as if he failed to understand.

“I’m Gatsby,” he said suddenly.

“What!” I exclaimed. “Oh, I beg your pardon.”

“I thought you knew, old sport. I’m afraid I’m not a very good host.”

He smiled understandingly—much more than understandingly. It was one
of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance in it, that
you may come across four or five times in life. It faced—or seemed to
face—the whole eternal world for an instant, and then concentrated on
you with an irresistible prejudice in your favour. It understood you
just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed in you as you
would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that it had
precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to
convey. Precisely at that point it vanished—and I was looking at an
elegant young roughneck, a year or two over thirty, whose elaborate
formality of speech just missed being absurd. Some time before he
introduced himself I’d got a strong impression that he was picking his
words with care.

Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified himself a butler
hurried toward him with the information that Chicago was calling him
on the wire. He excused himself with a small bow that included each of
us in turn.

“If you want anything just ask for it, old sport,” he urged me.
“Excuse me. I will rejoin you later.”

When he was gone I turned immediately to Jordan—constrained to assure
her of my surprise. I had expected that Mr. Gatsby would be a florid
and corpulent person in his middle years.

“Who is he?” I demanded. “Do you know?”

“He’s just a man named Gatsby.”

“Where is he from, I mean? And what does he do?”

“Now you’re started on the subject,” she answered with a wan smile.
“Well, he told me once he was an Oxford man.”

A dim background started to take shape behind him, but at her next
remark it faded away.

“However, I don’t believe it.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know,” she insisted, “I just don’t think he went there.”

Something in her tone reminded me of the other girl’s “I think he
killed a man,” and had the effect of stimulating my curiosity. I would
have accepted without question the information that Gatsby sprang from
the swamps of Louisiana or from the lower East Side of New York. That
was comprehensible. But young men didn’t—at least in my provincial
inexperience I believed they didn’t—drift coolly out of nowhere and
buy a palace on Long Island Sound.

“Anyhow, he gives large parties,” said Jordan, changing the subject
with an urban distaste for the concrete. “And I like large parties.
They’re so intimate. At small parties there isn’t any privacy.”

There was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the orchestra
leader rang out suddenly above the echolalia of the garden.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” he cried. “At the request of Mr. Gatsby we are
going to play for you Mr. Vladmir Tostoff’s latest work, which
attracted so much attention at Carnegie Hall last May. If you read the
papers you know there was a big sensation.” He smiled with jovial
condescension, and added: “Some sensation!” Whereupon everybody
laughed.

“The piece is known,” he concluded lustily, “as ‘Vladmir Tostoff’s
Jazz History of the World!’ ”

The nature of Mr. Tostoff’s composition eluded me, because just as it
began my eyes fell on Gatsby, standing alone on the marble steps and
looking from one group to another with approving eyes. His tanned skin
was drawn attractively tight on his face and his short hair looked as
though it were trimmed every day. I could see nothing sinister about
him. I wondered if the fact that he was not drinking helped to set him
off from his guests, for it seemed to me that he grew more correct as
the fraternal hilarity increased. When the “Jazz History of the World”
was over, girls were putting their heads on men’s shoulders in a
puppyish, convivial way, girls were swooning backward playfully into
men’s arms, even into groups, knowing that someone would arrest their
falls—but no one swooned backward on Gatsby, and no French bob touched
Gatsby’s shoulder, and no singing quartets were formed with Gatsby’s
head for one link.

“I beg your pardon.”

Gatsby’s butler was suddenly standing beside us.

“Miss Baker?” he inquired. “I beg your pardon, but Mr. Gatsby would
like to speak to you alone.”

“With me?” she exclaimed in surprise.

“Yes, madame.”

She got up slowly, raising her eyebrows at me in astonishment, and
followed the butler toward the house. I noticed that she wore her
evening-dress, all her dresses, like sports clothes—there was a
jauntiness about her movements as if she had first learned to walk
upon golf courses on clean, crisp mornings.

I was alone and it was almost two. For some time confused and
intriguing sounds had issued from a long, many-windowed room which
overhung the terrace. Eluding Jordan’s undergraduate, who was now
engaged in an obstetrical conversation with two chorus girls, and who
implored me to join him, I went inside.

The large room was full of people. One of the girls in yellow was
playing the piano, and beside her stood a tall, red-haired young lady
from a famous chorus, engaged in song. She had drunk a quantity of
champagne, and during the course of her song she had decided, ineptly,
that everything was very, very sad—she was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Whenever there was a pause in the song she filled it with
gasping, broken sobs, and then took up the lyric again in a quavering
soprano. The tears coursed down her cheeks—not freely, however, for
when they came into contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes they
assumed an inky colour, and pursued the rest of their way in slow
black rivulets. A humorous suggestion was made that she sing the notes
on her face, whereupon she threw up her hands, sank into a chair, and
went off into a deep vinous sleep.

“She had a fight with a man who says he’s her husband,” explained a
girl at my elbow.

I looked around. Most of the remaining women were now having fights
with men said to be their husbands. Even Jordan’s party, the quartet
from East Egg, were rent asunder by dissension. One of the men was
talking with curious intensity to a young actress, and his wife, after
attempting to laugh at the situation in a dignified and indifferent
way, broke down entirely and resorted to flank attacks—at intervals
she appeared suddenly at his side like an angry diamond, and hissed:
“You promised!” into his ear.

The reluctance to go home was not confined to wayward men. The hall
was at present occupied by two deplorably sober men and their highly
indignant wives. The wives were sympathizing with each other in
slightly raised voices.

“Whenever he sees I’m having a good time he wants to go home.”

“Never heard anything so selfish in my life.”

“We’re always the first ones to leave.”

“So are we.”

“Well, we’re almost the last tonight,” said one of the men sheepishly.
“The orchestra left half an hour ago.”

In spite of the wives’ agreement that such malevolence was beyond
credibility, the dispute ended in a short struggle, and both wives
were lifted, kicking, into the night.

As I waited for my hat in the hall the door of the library opened and
Jordan Baker and Gatsby came out together. He was saying some last
word to her, but the eagerness in his manner tightened abruptly into
formality as several people approached him to say goodbye.

Jordan’s party were calling impatiently to her from the porch, but she
lingered for a moment to shake hands.

“I’ve just heard the most amazing thing,” she whispered. “How long
were we in there?”

“Why, about an hour.”

“It was … simply amazing,” she repeated abstractedly. “But I swore I
wouldn’t tell it and here I am tantalizing you.” She yawned gracefully
in my face. “Please come and see me … Phone book … Under the name of
Mrs. Sigourney Howard … My aunt …” She was hurrying off as she
talked—her brown hand waved a jaunty salute as she melted into her
party at the door.

Rather ashamed that on my first appearance I had stayed so late, I
joined the last of Gatsby’s guests, who were clustered around him. I
wanted to explain that I’d hunted for him early in the evening and to
apologize for not having known him in the garden.

“Don’t mention it,” he enjoined me eagerly. “Don’t give it another
thought, old sport.” The familiar expression held no more familiarity
than the hand which reassuringly brushed my shoulder. “And don’t
forget we’re going up in the hydroplane tomorrow morning, at nine
o’clock.”

Then the butler, behind his shoulder:

“Philadelphia wants you on the phone, sir.”

“All right, in a minute. Tell them I’ll be right there … Good night.”

“Good night.”

“Good night.” He smiled—and suddenly there seemed to be a pleasant
significance in having been among the last to go, as if he had desired
it all the time. “Good night, old sport … Good night.”

But as I walked down the steps I saw that the evening was not quite
over. Fifty feet from the door a dozen headlights illuminated a
bizarre and tumultuous scene. In the ditch beside the road, right side
up, but violently shorn of one wheel, rested a new coupé which had
left Gatsby’s drive not two minutes before. The sharp jut of a wall
accounted for the detachment of the wheel, which was now getting
considerable attention from half a dozen curious chauffeurs. However,
as they had left their cars blocking the road, a harsh, discordant din
from those in the rear had been audible for some time, and added to
the already violent confusion of the scene.

A man in a long duster had dismounted from the wreck and now stood in
the middle of the road, looking from the car to the tyre and from the
tyre to the observers in a pleasant, puzzled way.

“See!” he explained. “It went in the ditch.”

The fact was infinitely astonishing to him, and I recognized first the
unusual quality of wonder, and then the man—it was the late patron of
Gatsby’s library.

“How’d it happen?”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I know nothing whatever about mechanics,” he said decisively.

“But how did it happen? Did you run into the wall?”

“Don’t ask me,” said Owl Eyes, washing his hands of the whole
matter. “I know very little about driving—next to nothing. It
happened, and that’s all I know.”

“Well, if you’re a poor driver you oughtn’t to try driving at night.”

“But I wasn’t even trying,” he explained indignantly, “I wasn’t even
trying.”

An awed hush fell upon the bystanders.

“Do you want to commit suicide?”

“You’re lucky it was just a wheel! A bad driver and not even trying!”

“You don’t understand,” explained the criminal. “I wasn’t driving.
There’s another man in the car.”

The shock that followed this declaration found voice in a sustained
“Ah-h-h!” as the door of the coupé swung slowly open. The crowd—it was
now a crowd—stepped back involuntarily, and when the door had opened
wide there was a ghostly pause. Then, very gradually, part by part, a
pale, dangling individual stepped out of the wreck, pawing tentatively
at the ground with a large uncertain dancing shoe.

Blinded by the glare of the headlights and confused by the incessant
groaning of the horns, the apparition stood swaying for a moment
before he perceived the man in the duster.

“Wha’s matter?” he inquired calmly. “Did we run outa gas?”

“Look!”

Half a dozen fingers pointed at the amputated wheel—he stared at it
for a moment, and then looked upward as though he suspected that it
had dropped from the sky.

“It came off,” someone explained.

He nodded.

“At first I din’ notice we’d stopped.”

A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening his shoulders,
he remarked in a determined voice:

“Wonder’ff tell me where there’s a gas’line station?”

At least a dozen men, some of them a little better off than he was,
explained to him that wheel and car were no longer joined by any
physical bond.

“Back out,” he suggested after a moment. “Put her in reverse.”

“But the wheel’s off!”

He hesitated.

“No harm in trying,” he said.

The caterwauling horns had reached a crescendo and I turned away and
cut across the lawn toward home. I glanced back once. A wafer of a
moon was shining over Gatsby’s house, making the night fine as before,
and surviving the laughter and the sound of his still glowing garden.
A sudden emptiness seemed to flow now from the windows and the great
doors, endowing with complete isolation the figure of the host, who
stood on the porch, his hand up in a formal gesture of farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reading over what I have written so far, I see I have given the
impression that the events of three nights several weeks apart were
all that absorbed me. On the contrary, they were merely casual events
in a crowded summer, and, until much later, they absorbed me
infinitely less than my personal affairs.

Most of the time I worked. In the early morning the sun threw my
shadow westward as I hurried down the white chasms of lower New York
to the Probity Trust. I knew the other clerks and young bond-salesmen
by their first names, and lunched with them in dark, crowded
restaurants on little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I
even had a short affair with a girl who lived in Jersey City and
worked in the accounting department, but her brother began throwing
mean looks in my direction, so when she went on her vacation in July I
let it blow quietly away.

I took dinner usually at the Yale Club—for some reason it was the
gloomiest event of my day—and then I went upstairs to the library and
studied investments and securities for a conscientious hour. There
were generally a few rioters around, but they never came into the
library, so it was a good place to work. After that, if the night was
mellow, I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old Murray Hill Hotel,
and over 33rd Street to the Pennsylvania Station.

I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous feel of it at night,
and the satisfaction that the constant flicker of men and women and
machines gives to the restless eye. I liked to walk up Fifth Avenue
and pick out romantic women from the crowd and imagine that in a few
minutes I was going to enter into their lives, and no one would ever
know or disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to their
apartments on the corners of hidden streets, and they turned and
smiled back at me before they faded through a door into warm
darkness. At the enchanted metropolitan twilight I felt a haunting
loneliness sometimes, and felt it in others—poor young clerks who
loitered in front of windows waiting until it was time for a solitary
restaurant dinner—young clerks in the dusk, wasting the most poignant
moments of night and life.

Again at eight o’clock, when the dark lanes of the Forties were lined
five deep with throbbing taxicabs, bound for the theatre district, I
felt a sinking in my heart. Forms leaned together in the taxis as they
waited, and voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard jokes,
and lighted cigarettes made unintelligible circles inside. Imagining
that I, too, was hurrying towards gaiety and sharing their intimate
excitement, I wished them well.

For a while I lost sight of Jordan Baker, and then in midsummer I
found her again. At first I was flattered to go places with her,
because she was a golf champion, and everyone knew her name. Then it
was something more. I wasn’t actually in love, but I felt a sort of
tender curiosity. The bored haughty face that she turned to the world
concealed something—most affectations conceal something eventually,
even though they don’t in the beginning—and one day I found what it
was. When we were on a house-party together up in Warwick, she left a
borrowed car out in the rain with the top down, and then lied about
it—and suddenly I remembered the story about her that had eluded me
that night at Daisy’s. At her first big golf tournament there was a
row that nearly reached the newspapers—a suggestion that she had moved
her ball from a bad lie in the semifinal round. The thing approached
the proportions of a scandal—then died away. A caddy retracted his
statement, and the only other witness admitted that he might have been
mistaken. The incident and the name had remained together in my mind.

Jordan Baker instinctively avoided clever, shrewd men, and now I saw
that this was because she felt safer on a plane where any divergence
from a code would be thought impossible. She was incurably dishonest.
She wasn’t able to endure being at a disadvantage and, given this
unwillingness, I suppose she had begun dealing in subterfuges when she
was very young in order to keep that cool, insolent smile turned to
the world and yet satisfy the demands of her hard, jaunty body.

It made no difference to me. Dishonesty in a woman is a thing you
never blame deeply—I was casually sorry, and then I forgot. It was on
that same house-party that we had a curious conversation about driving
a car. It started because she passed so close to some workmen that our
fender flicked a button on one man’s coat.

“You’re a rotten driver,” I protested. “Either you ought to be more
careful, or you oughtn’t to drive at all.”

“I am careful.”

“No, you’re not.”

“Well, other people are,” she said lightly.

“What’s that got to do with it?”

“They’ll keep out of my way,” she insisted. “It takes two to make an
accident.”

“Suppose you met somebody just as careless as yourself.”

“I hope I never will,” she answered. “I hate careless people. That’s
why I like you.”

Her grey, sun-strained eyes stared straight ahead, but she had
deliberately shifted our relations, and for a moment I thought I loved
her. But I am slow-thinking and full of interior rules that act as
brakes on my desires, and I knew that first I had to get myself
definitely out of that tangle back home. I’d been writing letters once
a week and signing them: “Love, Nick,” and all I could think of was
how, when that certain girl played tennis, a faint moustache of
perspiration appeared on her upper lip. Nevertheless there was a vague
understanding that had to be tactfully broken off before I was free.

Everyone suspects himself of at least one of the cardinal virtues, and
this is mine: I am one of the few honest people that I have ever
known.


                                  IV

On Sunday morning while church bells rang in the villages alongshore,
the world and its mistress returned to Gatsby’s house and twinkled
hilariously on his lawn.

“He’s a bootlegger,” said the young ladies, moving somewhere between
his cocktails and his flowers. “One time he killed a man who had found
out that he was nephew to Von Hindenburg and second cousin to the
devil. Reach me a rose, honey, and pour me a last drop into that there
crystal glass.”

Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a timetable the names of
those who came to Gatsby’s house that summer. It is an old timetable
now, disintegrating at its folds, and headed “This schedule in effect
July 5th, 1922.” But I can still read the grey names, and they will
give you a better impression than my generalities of those who
accepted Gatsby’s hospitality and paid him the subtle tribute of
knowing nothing whatever about him.

From East Egg, then, came the Chester Beckers and the Leeches, and a
man named Bunsen, whom I knew at Yale, and Doctor Webster Civet, who
was drowned last summer up in Maine. And the Hornbeams and the Willie
Voltaires, and a whole clan named Blackbuck, who always gathered in a
corner and flipped up their noses like goats at whosoever came
near. And the Ismays and the Chrysties (or rather Hubert Auerbach and
Mr. Chrystie’s wife), and Edgar Beaver, whose hair, they say, turned
cotton-white one winter afternoon for no good reason at all.

Clarence Endive was from East Egg, as I remember. He came only once,
in white knickerbockers, and had a fight with a bum named Etty in the
garden. From farther out on the Island came the Cheadles and the O.
R. P. Schraeders, and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of Georgia, and the
Fishguards and the Ripley Snells. Snell was there three days before he
went to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the gravel drive that
Mrs. Ulysses Swett’s automobile ran over his right hand. The Dancies
came, too, and S. B. Whitebait, who was well over sixty, and Maurice
A. Flink, and the Hammerheads, and Beluga the tobacco importer, and
Beluga’s girls.

From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys and Cecil Roebuck and
Cecil Schoen and Gulick the State senator and Newton Orchid, who
controlled Films Par Excellence, and Eckhaust and Clyde Cohen and Don
S. Schwartz (the son) and Arthur McCarty, all connected with the
movies in one way or another. And the Catlips and the Bembergs and G.
Earl Muldoon, brother to that Muldoon who afterward strangled his
wife. Da Fontano the promoter came there, and Ed Legros and James B.
(“Rot-Gut”) Ferret and the De Jongs and Ernest Lilly—they came to
gamble, and when Ferret wandered into the garden it meant he was
cleaned out and Associated Traction would have to fluctuate profitably
next day.

A man named Klipspringer was there so often that he became known as
“the boarder”—I doubt if he had any other home. Of theatrical people
there were Gus Waize and Horace O’Donavan and Lester Myer and George
Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also from New York were the Chromes and the
Backhyssons and the Dennickers and Russel Betty and the Corrigans and
the Kellehers and the Dewars and the Scullys and S. W. Belcher and the
Smirkes and the young Quinns, divorced now, and Henry L. Palmetto, who
killed himself by jumping in front of a subway train in Times Square.

Benny McClenahan arrived always with four girls. They were never quite
the same ones in physical person, but they were so identical one with
another that it inevitably seemed they had been there before. I have
forgotten their names—Jaqueline, I think, or else Consuela, or Gloria
or Judy or June, and their last names were either the melodious names
of flowers and months or the sterner ones of the great American
capitalists whose cousins, if pressed, they would confess themselves
to be.

In addition to all these I can remember that Faustina O’Brien came
there at least once and the Baedeker girls and young Brewer, who had
his nose shot off in the war, and Mr. Albrucksburger and Miss Haag,
his fiancée, and Ardita Fitz-Peters and Mr. P. Jewett, once head of
the American Legion, and Miss Claudia Hip, with a man reputed to be
her chauffeur, and a prince of something, whom we called Duke, and
whose name, if I ever knew it, I have forgotten.

All these people came to Gatsby’s house in the summer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At nine o’clock, one morning late in July, Gatsby’s gorgeous car
lurched up the rocky drive to my door and gave out a burst of melody
from its three-noted horn.

It was the first time he had called on me, though I had gone to two of
his parties, mounted in his hydroplane, and, at his urgent invitation,
made frequent use of his beach.

“Good morning, old sport. You’re having lunch with me today and I
thought we’d ride up together.”

He was balancing himself on the dashboard of his car with that
resourcefulness of movement that is so peculiarly American—that comes,
I suppose, with the absence of lifting work in youth and, even more,
with the formless grace of our nervous, sporadic games. This quality
was continually breaking through his punctilious manner in the shape
of restlessness. He was never quite still; there was always a tapping
foot somewhere or the impatient opening and closing of a hand.

He saw me looking with admiration at his car.

“It’s pretty, isn’t it, old sport?” He jumped off to give me a better
view. “Haven’t you ever seen it before?”

I’d seen it. Everybody had seen it. It was a rich cream colour, bright
with nickel, swollen here and there in its monstrous length with
triumphant hatboxes and supper-boxes and toolboxes, and terraced with
a labyrinth of windshields that mirrored a dozen suns. Sitting down
behind many layers of glass in a sort of green leather conservatory,
we started to town.

I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen times in the past month and
found, to my disappointment, that he had little to say. So my first
impression, that he was a person of some undefined consequence, had
gradually faded and he had become simply the proprietor of an
elaborate roadhouse next door.

And then came that disconcerting ride. We hadn’t reached West Egg
village before Gatsby began leaving his elegant sentences unfinished
and slapping himself indecisively on the knee of his caramel-coloured
suit.

“Look here, old sport,” he broke out surprisingly, “what’s your
opinion of me, anyhow?”

A little overwhelmed, I began the generalized evasions which that
question deserves.

“Well, I’m going to tell you something about my life,” he interrupted.
“I don’t want you to get a wrong idea of me from all these stories you
hear.”

So he was aware of the bizarre accusations that flavoured conversation
in his halls.

“I’ll tell you God’s truth.” His right hand suddenly ordered divine
retribution to stand by. “I am the son of some wealthy people in the
Middle West—all dead now. I was brought up in America but educated at
Oxford, because all my ancestors have been educated there for many
years. It is a family tradition.”

He looked at me sideways—and I knew why Jordan Baker had believed he
was lying. He hurried the phrase “educated at Oxford,” or swallowed
it, or choked on it, as though it had bothered him before. And with
this doubt, his whole statement fell to pieces, and I wondered if
there wasn’t something a little sinister about him, after all.

“What part of the Middle West?” I inquired casually.

“San Francisco.”

“I see.”

“My family all died and I came into a good deal of money.”

His voice was solemn, as if the memory of that sudden extinction of a
clan still haunted him. For a moment I suspected that he was pulling
my leg, but a glance at him convinced me otherwise.

“After that I lived like a young rajah in all the capitals of
Europe—Paris, Venice, Rome—collecting jewels, chiefly rubies, hunting
big game, painting a little, things for myself only, and trying to
forget something very sad that had happened to me long ago.”

With an effort I managed to restrain my incredulous laughter. The very
phrases were worn so threadbare that they evoked no image except that
of a turbaned “character” leaking sawdust at every pore as he pursued
a tiger through the Bois de Boulogne.

“Then came the war, old sport. It was a great relief, and I tried very
hard to die, but I seemed to bear an enchanted life. I accepted a
commission as first lieutenant when it began. In the Argonne Forest I
took the remains of my machine-gun battalion so far forward that there
was a half mile gap on either side of us where the infantry couldn’t
advance. We stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirty
men with sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came up at last
they found the insignia of three German divisions among the piles of
dead. I was promoted to be a major, and every Allied government gave
me a decoration—even Montenegro, little Montenegro down on the
Adriatic Sea!”

Little Montenegro! He lifted up the words and nodded at them—with his
smile. The smile comprehended Montenegro’s troubled history and
sympathized with the brave struggles of the Montenegrin people. It
appreciated fully the chain of national circumstances which had
elicited this tribute from Montenegro’s warm little heart. My
incredulity was submerged in fascination now; it was like skimming
hastily through a dozen magazines.

He reached in his pocket, and a piece of metal, slung on a ribbon,
fell into my palm.

“That’s the one from Montenegro.”

To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic look. “Orderi di
Danilo,” ran the circular legend, “Montenegro, Nicolas Rex.”

“Turn it.”

“Major Jay Gatsby,” I read, “For Valour Extraordinary.”

“Here’s another thing I always carry. A souvenir of Oxford days. It
was taken in Trinity Quad—the man on my left is now the Earl of
Doncaster.”

It was a photograph of half a dozen young men in blazers loafing in an
archway through which were visible a host of spires. There was Gatsby,
looking a little, not much, younger—with a cricket bat in his hand.

Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigers flaming in his palace
on the Grand Canal; I saw him opening a chest of rubies to ease, with
their crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings of his broken heart.

“I’m going to make a big request of you today,” he said, pocketing his
souvenirs with satisfaction, “so I thought you ought to know something
about me. I didn’t want you to think I was just some nobody. You see,
I usually find myself among strangers because I drift here and there
trying to forget the sad things that happened to me.” He hesitated.
“You’ll hear about it this afternoon.”

“At lunch?”

“No, this afternoon. I happened to find out that you’re taking Miss
Baker to tea.”

“Do you mean you’re in love with Miss Baker?”

“No, old sport, I’m not. But Miss Baker has kindly consented to speak
to you about this matter.”

I hadn’t the faintest idea what “this matter” was, but I was more
annoyed than interested. I hadn’t asked Jordan to tea in order to
discuss Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was sure the request would be something
utterly fantastic, and for a moment I was sorry I’d ever set foot upon
his overpopulated lawn.

He wouldn’t say another word. His correctness grew on him as we neared
the city. We passed Port Roosevelt, where there was a glimpse of
red-belted oceangoing ships, and sped along a cobbled slum lined with
the dark, undeserted saloons of the faded-gilt nineteen-hundreds.
Then the valley of ashes opened out on both sides of us, and I had a
glimpse of Mrs. Wilson straining at the garage pump with panting
vitality as we went by.

With fenders spread like wings we scattered light through half
Astoria—only half, for as we twisted among the pillars of the elevated
I heard the familiar “jug-jug-spat!” of a motorcycle, and a frantic
policeman rode alongside.

“All right, old sport,” called Gatsby. We slowed down. Taking a white
card from his wallet, he waved it before the man’s eyes.

“Right you are,” agreed the policeman, tipping his cap. “Know you next
time, Mr. Gatsby. Excuse me!”

“What was that?” I inquired. “The picture of Oxford?”

“I was able to do the commissioner a favour once, and he sends me a
Christmas card every year.”

Over the great bridge, with the sunlight through the girders making a
constant flicker upon the moving cars, with the city rising up across
the river in white heaps and sugar lumps all built with a wish out of
nonolfactory money. The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is always
the city seen for the first time, in its first wild promise of all the
mystery and the beauty in the world.

A dead man passed us in a hearse heaped with blooms, followed by two
carriages with drawn blinds, and by more cheerful carriages for
friends. The friends looked out at us with the tragic eyes and short
upper lips of southeastern Europe, and I was glad that the sight of
Gatsby’s splendid car was included in their sombre holiday. As we
crossed Blackwell’s Island a limousine passed us, driven by a white
chauffeur, in which sat three modish negroes, two bucks and a girl. I
laughed aloud as the yolks of their eyeballs rolled toward us in
haughty rivalry.

“Anything can happen now that we’ve slid over this bridge,” I thought;
“anything at all …”

Even Gatsby could happen, without any particular wonder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Roaring noon. In a well-fanned Forty-second Street cellar I met Gatsby
for lunch. Blinking away the brightness of the street outside, my eyes
picked him out obscurely in the anteroom, talking to another man.

“Mr. Carraway, this is my friend Mr. Wolfshiem.”

A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his large head and regarded me with two
fine growths of hair which luxuriated in either nostril. After a
moment I discovered his tiny eyes in the half-darkness.

“—So I took one look at him,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, shaking my hand
earnestly, “and what do you think I did?”

“What?” I inquired politely.

But evidently he was not addressing me, for he dropped my hand and
covered Gatsby with his expressive nose.

“I handed the money to Katspaugh and I said: ‘All right, Katspaugh,
don’t pay him a penny till he shuts his mouth.’ He shut it then and
there.”

Gatsby took an arm of each of us and moved forward into the
restaurant, whereupon Mr. Wolfshiem swallowed a new sentence he was
starting and lapsed into a somnambulatory abstraction.

“Highballs?” asked the head waiter.

“This is a nice restaurant here,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, looking at the
presbyterian nymphs on the ceiling. “But I like across the street
better!”

“Yes, highballs,” agreed Gatsby, and then to Mr. Wolfshiem: “It’s too
hot over there.”

“Hot and small—yes,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, “but full of memories.”

“What place is that?” I asked.

“The old Metropole.”

“The old Metropole,” brooded Mr. Wolfshiem gloomily. “Filled with
faces dead and gone. Filled with friends gone now forever. I can’t
forget so long as I live the night they shot Rosy Rosenthal there. It
was six of us at the table, and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot all
evening. When it was almost morning the waiter came up to him with a
funny look and says somebody wants to speak to him outside. ‘All
right,’ says Rosy, and begins to get up, and I pulled him down in his
chair.

“ ‘Let the bastards come in here if they want you, Rosy, but don’t
you, so help me, move outside this room.’

“It was four o’clock in the morning then, and if we’d of raised the
blinds we’d of seen daylight.”

“Did he go?” I asked innocently.

“Sure he went.” Mr. Wolfshiem’s nose flashed at me indignantly. “He
turned around in the door and says: ‘Don’t let that waiter take away
my coffee!’ Then he went out on the sidewalk, and they shot him three
times in his full belly and drove away.”

“Four of them were electrocuted,” I said, remembering.

“Five, with Becker.” His nostrils turned to me in an interested way.
“I understand you’re looking for a business gonnegtion.”

The juxtaposition of these two remarks was startling. Gatsby answered
for me:

“Oh, no,” he exclaimed, “this isn’t the man.”

“No?” Mr. Wolfshiem seemed disappointed.

“This is just a friend. I told you we’d talk about that some other
time.”

“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, “I had a wrong man.”

A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, forgetting the more
sentimental atmosphere of the old Metropole, began to eat with
ferocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved very slowly all around
the room—he completed the arc by turning to inspect the people
directly behind. I think that, except for my presence, he would have
taken one short glance beneath our own table.

“Look here, old sport,” said Gatsby, leaning toward me, “I’m afraid I
made you a little angry this morning in the car.”

There was the smile again, but this time I held out against it.

“I don’t like mysteries,” I answered, “and I don’t understand why you
won’t come out frankly and tell me what you want. Why has it all got
to come through Miss Baker?”

“Oh, it’s nothing underhand,” he assured me. “Miss Baker’s a great
sportswoman, you know, and she’d never do anything that wasn’t all
right.”

Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up, and hurried from the room,
leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table.

“He has to telephone,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him with his
eyes. “Fine fellow, isn’t he? Handsome to look at and a perfect
gentleman.”

“Yes.”

“He’s an Oggsford man.”

“Oh!”

“He went to Oggsford College in England. You know Oggsford College?”

“I’ve heard of it.”

“It’s one of the most famous colleges in the world.”

“Have you known Gatsby for a long time?” I inquired.

“Several years,” he answered in a gratified way. “I made the pleasure
of his acquaintance just after the war. But I knew I had discovered a
man of fine breeding after I talked with him an hour. I said to
myself: ‘There’s the kind of man you’d like to take home and introduce
to your mother and sister.’ ” He paused. “I see you’re looking at my
cuff buttons.”

I hadn’t been looking at them, but I did now. They were composed of
oddly familiar pieces of ivory.

“Finest specimens of human molars,” he informed me.

“Well!” I inspected them. “That’s a very interesting idea.”

“Yeah.” He flipped his sleeves up under his coat. “Yeah, Gatsby’s very
careful about women. He would never so much as look at a friend’s
wife.”

When the subject of this instinctive trust returned to the table and
sat down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a jerk and got to his
feet.

“I have enjoyed my lunch,” he said, “and I’m going to run off from you
two young men before I outstay my welcome.”

“Don’t hurry Meyer,” said Gatsby, without enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfshiem
raised his hand in a sort of benediction.

“You’re very polite, but I belong to another generation,” he announced
solemnly. “You sit here and discuss your sports and your young ladies
and your—” He supplied an imaginary noun with another wave of his
hand. “As for me, I am fifty years old, and I won’t impose myself on
you any longer.”

As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was trembling. I
wondered if I had said anything to offend him.

“He becomes very sentimental sometimes,” explained Gatsby. “This is
one of his sentimental days. He’s quite a character around New York—a
denizen of Broadway.”

“Who is he, anyhow, an actor?”

“No.”

“A dentist?”

“Meyer Wolfshiem? No, he’s a gambler.” Gatsby hesitated, then added,
coolly: “He’s the man who fixed the World’s Series back in 1919.”

“Fixed the World’s Series?” I repeated.

The idea staggered me. I remembered, of course, that the World’s
Series had been fixed in 1919, but if I had thought of it at all I
would have thought of it as a thing that merely happened, the end of
some inevitable chain. It never occurred to me that one man could
start to play with the faith of fifty million people—with the
single-mindedness of a burglar blowing a safe.

“How did he happen to do that?” I asked after a minute.

“He just saw the opportunity.”

“Why isn’t he in jail?”

“They can’t get him, old sport. He’s a smart man.”

I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter brought my change I
caught sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded room.

“Come along with me for a minute,” I said; “I’ve got to say hello to
someone.”

When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen steps in our
direction.

“Where’ve you been?” he demanded eagerly. “Daisy’s furious because you
haven’t called up.”

“This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan.”

They shook hands briefly, and a strained, unfamiliar look of
embarrassment came over Gatsby’s face.

“How’ve you been, anyhow?” demanded Tom of me. “How’d you happen to
come up this far to eat?”

“I’ve been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby.”

I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longer there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One October day in nineteen-seventeen—

(said Jordan Baker that afternoon, sitting up very straight on a
straight chair in the tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel)

—I was walking along from one place to another, half on the sidewalks
and half on the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because I had on
shoes from England with rubber knobs on the soles that bit into the
soft ground. I had on a new plaid skirt also that blew a little in the
wind, and whenever this happened the red, white, and blue banners in
front of all the houses stretched out stiff and said tut-tut-tut-tut,
in a disapproving way.

The largest of the banners and the largest of the lawns belonged to
Daisy Fay’s house. She was just eighteen, two years older than me, and
by far the most popular of all the young girls in Louisville. She
dressed in white, and had a little white roadster, and all day long
the telephone rang in her house and excited young officers from Camp
Taylor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her that
night. “Anyways, for an hour!”

When I came opposite her house that morning her white roadster was
beside the kerb, and she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I had
never seen before. They were so engrossed in each other that she
didn’t see me until I was five feet away.

“Hello, Jordan,” she called unexpectedly. “Please come here.”

I was flattered that she wanted to speak to me, because of all the
older girls I admired her most. She asked me if I was going to the Red
Cross to make bandages. I was. Well, then, would I tell them that she
couldn’t come that day? The officer looked at Daisy while she was
speaking, in a way that every young girl wants to be looked at
sometime, and because it seemed romantic to me I have remembered the
incident ever since. His name was Jay Gatsby, and I didn’t lay eyes on
him again for over four years—even after I’d met him on Long Island I
didn’t realize it was the same man.

That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next year I had a few beaux
myself, and I began to play in tournaments, so I didn’t see Daisy very
often. She went with a slightly older crowd—when she went with anyone
at all. Wild rumours were circulating about her—how her mother had
found her packing her bag one winter night to go to New York and say
goodbye to a soldier who was going overseas. She was effectually
prevented, but she wasn’t on speaking terms with her family for
several weeks. After that she didn’t play around with the soldiers any
more, but only with a few flat-footed, shortsighted young men in town,
who couldn’t get into the army at all.

By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as ever. She had a début
after the armistice, and in February she was presumably engaged to a
man from New Orleans. In June she married Tom Buchanan of Chicago,
with more pomp and circumstance than Louisville ever knew before. He
came down with a hundred people in four private cars, and hired a
whole floor of the Muhlbach Hotel, and the day before the wedding he
gave her a string of pearls valued at three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.

I was a bridesmaid. I came into her room half an hour before the
bridal dinner, and found her lying on her bed as lovely as the June
night in her flowered dress—and as drunk as a monkey. She had a bottle
of Sauterne in one hand and a letter in the other.

“ ’Gratulate me,” she muttered. “Never had a drink before, but oh how
I do enjoy it.”

“What’s the matter, Daisy?”

I was scared, I can tell you; I’d never seen a girl like that before.

“Here, dearies.” She groped around in a wastebasket she had with her
on the bed and pulled out the string of pearls. “Take ’em downstairs
and give ’em back to whoever they belong to. Tell ’em all Daisy’s
change’ her mine. Say: ‘Daisy’s change’ her mine!’ ”

She began to cry—she cried and cried. I rushed out and found her
mother’s maid, and we locked the door and got her into a cold bath.
She wouldn’t let go of the letter. She took it into the tub with her
and squeezed it up in a wet ball, and only let me leave it in the
soap-dish when she saw that it was coming to pieces like snow.

But she didn’t say another word. We gave her spirits of ammonia and
put ice on her forehead and hooked her back into her dress, and half
an hour later, when we walked out of the room, the pearls were around
her neck and the incident was over. Next day at five o’clock she
married Tom Buchanan without so much as a shiver, and started off on a
three months’ trip to the South Seas.

I saw them in Santa Barbara when they came back, and I thought I’d
never seen a girl so mad about her husband. If he left the room for a
minute she’d look around uneasily, and say: “Where’s Tom gone?” and
wear the most abstracted expression until she saw him coming in the
door. She used to sit on the sand with his head in her lap by the
hour, rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking at him with
unfathomable delight. It was touching to see them together—it made you
laugh in a hushed, fascinated way. That was in August. A week after I
left Santa Barbara Tom ran into a wagon on the Ventura road one night,
and ripped a front wheel off his car. The girl who was with him got
into the papers, too, because her arm was broken—she was one of the
chambermaids in the Santa Barbara Hotel.

The next April Daisy had her little girl, and they went to France for
a year. I saw them one spring in Cannes, and later in Deauville, and
then they came back to Chicago to settle down. Daisy was popular in
Chicago, as you know. They moved with a fast crowd, all of them young
and rich and wild, but she came out with an absolutely perfect
reputation. Perhaps because she doesn’t drink. It’s a great advantage
not to drink among hard-drinking people. You can hold your tongue and,
moreover, you can time any little irregularity of your own so that
everybody else is so blind that they don’t see or care. Perhaps Daisy
never went in for amour at all—and yet there’s something in that voice
of hers …

Well, about six weeks ago, she heard the name Gatsby for the first
time in years. It was when I asked you—do you remember?—if you knew
Gatsby in West Egg. After you had gone home she came into my room and
woke me up, and said: “What Gatsby?” and when I described him—I was
half asleep—she said in the strangest voice that it must be the man
she used to know. It wasn’t until then that I connected this Gatsby
with the officer in her white car.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Jordan Baker had finished telling all this we had left the Plaza
for half an hour and were driving in a victoria through Central Park.
The sun had gone down behind the tall apartments of the movie stars in
the West Fifties, and the clear voices of children, already gathered
like crickets on the grass, rose through the hot twilight:

 “I’m the Sheik of Araby. Your love belongs to me. At night when
 you’re asleep Into your tent I’ll creep—”

“It was a strange coincidence,” I said.

“But it wasn’t a coincidence at all.”

“Why not?”

“Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just across the bay.”

Then it had not been merely the stars to which he had aspired on that
June night. He came alive to me, delivered suddenly from the womb of
his purposeless splendour.

“He wants to know,” continued Jordan, “if you’ll invite Daisy to your
house some afternoon and then let him come over.”

The modesty of the demand shook me. He had waited five years and
bought a mansion where he dispensed starlight to casual moths—so that
he could “come over” some afternoon to a stranger’s garden.

“Did I have to know all this before he could ask such a little thing?”

“He’s afraid, he’s waited so long. He thought you might be
offended. You see, he’s regular tough underneath it all.”

Something worried me.

“Why didn’t he ask you to arrange a meeting?”

“He wants her to see his house,” she explained. “And your house is
right next door.”

“Oh!”

“I think he half expected her to wander into one of his parties, some
night,” went on Jordan, “but she never did. Then he began asking
people casually if they knew her, and I was the first one he found. It
was that night he sent for me at his dance, and you should have heard
the elaborate way he worked up to it. Of course, I immediately
suggested a luncheon in New York—and I thought he’d go mad:

“ ‘I don’t want to do anything out of the way!’ he kept saying. ‘I
want to see her right next door.’

“When I said you were a particular friend of Tom’s, he started to
abandon the whole idea. He doesn’t know very much about Tom, though he
says he’s read a Chicago paper for years just on the chance of
catching a glimpse of Daisy’s name.”

It was dark now, and as we dipped under a little bridge I put my arm
around Jordan’s golden shoulder and drew her toward me and asked her
to dinner. Suddenly I wasn’t thinking of Daisy and Gatsby any more,
but of this clean, hard, limited person, who dealt in universal
scepticism, and who leaned back jauntily just within the circle of my
arm. A phrase began to beat in my ears with a sort of heady
excitement: “There are only the pursued, the pursuing, the busy, and
the tired.”

“And Daisy ought to have something in her life,” murmured Jordan to
me.

“Does she want to see Gatsby?”

“She’s not to know about it. Gatsby doesn’t want her to know. You’re
just supposed to invite her to tea.”

We passed a barrier of dark trees, and then the façade of Fifty-Ninth
Street, a block of delicate pale light, beamed down into the park.
Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan, I had no girl whose disembodied face
floated along the dark cornices and blinding signs, and so I drew up
the girl beside me, tightening my arms. Her wan, scornful mouth
smiled, and so I drew her up again closer, this time to my face.


                                  V

When I came home to West Egg that night I was afraid for a moment that
my house was on fire. Two o’clock and the whole corner of the
peninsula was blazing with light, which fell unreal on the shrubbery
and made thin elongating glints upon the roadside wires. Turning a
corner, I saw that it was Gatsby’s house, lit from tower to cellar.

At first I thought it was another party, a wild rout that had resolved
itself into “hide-and-go-seek” or “sardines-in-the-box” with all the
house thrown open to the game. But there wasn’t a sound. Only wind in
the trees, which blew the wires and made the lights go off and on
again as if the house had winked into the darkness. As my taxi groaned
away I saw Gatsby walking toward me across his lawn.

“Your place looks like the World’s Fair,” I said.

“Does it?” He turned his eyes toward it absently. “I have been
glancing into some of the rooms. Let’s go to Coney Island, old
sport. In my car.”

“It’s too late.”

“Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool? I haven’t made
use of it all summer.”

“I’ve got to go to bed.”

“All right.”

He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagerness.

“I talked with Miss Baker,” I said after a moment. “I’m going to call
up Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to tea.”

“Oh, that’s all right,” he said carelessly. “I don’t want to put you
to any trouble.”

“What day would suit you?”

“What day would suit you?” he corrected me quickly. “I don’t want to
put you to any trouble, you see.”

“How about the day after tomorrow?”

He considered for a moment. Then, with reluctance: “I want to get the
grass cut,” he said.

We both looked down at the grass—there was a sharp line where my
ragged lawn ended and the darker, well-kept expanse of his began. I
suspected that he meant my grass.

“There’s another little thing,” he said uncertainly, and hesitated.

“Would you rather put it off for a few days?” I asked.

“Oh, it isn’t about that. At least—” He fumbled with a series of
beginnings. “Why, I thought—why, look here, old sport, you don’t make
much money, do you?”

“Not very much.”

This seemed to reassure him and he continued more confidently.

“I thought you didn’t, if you’ll pardon my—you see, I carry on a
little business on the side, a sort of side line, you understand. And
I thought that if you don’t make very much—You’re selling bonds,
aren’t you, old sport?”

“Trying to.”

“Well, this would interest you. It wouldn’t take up much of your time
and you might pick up a nice bit of money. It happens to be a rather
confidential sort of thing.”

I realize now that under different circumstances that conversation
might have been one of the crises of my life. But, because the offer
was obviously and tactlessly for a service to be rendered, I had no
choice except to cut him off there.

“I’ve got my hands full,” I said. “I’m much obliged but I couldn’t
take on any more work.”

“You wouldn’t have to do any business with Wolfshiem.” Evidently he
thought that I was shying away from the “gonnegtion” mentioned at
lunch, but I assured him he was wrong. He waited a moment longer,
hoping I’d begin a conversation, but I was too absorbed to be
responsive, so he went unwillingly home.

The evening had made me lightheaded and happy; I think I walked into a
deep sleep as I entered my front door. So I don’t know whether or not
Gatsby went to Coney Island, or for how many hours he “glanced into
rooms” while his house blazed gaudily on. I called up Daisy from the
office next morning, and invited her to come to tea.

“Don’t bring Tom,” I warned her.

“What?”

“Don’t bring Tom.”

“Who is ‘Tom’?” she asked innocently.

The day agreed upon was pouring rain. At eleven o’clock a man in a
raincoat, dragging a lawn-mower, tapped at my front door and said that
Mr. Gatsby had sent him over to cut my grass. This reminded me that I
had forgotten to tell my Finn to come back, so I drove into West Egg
Village to search for her among soggy whitewashed alleys and to buy
some cups and lemons and flowers.

The flowers were unnecessary, for at two o’clock a greenhouse arrived
from Gatsby’s, with innumerable receptacles to contain it. An hour
later the front door opened nervously, and Gatsby in a white flannel
suit, silver shirt, and gold-coloured tie, hurried in. He was pale,
and there were dark signs of sleeplessness beneath his eyes.

“Is everything all right?” he asked immediately.

“The grass looks fine, if that’s what you mean.”

“What grass?” he inquired blankly. “Oh, the grass in the yard.” He
looked out the window at it, but, judging from his expression, I don’t
believe he saw a thing.

“Looks very good,” he remarked vaguely. “One of the papers said they
thought the rain would stop about four. I think it was The
Journal. Have you got everything you need in the shape of—of tea?”

I took him into the pantry, where he looked a little reproachfully at
the Finn. Together we scrutinized the twelve lemon cakes from the
delicatessen shop.

“Will they do?” I asked.

“Of course, of course! They’re fine!” and he added hollowly, “… old
sport.”

The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist, through which
occasional thin drops swam like dew. Gatsby looked with vacant eyes
through a copy of Clay’s Economics, starting at the Finnish tread that
shook the kitchen floor, and peering towards the bleared windows from
time to time as if a series of invisible but alarming happenings were
taking place outside. Finally he got up and informed me, in an
uncertain voice, that he was going home.

“Why’s that?”

“Nobody’s coming to tea. It’s too late!” He looked at his watch as if
there was some pressing demand on his time elsewhere. “I can’t wait
all day.”

“Don’t be silly; it’s just two minutes to four.”

He sat down miserably, as if I had pushed him, and simultaneously
there was the sound of a motor turning into my lane. We both jumped
up, and, a little harrowed myself, I went out into the yard.

Under the dripping bare lilac-trees a large open car was coming up the
drive. It stopped. Daisy’s face, tipped sideways beneath a
three-cornered lavender hat, looked out at me with a bright ecstatic
smile.

“Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?”

The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a wild tonic in the rain. I
had to follow the sound of it for a moment, up and down, with my ear
alone, before any words came through. A damp streak of hair lay like a
dash of blue paint across her cheek, and her hand was wet with
glistening drops as I took it to help her from the car.

“Are you in love with me,” she said low in my ear, “or why did I have
to come alone?”

“That’s the secret of Castle Rackrent. Tell your chauffeur to go far
away and spend an hour.”

“Come back in an hour, Ferdie.” Then in a grave murmur: “His name is
Ferdie.”

“Does the gasoline affect his nose?”

“I don’t think so,” she said innocently. “Why?”

We went in. To my overwhelming surprise the living-room was deserted.

“Well, that’s funny,” I exclaimed.

“What’s funny?”

She turned her head as there was a light dignified knocking at the
front door. I went out and opened it. Gatsby, pale as death, with his
hands plunged like weights in his coat pockets, was standing in a
puddle of water glaring tragically into my eyes.

With his hands still in his coat pockets he stalked by me into the
hall, turned sharply as if he were on a wire, and disappeared into the
living-room. It wasn’t a bit funny. Aware of the loud beating of my
own heart I pulled the door to against the increasing rain.

For half a minute there wasn’t a sound. Then from the living-room I
heard a sort of choking murmur and part of a laugh, followed by
Daisy’s voice on a clear artificial note:

“I certainly am awfully glad to see you again.”

A pause; it endured horribly. I had nothing to do in the hall, so I
went into the room.

Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was reclining against the
mantelpiece in a strained counterfeit of perfect ease, even of
boredom. His head leaned back so far that it rested against the face
of a defunct mantelpiece clock, and from this position his distraught
eyes stared down at Daisy, who was sitting, frightened but graceful,
on the edge of a stiff chair.

“We’ve met before,” muttered Gatsby. His eyes glanced momentarily at
me, and his lips parted with an abortive attempt at a laugh. Luckily
the clock took this moment to tilt dangerously at the pressure of his
head, whereupon he turned and caught it with trembling fingers, and
set it back in place. Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the arm
of the sofa and his chin in his hand.

“I’m sorry about the clock,” he said.

My own face had now assumed a deep tropical burn. I couldn’t muster up
a single commonplace out of the thousand in my head.

“It’s an old clock,” I told them idiotically.

I think we all believed for a moment that it had smashed in pieces on
the floor.

“We haven’t met for many years,” said Daisy, her voice as
matter-of-fact as it could ever be.

“Five years next November.”

The automatic quality of Gatsby’s answer set us all back at least
another minute. I had them both on their feet with the desperate
suggestion that they help me make tea in the kitchen when the demoniac
Finn brought it in on a tray.

Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a certain physical
decency established itself. Gatsby got himself into a shadow and,
while Daisy and I talked, looked conscientiously from one to the other
of us with tense, unhappy eyes. However, as calmness wasn’t an end in
itself, I made an excuse at the first possible moment, and got to my
feet.

“Where are you going?” demanded Gatsby in immediate alarm.

“I’ll be back.”

“I’ve got to speak to you about something before you go.”

He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed the door, and
whispered: “Oh, God!” in a miserable way.

“What’s the matter?”

“This is a terrible mistake,” he said, shaking his head from side to
side, “a terrible, terrible mistake.”

“You’re just embarrassed, that’s all,” and luckily I added: “Daisy’s
embarrassed too.”

“She’s embarrassed?” he repeated incredulously.

“Just as much as you are.”

“Don’t talk so loud.”

“You’re acting like a little boy,” I broke out impatiently. “Not only
that, but you’re rude. Daisy’s sitting in there all alone.”

He raised his hand to stop my words, looked at me with unforgettable
reproach, and, opening the door cautiously, went back into the other
room.

I walked out the back way—just as Gatsby had when he had made his
nervous circuit of the house half an hour before—and ran for a huge
black knotted tree, whose massed leaves made a fabric against the
rain. Once more it was pouring, and my irregular lawn, well-shaved by
Gatsby’s gardener, abounded in small muddy swamps and prehistoric
marshes. There was nothing to look at from under the tree except
Gatsby’s enormous house, so I stared at it, like Kant at his church
steeple, for half an hour. A brewer had built it early in the “period”
craze, a decade before, and there was a story that he’d agreed to pay
five years’ taxes on all the neighbouring cottages if the owners would
have their roofs thatched with straw. Perhaps their refusal took the
heart out of his plan to Found a Family—he went into an immediate
decline. His children sold his house with the black wreath still on
the door. Americans, while willing, even eager, to be serfs, have
always been obstinate about being peasantry.

After half an hour, the sun shone again, and the grocer’s automobile
rounded Gatsby’s drive with the raw material for his servants’
dinner—I felt sure he wouldn’t eat a spoonful. A maid began opening
the upper windows of his house, appeared momentarily in each, and,
leaning from the large central bay, spat meditatively into the
garden. It was time I went back. While the rain continued it had
seemed like the murmur of their voices, rising and swelling a little
now and then with gusts of emotion. But in the new silence I felt that
silence had fallen within the house too.

I went in—after making every possible noise in the kitchen, short of
pushing over the stove—but I don’t believe they heard a sound. They
were sitting at either end of the couch, looking at each other as if
some question had been asked, or was in the air, and every vestige of
embarrassment was gone. Daisy’s face was smeared with tears, and when
I came in she jumped up and began wiping at it with her handkerchief
before a mirror. But there was a change in Gatsby that was simply
confounding. He literally glowed; without a word or a gesture of
exultation a new well-being radiated from him and filled the little
room.

“Oh, hello, old sport,” he said, as if he hadn’t seen me for years. I
thought for a moment he was going to shake hands.

“It’s stopped raining.”

“Has it?” When he realized what I was talking about, that there were
twinkle-bells of sunshine in the room, he smiled like a weather man,
like an ecstatic patron of recurrent light, and repeated the news to
Daisy. “What do you think of that? It’s stopped raining.”

“I’m glad, Jay.” Her throat, full of aching, grieving beauty, told
only of her unexpected joy.

“I want you and Daisy to come over to my house,” he said, “I’d like to
show her around.”

“You’re sure you want me to come?”

“Absolutely, old sport.”

Daisy went upstairs to wash her face—too late I thought with
humiliation of my towels—while Gatsby and I waited on the lawn.

“My house looks well, doesn’t it?” he demanded. “See how the whole
front of it catches the light.”

I agreed that it was splendid.

“Yes.” His eyes went over it, every arched door and square tower. “It
took me just three years to earn the money that bought it.”

“I thought you inherited your money.”

“I did, old sport,” he said automatically, “but I lost most of it in
the big panic—the panic of the war.”

I think he hardly knew what he was saying, for when I asked him what
business he was in he answered: “That’s my affair,” before he realized
that it wasn’t an appropriate reply.

“Oh, I’ve been in several things,” he corrected himself. “I was in the
drug business and then I was in the oil business. But I’m not in
either one now.” He looked at me with more attention. “Do you mean
you’ve been thinking over what I proposed the other night?”

Before I could answer, Daisy came out of the house and two rows of
brass buttons on her dress gleamed in the sunlight.

“That huge place there?” she cried pointing.

“Do you like it?”

“I love it, but I don’t see how you live there all alone.”

“I keep it always full of interesting people, night and day. People
who do interesting things. Celebrated people.”

Instead of taking the shortcut along the Sound we went down to the
road and entered by the big postern. With enchanting murmurs Daisy
admired this aspect or that of the feudal silhouette against the sky,
admired the gardens, the sparkling odour of jonquils and the frothy
odour of hawthorn and plum blossoms and the pale gold odour of
kiss-me-at-the-gate. It was strange to reach the marble steps and find
no stir of bright dresses in and out the door, and hear no sound but
bird voices in the trees.

And inside, as we wandered through Marie Antoinette music-rooms and
Restoration Salons, I felt that there were guests concealed behind
every couch and table, under orders to be breathlessly silent until we
had passed through. As Gatsby closed the door of “the Merton College
Library” I could have sworn I heard the owl-eyed man break into
ghostly laughter.

We went upstairs, through period bedrooms swathed in rose and lavender
silk and vivid with new flowers, through dressing-rooms and poolrooms,
and bathrooms with sunken baths—intruding into one chamber where a
dishevelled man in pyjamas was doing liver exercises on the floor. It
was Mr. Klipspringer, the “boarder.” I had seen him wandering hungrily
about the beach that morning. Finally we came to Gatsby’s own
apartment, a bedroom and a bath, and an Adam’s study, where we sat
down and drank a glass of some Chartreuse he took from a cupboard in
the wall.

He hadn’t once ceased looking at Daisy, and I think he revalued
everything in his house according to the measure of response it drew
from her well-loved eyes. Sometimes too, he stared around at his
possessions in a dazed way, as though in her actual and astounding
presence none of it was any longer real. Once he nearly toppled down a
flight of stairs.

His bedroom was the simplest room of all—except where the dresser was
garnished with a toilet set of pure dull gold. Daisy took the brush
with delight, and smoothed her hair, whereupon Gatsby sat down and
shaded his eyes and began to laugh.

“It’s the funniest thing, old sport,” he said hilariously. “I
can’t—When I try to—”

He had passed visibly through two states and was entering upon a
third. After his embarrassment and his unreasoning joy he was consumed
with wonder at her presence. He had been full of the idea so long,
dreamed it right through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so to
speak, at an inconceivable pitch of intensity. Now, in the reaction,
he was running down like an over-wound clock.

Recovering himself in a minute he opened for us two hulking patent
cabinets which held his massed suits and dressing-gowns and ties, and
his shirts, piled like bricks in stacks a dozen high.

“I’ve got a man in England who buys me clothes. He sends over a
selection of things at the beginning of each season, spring and fall.”

He took out a pile of shirts and began throwing them, one by one,
before us, shirts of sheer linen and thick silk and fine flannel,
which lost their folds as they fell and covered the table in
many-coloured disarray. While we admired he brought more and the soft
rich heap mounted higher—shirts with stripes and scrolls and plaids in
coral and apple-green and lavender and faint orange, with monograms of
indian blue. Suddenly, with a strained sound, Daisy bent her head into
the shirts and began to cry stormily.

“They’re such beautiful shirts,” she sobbed, her voice muffled in the
thick folds. “It makes me sad because I’ve never seen such—such
beautiful shirts before.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the house, we were to see the grounds and the swimming pool, and
the hydroplane, and the midsummer flowers—but outside Gatsby’s window
it began to rain again, so we stood in a row looking at the corrugated
surface of the Sound.

“If it wasn’t for the mist we could see your home across the bay,”
said Gatsby. “You always have a green light that burns all night at
the end of your dock.”

Daisy put her arm through his abruptly, but he seemed absorbed in what
he had just said. Possibly it had occurred to him that the colossal
significance of that light had now vanished forever. Compared to the
great distance that had separated him from Daisy it had seemed very
near to her, almost touching her. It had seemed as close as a star to
the moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count of
enchanted objects had diminished by one.

I began to walk about the room, examining various indefinite objects
in the half darkness. A large photograph of an elderly man in yachting
costume attracted me, hung on the wall over his desk.

“Who’s this?”

“That? That’s Mr. Dan Cody, old sport.”

The name sounded faintly familiar.

“He’s dead now. He used to be my best friend years ago.”

There was a small picture of Gatsby, also in yachting costume, on the
bureau—Gatsby with his head thrown back defiantly—taken apparently
when he was about eighteen.

“I adore it,” exclaimed Daisy. “The pompadour! You never told me you
had a pompadour—or a yacht.”

“Look at this,” said Gatsby quickly. “Here’s a lot of clippings—about
you.”

They stood side by side examining it. I was going to ask to see the
rubies when the phone rang, and Gatsby took up the receiver.

“Yes … Well, I can’t talk now … I can’t talk now, old sport … I said a
small town … He must know what a small town is … Well, he’s no use to
us if Detroit is his idea of a small town …”

He rang off.

“Come here quick!” cried Daisy at the window.

The rain was still falling, but the darkness had parted in the west,
and there was a pink and golden billow of foamy clouds above the sea.

“Look at that,” she whispered, and then after a moment: “I’d like to
just get one of those pink clouds and put you in it and push you
around.”

I tried to go then, but they wouldn’t hear of it; perhaps my presence
made them feel more satisfactorily alone.

“I know what we’ll do,” said Gatsby, “we’ll have Klipspringer play the
piano.”

He went out of the room calling “Ewing!” and returned in a few minutes
accompanied by an embarrassed, slightly worn young man, with
shell-rimmed glasses and scanty blond hair. He was now decently
clothed in a “sport shirt,” open at the neck, sneakers, and duck
trousers of a nebulous hue.

“Did we interrupt your exercise?” inquired Daisy politely.

“I was asleep,” cried Mr. Klipspringer, in a spasm of embarrassment.
“That is, I’d been asleep. Then I got up …”

“Klipspringer plays the piano,” said Gatsby, cutting him off. “Don’t
you, Ewing, old sport?”

“I don’t play well. I don’t—hardly play at all. I’m all out of prac—”

“We’ll go downstairs,” interrupted Gatsby. He flipped a switch. The
grey windows disappeared as the house glowed full of light.

In the music-room Gatsby turned on a solitary lamp beside the piano.
He lit Daisy’s cigarette from a trembling match, and sat down with her
on a couch far across the room, where there was no light save what the
gleaming floor bounced in from the hall.

When Klipspringer had played “The Love Nest” he turned around on the
bench and searched unhappily for Gatsby in the gloom.

“I’m all out of practice, you see. I told you I couldn’t play. I’m all
out of prac—”

“Don’t talk so much, old sport,” commanded Gatsby. “Play!”

 “In the morning, In the evening, Ain’t we got fun—”

Outside the wind was loud and there was a faint flow of thunder along
the Sound. All the lights were going on in West Egg now; the electric
trains, men-carrying, were plunging home through the rain from New
York. It was the hour of a profound human change, and excitement was
generating on the air.

 “One thing’s sure and nothing’s surer The rich get richer and the
 poor get—children. In the meantime, In between time—”

As I went over to say goodbye I saw that the expression of
bewilderment had come back into Gatsby’s face, as though a faint doubt
had occurred to him as to the quality of his present happiness. Almost
five years! There must have been moments even that afternoon when
Daisy tumbled short of his dreams—not through her own fault, but
because of the colossal vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond
her, beyond everything. He had thrown himself into it with a creative
passion, adding to it all the time, decking it out with every bright
feather that drifted his way. No amount of fire or freshness can
challenge what a man can store up in his ghostly heart.

As I watched him he adjusted himself a little, visibly. His hand took
hold of hers, and as she said something low in his ear he turned
toward her with a rush of emotion. I think that voice held him most,
with its fluctuating, feverish warmth, because it couldn’t be
over-dreamed—that voice was a deathless song.

They had forgotten me, but Daisy glanced up and held out her hand;
Gatsby didn’t know me now at all. I looked once more at them and they
looked back at me, remotely, possessed by intense life. Then I went
out of the room and down the marble steps into the rain, leaving them
there together.


                                  VI

About this time an ambitious young reporter from New York arrived one
morning at Gatsby’s door and asked him if he had anything to say.

“Anything to say about what?” inquired Gatsby politely.

“Why—any statement to give out.”

It transpired after a confused five minutes that the man had heard
Gatsby’s name around his office in a connection which he either
wouldn’t reveal or didn’t fully understand. This was his day off and
with laudable initiative he had hurried out “to see.”

It was a random shot, and yet the reporter’s instinct was right.
Gatsby’s notoriety, spread about by the hundreds who had accepted his
hospitality and so become authorities upon his past, had increased all
summer until he fell just short of being news. Contemporary legends
such as the “underground pipeline to Canada” attached themselves to
him, and there was one persistent story that he didn’t live in a house
at all, but in a boat that looked like a house and was moved secretly
up and down the Long Island shore. Just why these inventions were a
source of satisfaction to James Gatz of North Dakota, isn’t easy to
say.

James Gatz—that was really, or at least legally, his name. He had
changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific moment that
witnessed the beginning of his career—when he saw Dan Cody’s yacht
drop anchor over the most insidious flat on Lake Superior. It was
James Gatz who had been loafing along the beach that afternoon in a
torn green jersey and a pair of canvas pants, but it was already Jay
Gatsby who borrowed a rowboat, pulled out to the Tuolomee, and
informed Cody that a wind might catch him and break him up in half an
hour.

I suppose he’d had the name ready for a long time, even then. His
parents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm people—his imagination
had never really accepted them as his parents at all. The truth was
that Jay Gatsby of West Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic
conception of himself. He was a son of God—a phrase which, if it means
anything, means just that—and he must be about His Father’s business,
the service of a vast, vulgar, and meretricious beauty. So he invented
just the sort of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-year-old boy would be
likely to invent, and to this conception he was faithful to the end.

For over a year he had been beating his way along the south shore of
Lake Superior as a clam-digger and a salmon-fisher or in any other
capacity that brought him food and bed. His brown, hardening body
lived naturally through the half-fierce, half-lazy work of the bracing
days. He knew women early, and since they spoiled him he became
contemptuous of them, of young virgins because they were ignorant, of
the others because they were hysterical about things which in his
overwhelming self-absorption he took for granted.

But his heart was in a constant, turbulent riot. The most grotesque
and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night. A universe of
ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in his brain while the clock
ticked on the washstand and the moon soaked with wet light his tangled
clothes upon the floor. Each night he added to the pattern of his
fancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with an
oblivious embrace. For a while these reveries provided an outlet for
his imagination; they were a satisfactory hint of the unreality of
reality, a promise that the rock of the world was founded securely on
a fairy’s wing.

An instinct toward his future glory had led him, some months before,
to the small Lutheran College of St. Olaf’s in southern Minnesota. He
stayed there two weeks, dismayed at its ferocious indifference to the
drums of his destiny, to destiny itself, and despising the janitor’s
work with which he was to pay his way through. Then he drifted back to
Lake Superior, and he was still searching for something to do on the
day that Dan Cody’s yacht dropped anchor in the shallows alongshore.

Cody was fifty years old then, a product of the Nevada silver fields,
of the Yukon, of every rush for metal since seventy-five. The
transactions in Montana copper that made him many times a millionaire
found him physically robust but on the verge of soft-mindedness, and,
suspecting this, an infinite number of women tried to separate him
from his money. The none too savoury ramifications by which Ella Kaye,
the newspaper woman, played Madame de Maintenon to his weakness and
sent him to sea in a yacht, were common property of the turgid
journalism in 1902. He had been coasting along all too hospitable
shores for five years when he turned up as James Gatz’s destiny in
Little Girl Bay.

To young Gatz, resting on his oars and looking up at the railed deck,
that yacht represented all the beauty and glamour in the world. I
suppose he smiled at Cody—he had probably discovered that people liked
him when he smiled. At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one of
them elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick and
extravagantly ambitious. A few days later he took him to Duluth and
bought him a blue coat, six pairs of white duck trousers, and a
yachting cap. And when the Tuolomee left for the West Indies and the
Barbary Coast, Gatsby left too.

He was employed in a vague personal capacity—while he remained with
Cody he was in turn steward, mate, skipper, secretary, and even
jailor, for Dan Cody sober knew what lavish doings Dan Cody drunk
might soon be about, and he provided for such contingencies by
reposing more and more trust in Gatsby. The arrangement lasted five
years, during which the boat went three times around the Continent.
It might have lasted indefinitely except for the fact that Ella Kaye
came on board one night in Boston and a week later Dan Cody
inhospitably died.

I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsby’s bedroom, a grey, florid
man with a hard, empty face—the pioneer debauchee, who during one
phase of American life brought back to the Eastern seaboard the savage
violence of the frontier brothel and saloon. It was indirectly due to
Cody that Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes in the course of gay
parties women used to rub champagne into his hair; for himself he
formed the habit of letting liquor alone.

And it was from Cody that he inherited money—a legacy of twenty-five
thousand dollars. He didn’t get it. He never understood the legal
device that was used against him, but what remained of the millions
went intact to Ella Kaye. He was left with his singularly appropriate
education; the vague contour of Jay Gatsby had filled out to the
substantiality of a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He told me all this very much later, but I’ve put it down here with
the idea of exploding those first wild rumours about his antecedents,
which weren’t even faintly true. Moreover he told it to me at a time
of confusion, when I had reached the point of believing everything and
nothing about him. So I take advantage of this short halt, while
Gatsby, so to speak, caught his breath, to clear this set of
misconceptions away.

It was a halt, too, in my association with his affairs. For several
weeks I didn’t see him or hear his voice on the phone—mostly I was in
New York, trotting around with Jordan and trying to ingratiate myself
with her senile aunt—but finally I went over to his house one Sunday
afternoon. I hadn’t been there two minutes when somebody brought Tom
Buchanan in for a drink. I was startled, naturally, but the really
surprising thing was that it hadn’t happened before.

They were a party of three on horseback—Tom and a man named Sloane and
a pretty woman in a brown riding-habit, who had been there previously.

“I’m delighted to see you,” said Gatsby, standing on his porch. “I’m
delighted that you dropped in.”

As though they cared!

“Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar.” He walked around the
room quickly, ringing bells. “I’ll have something to drink for you in
just a minute.”

He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was there. But he
would be uneasy anyhow until he had given them something, realizing in
a vague way that that was all they came for. Mr. Sloane wanted
nothing. A lemonade? No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at all,
thanks … I’m sorry—

“Did you have a nice ride?”

“Very good roads around here.”

“I suppose the automobiles—”

“Yeah.”

Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned to Tom, who had
accepted the introduction as a stranger.

“I believe we’ve met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan.”

“Oh, yes,” said Tom, gruffly polite, but obviously not remembering.
“So we did. I remember very well.”

“About two weeks ago.”

“That’s right. You were with Nick here.”

“I know your wife,” continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.

“That so?”

Tom turned to me.

“You live near here, Nick?”

“Next door.”

“That so?”

Mr. Sloane didn’t enter into the conversation, but lounged back
haughtily in his chair; the woman said nothing either—until
unexpectedly, after two highballs, she became cordial.

“We’ll all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby,” she suggested.
“What do you say?”

“Certainly; I’d be delighted to have you.”

“Be ver’ nice,” said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. “Well—think ought
to be starting home.”

“Please don’t hurry,” Gatsby urged them. He had control of himself
now, and he wanted to see more of Tom. “Why don’t you—why don’t you
stay for supper? I wouldn’t be surprised if some other people dropped
in from New York.”

“You come to supper with me,” said the lady enthusiastically. “Both of
you.”

This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.

“Come along,” he said—but to her only.

“I mean it,” she insisted. “I’d love to have you. Lots of room.”

Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go and he didn’t see
that Mr. Sloane had determined he shouldn’t.

“I’m afraid I won’t be able to,” I said.

“Well, you come,” she urged, concentrating on Gatsby.

Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her ear.

“We won’t be late if we start now,” she insisted aloud.

“I haven’t got a horse,” said Gatsby. “I used to ride in the army, but
I’ve never bought a horse. I’ll have to follow you in my car. Excuse
me for just a minute.”

The rest of us walked out on the porch, where Sloane and the lady
began an impassioned conversation aside.

“My God, I believe the man’s coming,” said Tom. “Doesn’t he know she
doesn’t want him?”

“She says she does want him.”

“She has a big dinner party and he won’t know a soul there.” He
frowned. “I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy. By God, I may be
old-fashioned in my ideas, but women run around too much these days to
suit me. They meet all kinds of crazy fish.”

Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps and mounted
their horses.

“Come on,” said Mr. Sloane to Tom, “we’re late. We’ve got to go.”  And
then to me: “Tell him we couldn’t wait, will you?”

Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool nod, and they
trotted quickly down the drive, disappearing under the August foliage
just as Gatsby, with hat and light overcoat in hand, came out the
front door.

Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisy’s running around alone, for on
the following Saturday night he came with her to Gatsby’s
party. Perhaps his presence gave the evening its peculiar quality of
oppressiveness—it stands out in my memory from Gatsby’s other parties
that summer. There were the same people, or at least the same sort of
people, the same profusion of champagne, the same many-coloured,
many-keyed commotion, but I felt an unpleasantness in the air, a
pervading harshness that hadn’t been there before. Or perhaps I had
merely grown used to it, grown to accept West Egg as a world complete
in itself, with its own standards and its own great figures, second to
nothing because it had no consciousness of being so, and now I was
looking at it again, through Daisy’s eyes. It is invariably saddening
to look through new eyes at things upon which you have expended your
own powers of adjustment.

They arrived at twilight, and, as we strolled out among the sparkling
hundreds, Daisy’s voice was playing murmurous tricks in her throat.

“These things excite me so,” she whispered. “If you want to kiss me
any time during the evening, Nick, just let me know and I’ll be glad
to arrange it for you. Just mention my name. Or present a green card.
I’m giving out green—”

“Look around,” suggested Gatsby.

“I’m looking around. I’m having a marvellous—”

“You must see the faces of many people you’ve heard about.”

Tom’s arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.

“We don’t go around very much,” he said; “in fact, I was just thinking
I don’t know a soul here.”

“Perhaps you know that lady.” Gatsby indicated a gorgeous, scarcely
human orchid of a woman who sat in state under a white-plum tree. Tom
and Daisy stared, with that peculiarly unreal feeling that accompanies
the recognition of a hitherto ghostly celebrity of the movies.

“She’s lovely,” said Daisy.

“The man bending over her is her director.”

He took them ceremoniously from group to group:

“Mrs. Buchanan … and Mr. Buchanan—” After an instant’s hesitation he
added: “the polo player.”

“Oh no,” objected Tom quickly, “not me.”

But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby for Tom remained “the
polo player” for the rest of the evening.

“I’ve never met so many celebrities,” Daisy exclaimed. “I liked that
man—what was his name?—with the sort of blue nose.”

Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small producer.

“Well, I liked him anyhow.”

“I’d a little rather not be the polo player,” said Tom pleasantly,
“I’d rather look at all these famous people in—in oblivion.”

Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being surprised by his graceful,
conservative foxtrot—I had never seen him dance before. Then they
sauntered over to my house and sat on the steps for half an hour,
while at her request I remained watchfully in the garden. “In case
there’s a fire or a flood,” she explained, “or any act of God.”

Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down to supper
together. “Do you mind if I eat with some people over here?” he
said. “A fellow’s getting off some funny stuff.”

“Go ahead,” answered Daisy genially, “and if you want to take down any
addresses here’s my little gold pencil.” … She looked around after a
moment and told me the girl was “common but pretty,” and I knew that
except for the half-hour she’d been alone with Gatsby she wasn’t
having a good time.

We were at a particularly tipsy table. That was my fault—Gatsby had
been called to the phone, and I’d enjoyed these same people only two
weeks before. But what had amused me then turned septic on the air
now.

“How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?”

The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump against my
shoulder. At this inquiry she sat up and opened her eyes.

“Wha’?”

A massive and lethargic woman, who had been urging Daisy to play golf
with her at the local club tomorrow, spoke in Miss Baedeker’s defence:

“Oh, she’s all right now. When she’s had five or six cocktails she
always starts screaming like that. I tell her she ought to leave it
alone.”

“I do leave it alone,” affirmed the accused hollowly.

“We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: ‘There’s somebody
that needs your help, Doc.’ ”

“She’s much obliged, I’m sure,” said another friend, without
gratitude, “but you got her dress all wet when you stuck her head in
the pool.”

“Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool,” mumbled Miss
Baedeker. “They almost drowned me once over in New Jersey.”

“Then you ought to leave it alone,” countered Doctor Civet.

“Speak for yourself!” cried Miss Baedeker violently. “Your hand
shakes. I wouldn’t let you operate on me!”

It was like that. Almost the last thing I remember was standing with
Daisy and watching the moving-picture director and his Star. They were
still under the white-plum tree and their faces were touching except
for a pale, thin ray of moonlight between. It occurred to me that he
had been very slowly bending toward her all evening to attain this
proximity, and even while I watched I saw him stoop one ultimate
degree and kiss at her cheek.

“I like her,” said Daisy, “I think she’s lovely.”

But the rest offended her—and inarguably because it wasn’t a gesture
but an emotion. She was appalled by West Egg, this unprecedented
“place” that Broadway had begotten upon a Long Island fishing
village—appalled by its raw vigour that chafed under the old
euphemisms and by the too obtrusive fate that herded its inhabitants
along a shortcut from nothing to nothing. She saw something awful in
the very simplicity she failed to understand.

I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for their car.
It was dark here in front; only the bright door sent ten square feet
of light volleying out into the soft black morning. Sometimes a shadow
moved against a dressing-room blind above, gave way to another shadow,
an indefinite procession of shadows, who rouged and powdered in an
invisible glass.

“Who is this Gatsby anyhow?” demanded Tom suddenly. “Some big
bootlegger?”

“Where’d you hear that?” I inquired.

“I didn’t hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich people are
just big bootleggers, you know.”

“Not Gatsby,” I said shortly.

He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of the drive crunched under
his feet.

“Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this menagerie
together.”

A breeze stirred the grey haze of Daisy’s fur collar.

“At least they are more interesting than the people we know,” she said
with an effort.

“You didn’t look so interested.”

“Well, I was.”

Tom laughed and turned to me.

“Did you notice Daisy’s face when that girl asked her to put her under
a cold shower?”

Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic whisper,
bringing out a meaning in each word that it had never had before and
would never have again. When the melody rose her voice broke up
sweetly, following it, in a way contralto voices have, and each change
tipped out a little of her warm human magic upon the air.

“Lots of people come who haven’t been invited,” she said
suddenly. “That girl hadn’t been invited. They simply force their way
in and he’s too polite to object.”

“I’d like to know who he is and what he does,” insisted Tom. “And I
think I’ll make a point of finding out.”

“I can tell you right now,” she answered. “He owned some drugstores, a
lot of drugstores. He built them up himself.”

The dilatory limousine came rolling up the drive.

“Good night, Nick,” said Daisy.

Her glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps, where
“Three O’Clock in the Morning,” a neat, sad little waltz of that year,
was drifting out the open door. After all, in the very casualness of
Gatsby’s party there were romantic possibilities totally absent from
her world. What was it up there in the song that seemed to be calling
her back inside? What would happen now in the dim, incalculable hours?
Perhaps some unbelievable guest would arrive, a person infinitely rare
and to be marvelled at, some authentically radiant young girl who with
one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment of magical encounter, would
blot out those five years of unwavering devotion.

I stayed late that night. Gatsby asked me to wait until he was free,
and I lingered in the garden until the inevitable swimming party had
run up, chilled and exalted, from the black beach, until the lights
were extinguished in the guestrooms overhead. When he came down the
steps at last the tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face,
and his eyes were bright and tired.

“She didn’t like it,” he said immediately.

“Of course she did.”

“She didn’t like it,” he insisted. “She didn’t have a good time.”

He was silent, and I guessed at his unutterable depression.

“I feel far away from her,” he said. “It’s hard to make her
understand.”

“You mean about the dance?”

“The dance?” He dismissed all the dances he had given with a snap of
his fingers. “Old sport, the dance is unimportant.”

He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go to Tom and
say: “I never loved you.” After she had obliterated four years with
that sentence they could decide upon the more practical measures to be
taken. One of them was that, after she was free, they were to go back
to Louisville and be married from her house—just as if it were five
years ago.

“And she doesn’t understand,” he said. “She used to be able to
understand. We’d sit for hours—”

He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate path of fruit
rinds and discarded favours and crushed flowers.

“I wouldn’t ask too much of her,” I ventured. “You can’t repeat the
past.”

“Can’t repeat the past?” he cried incredulously. “Why of course you
can!”

He looked around him wildly, as if the past were lurking here in the
shadow of his house, just out of reach of his hand.

“I’m going to fix everything just the way it was before,” he said,
nodding determinedly. “She’ll see.”

He talked a lot about the past, and I gathered that he wanted to
recover something, some idea of himself perhaps, that had gone into
loving Daisy. His life had been confused and disordered since then,
but if he could once return to a certain starting place and go over it
all slowly, he could find out what that thing was …

… One autumn night, five years before, they had been walking down the
street when the leaves were falling, and they came to a place where
there were no trees and the sidewalk was white with moonlight. They
stopped here and turned toward each other. Now it was a cool night
with that mysterious excitement in it which comes at the two changes
of the year. The quiet lights in the houses were humming out into the
darkness and there was a stir and bustle among the stars. Out of the
corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the blocks of the sidewalks really
formed a ladder and mounted to a secret place above the trees—he could
climb to it, if he climbed alone, and once there he could suck on the
pap of life, gulp down the incomparable milk of wonder.

His heart beat faster as Daisy’s white face came up to his own. He
knew that when he kissed this girl, and forever wed his unutterable
visions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp again like
the mind of God. So he waited, listening for a moment longer to the
tuning-fork that had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her. At
his lips’ touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the
incarnation was complete.

Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality, I was
reminded of something—an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost words,
that I had heard somewhere a long time ago. For a moment a phrase
tried to take shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb man’s,
as though there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of startled
air. But they made no sound, and what I had almost remembered was
uncommunicable forever.


                                 VII

It was when curiosity about Gatsby was at its highest that the lights
in his house failed to go on one Saturday night—and, as obscurely as
it had begun, his career as Trimalchio was over. Only gradually did I
become aware that the automobiles which turned expectantly into his
drive stayed for just a minute and then drove sulkily away. Wondering
if he were sick I went over to find out—an unfamiliar butler with a
villainous face squinted at me suspiciously from the door.

“Is Mr. Gatsby sick?”

“Nope.” After a pause he added “sir” in a dilatory, grudging way.

“I hadn’t seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell him Mr.
Carraway came over.”

“Who?” he demanded rudely.

“Carraway.”

“Carraway. All right, I’ll tell him.”

Abruptly he slammed the door.

My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every servant in his
house a week ago and replaced them with half a dozen others, who never
went into West Egg village to be bribed by the tradesmen, but ordered
moderate supplies over the telephone. The grocery boy reported that
the kitchen looked like a pigsty, and the general opinion in the
village was that the new people weren’t servants at all.

Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.

“Going away?” I inquired.

“No, old sport.”

“I hear you fired all your servants.”

“I wanted somebody who wouldn’t gossip. Daisy comes over quite
often—in the afternoons.”

So the whole caravansary had fallen in like a card house at the
disapproval in her eyes.

“They’re some people Wolfshiem wanted to do something for. They’re all
brothers and sisters. They used to run a small hotel.”

“I see.”

He was calling up at Daisy’s request—would I come to lunch at her
house tomorrow? Miss Baker would be there. Half an hour later Daisy
herself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I was
coming. Something was up. And yet I couldn’t believe that they would
choose this occasion for a scene—especially for the rather harrowing
scene that Gatsby had outlined in the garden.

The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the warmest, of
the summer. As my train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight, only
the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmering
hush at noon. The straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of
combustion; the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into
her white shirtwaist, and then, as her newspaper dampened under her
fingers, lapsed despairingly into deep heat with a desolate cry. Her
pocketbook slapped to the floor.

“Oh, my!” she gasped.

I picked it up with a weary bend and handed it back to her, holding it
at arm’s length and by the extreme tip of the corners to indicate that
I had no designs upon it—but everyone near by, including the woman,
suspected me just the same.

“Hot!” said the conductor to familiar faces. “Some weather! … Hot! …
Hot! … Hot! … Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it … ?”

My commutation ticket came back to me with a dark stain from his hand.
That anyone should care in this heat whose flushed lips he kissed,
whose head made damp the pyjama pocket over his heart!

… Through the hall of the Buchanans’ house blew a faint wind, carrying
the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby and me as we waited at
the door.

“The master’s body?” roared the butler into the mouthpiece. “I’m
sorry, madame, but we can’t furnish it—it’s far too hot to touch this
noon!”

What he really said was: “Yes … Yes … I’ll see.”

He set down the receiver and came toward us, glistening slightly, to
take our stiff straw hats.

“Madame expects you in the salon!” he cried, needlessly indicating the
direction. In this heat every extra gesture was an affront to the
common store of life.

The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and cool. Daisy and
Jordan lay upon an enormous couch, like silver idols weighing down
their own white dresses against the singing breeze of the fans.

“We can’t move,” they said together.

Jordan’s fingers, powdered white over their tan, rested for a moment
in mine.

“And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?” I inquired.

Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled, husky, at the hall
telephone.

Gatsby stood in the centre of the crimson carpet and gazed around with
fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and laughed, her sweet, exciting
laugh; a tiny gust of powder rose from her bosom into the air.

“The rumour is,” whispered Jordan, “that that’s Tom’s girl on the
telephone.”

We were silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoyance: “Very
well, then, I won’t sell you the car at all … I’m under no obligations
to you at all … and as for your bothering me about it at lunch time, I
won’t stand that at all!”

“Holding down the receiver,” said Daisy cynically.

“No, he’s not,” I assured her. “It’s a bona-fide deal. I happen to
know about it.”

Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space for a moment with his
thick body, and hurried into the room.

“Mr. Gatsby!” He put out his broad, flat hand with well-concealed
dislike. “I’m glad to see you, sir … Nick …”

“Make us a cold drink,” cried Daisy.

As he left the room again she got up and went over to Gatsby and
pulled his face down, kissing him on the mouth.

“You know I love you,” she murmured.

“You forget there’s a lady present,” said Jordan.

Daisy looked around doubtfully.

“You kiss Nick too.”

“What a low, vulgar girl!”

“I don’t care!” cried Daisy, and began to clog on the brick fireplace.
Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch just
as a freshly laundered nurse leading a little girl came into the room.

“Bles-sed pre-cious,” she crooned, holding out her arms. “Come to your
own mother that loves you.”

The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the room and
rooted shyly into her mother’s dress.

“The bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old yellowy
hair? Stand up now, and say—How-de-do.”

Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand.
Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise. I don’t think he
had ever really believed in its existence before.

“I got dressed before luncheon,” said the child, turning eagerly to
Daisy.

“That’s because your mother wanted to show you off.” Her face bent
into the single wrinkle of the small white neck. “You dream, you. You
absolute little dream.”

“Yes,” admitted the child calmly. “Aunt Jordan’s got on a white dress
too.”

“How do you like mother’s friends?” Daisy turned her around so that
she faced Gatsby. “Do you think they’re pretty?”

“Where’s Daddy?”

“She doesn’t look like her father,” explained Daisy. “She looks like
me. She’s got my hair and shape of the face.”

Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took a step forward and held
out her hand.

“Come, Pammy.”

“Goodbye, sweetheart!”

With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined child held to
her nurse’s hand and was pulled out the door, just as Tom came back,
preceding four gin rickeys that clicked full of ice.

Gatsby took up his drink.

“They certainly look cool,” he said, with visible tension.

We drank in long, greedy swallows.

“I read somewhere that the sun’s getting hotter every year,” said Tom
genially. “It seems that pretty soon the earth’s going to fall into
the sun—or wait a minute—it’s just the opposite—the sun’s getting
colder every year.

“Come outside,” he suggested to Gatsby, “I’d like you to have a look
at the place.”

I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound, stagnant in
the heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward the fresher sea.
Gatsby’s eyes followed it momentarily; he raised his hand and pointed
across the bay.

“I’m right across from you.”

“So you are.”

Our eyes lifted over the rose-beds and the hot lawn and the weedy
refuse of the dog-days alongshore. Slowly the white wings of the boat
moved against the blue cool limit of the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped
ocean and the abounding blessed isles.

“There’s sport for you,” said Tom, nodding. “I’d like to be out there
with him for about an hour.”

We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened too against the heat, and
drank down nervous gaiety with the cold ale.

“What’ll we do with ourselves this afternoon?” cried Daisy, “and the
day after that, and the next thirty years?”

“Don’t be morbid,” Jordan said. “Life starts all over again when it
gets crisp in the fall.”

“But it’s so hot,” insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, “and
everything’s so confused. Let’s all go to town!”

Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against it, moulding
its senselessness into forms.

“I’ve heard of making a garage out of a stable,” Tom was saying to
Gatsby, “but I’m the first man who ever made a stable out of a
garage.”

“Who wants to go to town?” demanded Daisy insistently. Gatsby’s eyes
floated toward her. “Ah,” she cried, “you look so cool.”

Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone in
space. With an effort she glanced down at the table.

“You always look so cool,” she repeated.

She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan saw. He was
astounded. His mouth opened a little, and he looked at Gatsby, and
then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized her as someone he knew
a long time ago.

“You resemble the advertisement of the man,” she went on innocently.
“You know the advertisement of the man—”

“All right,” broke in Tom quickly, “I’m perfectly willing to go to
town. Come on—we’re all going to town.”

He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his wife. No one
moved.

“Come on!” His temper cracked a little. “What’s the matter, anyhow?
If we’re going to town, let’s start.”

His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control, bore to his lips
the last of his glass of ale. Daisy’s voice got us to our feet and out
on to the blazing gravel drive.

“Are we just going to go?” she objected. “Like this? Aren’t we going
to let anyone smoke a cigarette first?”

“Everybody smoked all through lunch.”

“Oh, let’s have fun,” she begged him. “It’s too hot to fuss.”

He didn’t answer.

“Have it your own way,” she said. “Come on, Jordan.”

They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood there
shuffling the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve of the moon
hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby started to speak, changed
his mind, but not before Tom wheeled and faced him expectantly.

“Have you got your stables here?” asked Gatsby with an effort.

“About a quarter of a mile down the road.”

“Oh.”

A pause.

“I don’t see the idea of going to town,” broke out Tom savagely.
“Women get these notions in their heads—”

“Shall we take anything to drink?” called Daisy from an upper window.

“I’ll get some whisky,” answered Tom. He went inside.

Gatsby turned to me rigidly:

“I can’t say anything in his house, old sport.”

“She’s got an indiscreet voice,” I remarked. “It’s full of—” I
hesitated.

“Her voice is full of money,” he said suddenly.

That was it. I’d never understood before. It was full of money—that
was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the jingle of
it, the cymbals’ song of it … High in a white palace the king’s
daughter, the golden girl …

Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in a towel, followed
by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight hats of metallic cloth and
carrying light capes over their arms.

“Shall we all go in my car?” suggested Gatsby. He felt the hot, green
leather of the seat. “I ought to have left it in the shade.”

“Is it standard shift?” demanded Tom.

“Yes.”

“Well, you take my coupé and let me drive your car to town.”

The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.

“I don’t think there’s much gas,” he objected.

“Plenty of gas,” said Tom boisterously. He looked at the gauge. “And
if it runs out I can stop at a drugstore. You can buy anything at a
drugstore nowadays.”

A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Daisy looked at Tom
frowning, and an indefinable expression, at once definitely unfamiliar
and vaguely recognizable, as if I had only heard it described in
words, passed over Gatsby’s face.

“Come on, Daisy,” said Tom, pressing her with his hand toward Gatsby’s
car. “I’ll take you in this circus wagon.”

He opened the door, but she moved out from the circle of his arm.

“You take Nick and Jordan. We’ll follow you in the coupé.”

She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand. Jordan
and Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsby’s car, Tom pushed the
unfamiliar gears tentatively, and we shot off into the oppressive
heat, leaving them out of sight behind.

“Did you see that?” demanded Tom.

“See what?”

He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must have known
all along.

“You think I’m pretty dumb, don’t you?” he suggested. “Perhaps I am,
but I have a—almost a second sight, sometimes, that tells me what to
do. Maybe you don’t believe that, but science—”

He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled him back
from the edge of theoretical abyss.

“I’ve made a small investigation of this fellow,” he continued. “I
could have gone deeper if I’d known—”

“Do you mean you’ve been to a medium?” inquired Jordan humorously.

“What?” Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. “A medium?”

“About Gatsby.”

“About Gatsby! No, I haven’t. I said I’d been making a small
investigation of his past.”

“And you found he was an Oxford man,” said Jordan helpfully.

“An Oxford man!” He was incredulous. “Like hell he is! He wears a pink
suit.”

“Nevertheless he’s an Oxford man.”

“Oxford, New Mexico,” snorted Tom contemptuously, “or something like
that.”

“Listen, Tom. If you’re such a snob, why did you invite him to lunch?”
demanded Jordan crossly.

“Daisy invited him; she knew him before we were married—God knows
where!”

We were all irritable now with the fading ale, and aware of it we
drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckleburg’s faded
eyes came into sight down the road, I remembered Gatsby’s caution
about gasoline.

“We’ve got enough to get us to town,” said Tom.

“But there’s a garage right here,” objected Jordan. “I don’t want to
get stalled in this baking heat.”

Tom threw on both brakes impatiently, and we slid to an abrupt dusty
stop under Wilson’s sign. After a moment the proprietor emerged from
the interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.

“Let’s have some gas!” cried Tom roughly. “What do you think we
stopped for—to admire the view?”

“I’m sick,” said Wilson without moving. “Been sick all day.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I’m all run down.”

“Well, shall I help myself?” Tom demanded. “You sounded well enough on
the phone.”

With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the doorway and,
breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the tank. In the sunlight his
face was green.

“I didn’t mean to interrupt your lunch,” he said. “But I need money
pretty bad, and I was wondering what you were going to do with your
old car.”

“How do you like this one?” inquired Tom. “I bought it last week.”

“It’s a nice yellow one,” said Wilson, as he strained at the handle.

“Like to buy it?”

“Big chance,” Wilson smiled faintly. “No, but I could make some money
on the other.”

“What do you want money for, all of a sudden?”

“I’ve been here too long. I want to get away. My wife and I want to go
West.”

“Your wife does,” exclaimed Tom, startled.

“She’s been talking about it for ten years.” He rested for a moment
against the pump, shading his eyes. “And now she’s going whether she
wants to or not. I’m going to get her away.”

The coupé flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the flash of a
waving hand.

“What do I owe you?” demanded Tom harshly.

“I just got wised up to something funny the last two days,” remarked
Wilson. “That’s why I want to get away. That’s why I been bothering
you about the car.”

“What do I owe you?”

“Dollar twenty.”

The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse me and I had a
bad moment there before I realized that so far his suspicions hadn’t
alighted on Tom. He had discovered that Myrtle had some sort of life
apart from him in another world, and the shock had made him physically
sick. I stared at him and then at Tom, who had made a parallel
discovery less than an hour before—and it occurred to me that there
was no difference between men, in intelligence or race, so profound as
the difference between the sick and the well. Wilson was so sick that
he looked guilty, unforgivably guilty—as if he had just got some poor
girl with child.

“I’ll let you have that car,” said Tom. “I’ll send it over tomorrow
afternoon.”

That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in the broad glare
of afternoon, and now I turned my head as though I had been warned of
something behind. Over the ash-heaps the giant eyes of Doctor T. J.
Eckleburg kept their vigil, but I perceived, after a moment, that
other eyes were regarding us with peculiar intensity from less than
twenty feet away.

In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had been moved
aside a little, and Myrtle Wilson was peering down at the car. So
engrossed was she that she had no consciousness of being observed, and
one emotion after another crept into her face like objects into a
slowly developing picture. Her expression was curiously familiar—it
was an expression I had often seen on women’s faces, but on Myrtle
Wilson’s face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable until I realized
that her eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but on
Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple mind, and as we
drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips of panic. His wife and his
mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slipping
precipitately from his control. Instinct made him step on the
accelerator with the double purpose of overtaking Daisy and leaving
Wilson behind, and we sped along toward Astoria at fifty miles an
hour, until, among the spidery girders of the elevated, we came in
sight of the easygoing blue coupé.

“Those big movies around Fiftieth Street are cool,” suggested
Jordan. “I love New York on summer afternoons when everyone’s away.
There’s something very sensuous about it—overripe, as if all sorts of
funny fruits were going to fall into your hands.”

The word “sensuous” had the effect of further disquieting Tom, but
before he could invent a protest the coupé came to a stop, and Daisy
signalled us to draw up alongside.

“Where are we going?” she cried.

“How about the movies?”

“It’s so hot,” she complained. “You go. We’ll ride around and meet you
after.” With an effort her wit rose faintly. “We’ll meet you on some
corner. I’ll be the man smoking two cigarettes.”

“We can’t argue about it here,” Tom said impatiently, as a truck gave
out a cursing whistle behind us. “You follow me to the south side of
Central Park, in front of the Plaza.”

Several times he turned his head and looked back for their car, and if
the traffic delayed them he slowed up until they came into sight. I
think he was afraid they would dart down a side-street and out of his
life forever.

But they didn’t. And we all took the less explicable step of engaging
the parlour of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.

The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by herding us into
that room eludes me, though I have a sharp physical memory that, in
the course of it, my underwear kept climbing like a damp snake around
my legs and intermittent beads of sweat raced cool across my back.
The notion originated with Daisy’s suggestion that we hire five
bathrooms and take cold baths, and then assumed more tangible form as
“a place to have a mint julep.” Each of us said over and over that it
was a “crazy idea”—we all talked at once to a baffled clerk and
thought, or pretended to think, that we were being very funny …

The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already four
o’clock, opening the windows admitted only a gust of hot shrubbery
from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and stood with her back to us,
fixing her hair.

“It’s a swell suite,” whispered Jordan respectfully, and everyone
laughed.

“Open another window,” commanded Daisy, without turning around.

“There aren’t any more.”

“Well, we’d better telephone for an axe—”

“The thing to do is to forget about the heat,” said Tom impatiently.
“You make it ten times worse by crabbing about it.”

He unrolled the bottle of whisky from the towel and put it on the
table.

“Why not let her alone, old sport?” remarked Gatsby. “You’re the one
that wanted to come to town.”

There was a moment of silence. The telephone book slipped from its
nail and splashed to the floor, whereupon Jordan whispered, “Excuse
me”—but this time no one laughed.

“I’ll pick it up,” I offered.

“I’ve got it.” Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered “Hum!” in
an interested way, and tossed the book on a chair.

“That’s a great expression of yours, isn’t it?” said Tom sharply.

“What is?”

“All this ‘old sport’ business. Where’d you pick that up?”

“Now see here, Tom,” said Daisy, turning around from the mirror, “if
you’re going to make personal remarks I won’t stay here a minute.
Call up and order some ice for the mint julep.”

As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded into sound
and we were listening to the portentous chords of Mendelssohn’s
Wedding March from the ballroom below.

“Imagine marrying anybody in this heat!” cried Jordan dismally.

“Still—I was married in the middle of June,” Daisy remembered.
“Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who was it fainted, Tom?”

“Biloxi,” he answered shortly.

“A man named Biloxi. ‘Blocks’ Biloxi, and he made boxes—that’s a
fact—and he was from Biloxi, Tennessee.”

“They carried him into my house,” appended Jordan, “because we lived
just two doors from the church. And he stayed three weeks, until Daddy
told him he had to get out. The day after he left Daddy died.”  After
a moment she added as if she might have sounded irreverent, “There
wasn’t any connection.”

“I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis,” I remarked.

“That was his cousin. I knew his whole family history before he
left. He gave me an aluminium putter that I use today.”

The music had died down as the ceremony began and now a long cheer
floated in at the window, followed by intermittent cries of
“Yea—ea—ea!” and finally by a burst of jazz as the dancing began.

“We’re getting old,” said Daisy. “If we were young we’d rise and
dance.”

“Remember Biloxi,” Jordan warned her. “Where’d you know him, Tom?”

“Biloxi?” He concentrated with an effort. “I didn’t know him. He was a
friend of Daisy’s.”

“He was not,” she denied. “I’d never seen him before. He came down in
the private car.”

“Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louisville. Asa
Bird brought him around at the last minute and asked if we had room
for him.”

Jordan smiled.

“He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he was president of
your class at Yale.”

Tom and I looked at each other blankly.

“Biloxi?”

“First place, we didn’t have any president—”

Gatsby’s foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed him suddenly.

“By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand you’re an Oxford man.”

“Not exactly.”

“Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford.”

“Yes—I went there.”

A pause. Then Tom’s voice, incredulous and insulting:

“You must have gone there about the time Biloxi went to New Haven.”

Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with crushed mint and ice
but the silence was unbroken by his “thank you” and the soft closing
of the door. This tremendous detail was to be cleared up at last.

“I told you I went there,” said Gatsby.

“I heard you, but I’d like to know when.”

“It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months. That’s why I
can’t really call myself an Oxford man.”

Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief. But we were all
looking at Gatsby.

“It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers after the
armistice,” he continued. “We could go to any of the universities in
England or France.”

I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one of those
renewals of complete faith in him that I’d experienced before.

Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.

“Open the whisky, Tom,” she ordered, “and I’ll make you a mint julep.
Then you won’t seem so stupid to yourself … Look at the mint!”

“Wait a minute,” snapped Tom, “I want to ask Mr. Gatsby one more
question.”

“Go on,” Gatsby said politely.

“What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house anyhow?”

They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.

“He isn’t causing a row,” Daisy looked desperately from one to the
other. “You’re causing a row. Please have a little self-control.”

“Self-control!” repeated Tom incredulously. “I suppose the latest
thing is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere make love to your
wife. Well, if that’s the idea you can count me out … Nowadays people
begin by sneering at family life and family institutions, and next
they’ll throw everything overboard and have intermarriage between
black and white.”

Flushed with his impassioned gibberish, he saw himself standing alone
on the last barrier of civilization.

“We’re all white here,” murmured Jordan.

“I know I’m not very popular. I don’t give big parties. I suppose
you’ve got to make your house into a pigsty in order to have any
friends—in the modern world.”

Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh whenever he
opened his mouth. The transition from libertine to prig was so
complete.

“I’ve got something to tell you, old sport—” began Gatsby. But Daisy
guessed at his intention.

“Please don’t!” she interrupted helplessly. “Please let’s all go
home. Why don’t we all go home?”

“That’s a good idea,” I got up. “Come on, Tom. Nobody wants a drink.”

“I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me.”

“Your wife doesn’t love you,” said Gatsby. “She’s never loved you.
She loves me.”

“You must be crazy!” exclaimed Tom automatically.

Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.

“She never loved you, do you hear?” he cried. “She only married you
because I was poor and she was tired of waiting for me. It was a
terrible mistake, but in her heart she never loved anyone except me!”

At this point Jordan and I tried to go, but Tom and Gatsby insisted
with competitive firmness that we remain—as though neither of them had
anything to conceal and it would be a privilege to partake vicariously
of their emotions.

“Sit down, Daisy,” Tom’s voice groped unsuccessfully for the paternal
note. “What’s been going on? I want to hear all about it.”

“I told you what’s been going on,” said Gatsby. “Going on for five
years—and you didn’t know.”

Tom turned to Daisy sharply.

“You’ve been seeing this fellow for five years?”

“Not seeing,” said Gatsby. “No, we couldn’t meet. But both of us loved
each other all that time, old sport, and you didn’t know. I used to
laugh sometimes”—but there was no laughter in his eyes—“to think that
you didn’t know.”

“Oh—that’s all.” Tom tapped his thick fingers together like a
clergyman and leaned back in his chair.

“You’re crazy!” he exploded. “I can’t speak about what happened five
years ago, because I didn’t know Daisy then—and I’ll be damned if I
see how you got within a mile of her unless you brought the groceries
to the back door. But all the rest of that’s a God damned lie. Daisy
loved me when she married me and she loves me now.”

“No,” said Gatsby, shaking his head.

“She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets foolish
ideas in her head and doesn’t know what she’s doing.” He nodded
sagely. “And what’s more, I love Daisy too. Once in a while I go off
on a spree and make a fool of myself, but I always come back, and in
my heart I love her all the time.”

“You’re revolting,” said Daisy. She turned to me, and her voice,
dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn: “Do
you know why we left Chicago? I’m surprised that they didn’t treat you
to the story of that little spree.”

Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.

“Daisy, that’s all over now,” he said earnestly. “It doesn’t matter
any more. Just tell him the truth—that you never loved him—and it’s
all wiped out forever.”

She looked at him blindly. “Why—how could I love him—possibly?”

“You never loved him.”

She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of appeal,
as though she realized at last what she was doing—and as though she
had never, all along, intended doing anything at all. But it was done
now. It was too late.

“I never loved him,” she said, with perceptible reluctance.

“Not at Kapiolani?” demanded Tom suddenly.

“No.”

From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating chords were
drifting up on hot waves of air.

“Not that day I carried you down from the Punch Bowl to keep your
shoes dry?” There was a husky tenderness in his tone … “Daisy?”

“Please don’t.” Her voice was cold, but the rancour was gone from it.
She looked at Gatsby. “There, Jay,” she said—but her hand as she tried
to light a cigarette was trembling. Suddenly she threw the cigarette
and the burning match on the carpet.

“Oh, you want too much!” she cried to Gatsby. “I love you now—isn’t
that enough? I can’t help what’s past.” She began to sob
helplessly. “I did love him once—but I loved you too.”

Gatsby’s eyes opened and closed.

“You loved me too?” he repeated.

“Even that’s a lie,” said Tom savagely. “She didn’t know you were
alive. Why—there’s things between Daisy and me that you’ll never know,
things that neither of us can ever forget.”

The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.

“I want to speak to Daisy alone,” he insisted. “She’s all excited
now—”

“Even alone I can’t say I never loved Tom,” she admitted in a pitiful
voice. “It wouldn’t be true.”

“Of course it wouldn’t,” agreed Tom.

She turned to her husband.

“As if it mattered to you,” she said.

“Of course it matters. I’m going to take better care of you from now
on.”

“You don’t understand,” said Gatsby, with a touch of panic. “You’re
not going to take care of her any more.”

“I’m not?” Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He could afford to
control himself now. “Why’s that?”

“Daisy’s leaving you.”

“Nonsense.”

“I am, though,” she said with a visible effort.

“She’s not leaving me!” Tom’s words suddenly leaned down over Gatsby.
“Certainly not for a common swindler who’d have to steal the ring he
put on her finger.”

“I won’t stand this!” cried Daisy. “Oh, please let’s get out.”

“Who are you, anyhow?” broke out Tom. “You’re one of that bunch that
hangs around with Meyer Wolfshiem—that much I happen to know. I’ve
made a little investigation into your affairs—and I’ll carry it
further tomorrow.”

“You can suit yourself about that, old sport,” said Gatsby steadily.

“I found out what your ‘drugstores’ were.” He turned to us and spoke
rapidly. “He and this Wolfshiem bought up a lot of side-street
drugstores here and in Chicago and sold grain alcohol over the
counter. That’s one of his little stunts. I picked him for a
bootlegger the first time I saw him, and I wasn’t far wrong.”

“What about it?” said Gatsby politely. “I guess your friend Walter
Chase wasn’t too proud to come in on it.”

“And you left him in the lurch, didn’t you? You let him go to jail for
a month over in New Jersey. God! You ought to hear Walter on the
subject of you.”

“He came to us dead broke. He was very glad to pick up some money, old
sport.”

“Don’t you call me ‘old sport’!” cried Tom. Gatsby said
nothing. “Walter could have you up on the betting laws too, but
Wolfshiem scared him into shutting his mouth.”

That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in Gatsby’s face.

“That drugstore business was just small change,” continued Tom slowly,
“but you’ve got something on now that Walter’s afraid to tell me
about.”

I glanced at Daisy, who was staring terrified between Gatsby and her
husband, and at Jordan, who had begun to balance an invisible but
absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then I turned back to
Gatsby—and was startled at his expression. He looked—and this is said
in all contempt for the babbled slander of his garden—as if he had
“killed a man.” For a moment the set of his face could be described in
just that fantastic way.

It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying
everything, defending his name against accusations that had not been
made. But with every word she was drawing further and further into
herself, so he gave that up, and only the dead dream fought on as the
afternoon slipped away, trying to touch what was no longer tangible,
struggling unhappily, undespairingly, toward that lost voice across
the room.

The voice begged again to go.

“Please, Tom! I can’t stand this any more.”

Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever courage
she had had, were definitely gone.

“You two start on home, Daisy,” said Tom. “In Mr. Gatsby’s car.”

She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with magnanimous
scorn.

“Go on. He won’t annoy you. I think he realizes that his presumptuous
little flirtation is over.”

They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made accidental,
isolated, like ghosts, even from our pity.

After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the unopened bottle of
whisky in the towel.

“Want any of this stuff? Jordan? … Nick?”

I didn’t answer.

“Nick?” He asked again.

“What?”

“Want any?”

“No … I just remembered that today’s my birthday.”

I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous, menacing road of a
new decade.

It was seven o’clock when we got into the coupé with him and started
for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing, but
his voice was as remote from Jordan and me as the foreign clamour on
the sidewalk or the tumult of the elevated overhead. Human sympathy
has its limits, and we were content to let all their tragic arguments
fade with the city lights behind. Thirty—the promise of a decade of
loneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinning
briefcase of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was Jordan beside
me, who, unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to carry well-forgotten
dreams from age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge her wan face
fell lazily against my coat’s shoulder and the formidable stroke of
thirty died away with the reassuring pressure of her hand.

So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside the
ash-heaps was the principal witness at the inquest. He had slept
through the heat until after five, when he strolled over to the
garage, and found George Wilson sick in his office—really sick, pale
as his own pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis advised him to go
to bed, but Wilson refused, saying that he’d miss a lot of business if
he did. While his neighbour was trying to persuade him a violent
racket broke out overhead.

“I’ve got my wife locked in up there,” explained Wilson calmly.
“She’s going to stay there till the day after tomorrow, and then we’re
going to move away.”

Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbours for four years, and
Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of such a statement.
Generally he was one of these worn-out men: when he wasn’t working, he
sat on a chair in the doorway and stared at the people and the cars
that passed along the road. When anyone spoke to him he invariably
laughed in an agreeable, colourless way. He was his wife’s man and not
his own.

So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened, but Wilson
wouldn’t say a word—instead he began to throw curious, suspicious
glances at his visitor and ask him what he’d been doing at certain
times on certain days. Just as the latter was getting uneasy, some
workmen came past the door bound for his restaurant, and Michaelis
took the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later. But he
didn’t. He supposed he forgot to, that’s all. When he came outside
again, a little after seven, he was reminded of the conversation
because he heard Mrs. Wilson’s voice, loud and scolding, downstairs in
the garage.

“Beat me!” he heard her cry. “Throw me down and beat me, you dirty
little coward!”

A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her hands and
shouting—before he could move from his door the business was over.

The “death car” as the newspapers called it, didn’t stop; it came out
of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically for a moment, and then
disappeared around the next bend. Mavro Michaelis wasn’t even sure of
its colour—he told the first policeman that it was light green. The
other car, the one going toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards
beyond, and its driver hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life
violently extinguished, knelt in the road and mingled her thick dark
blood with the dust.

Michaelis and this man reached her first, but when they had torn open
her shirtwaist, still damp with perspiration, they saw that her left
breast was swinging loose like a flap, and there was no need to listen
for the heart beneath. The mouth was wide open and ripped a little at
the corners, as though she had choked a little in giving up the
tremendous vitality she had stored so long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd when we were still
some distance away.

“Wreck!” said Tom. “That’s good. Wilson’ll have a little business at
last.”

He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping, until, as
we came nearer, the hushed, intent faces of the people at the garage
door made him automatically put on the brakes.

“We’ll take a look,” he said doubtfully, “just a look.”

I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued incessantly
from the garage, a sound which as we got out of the coupé and walked
toward the door resolved itself into the words “Oh, my God!” uttered
over and over in a gasping moan.

“There’s some bad trouble here,” said Tom excitedly.

He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of heads into the
garage, which was lit only by a yellow light in a swinging metal
basket overhead. Then he made a harsh sound in his throat, and with a
violent thrusting movement of his powerful arms pushed his way
through.

The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation; it
was a minute before I could see anything at all. Then new arrivals
deranged the line, and Jordan and I were pushed suddenly inside.

Myrtle Wilson’s body, wrapped in a blanket, and then in another
blanket, as though she suffered from a chill in the hot night, lay on
a worktable by the wall, and Tom, with his back to us, was bending
over it, motionless. Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking
down names with much sweat and correction in a little book. At first I
couldn’t find the source of the high, groaning words that echoed
clamorously through the bare garage—then I saw Wilson standing on the
raised threshold of his office, swaying back and forth and holding to
the doorposts with both hands. Some man was talking to him in a low
voice and attempting, from time to time, to lay a hand on his
shoulder, but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would drop slowly
from the swinging light to the laden table by the wall, and then jerk
back to the light again, and he gave out incessantly his high,
horrible call:

“Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od!”

Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and, after staring around
the garage with glazed eyes, addressed a mumbled incoherent remark to
the policeman.

“M-a-v—” the policeman was saying, “—o—”

“No, r—” corrected the man, “M-a-v-r-o—”

“Listen to me!” muttered Tom fiercely.

“r—” said the policeman, “o—”

“g—”

“g—” He looked up as Tom’s broad hand fell sharply on his shoulder.
“What you want, fella?”

“What happened?—that’s what I want to know.”

“Auto hit her. Ins’antly killed.”

“Instantly killed,” repeated Tom, staring.

“She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didn’t even stopus car.”

“There was two cars,” said Michaelis, “one comin’, one goin’, see?”

“Going where?” asked the policeman keenly.

“One goin’ each way. Well, she”—his hand rose toward the blankets but
stopped halfway and fell to his side—“she ran out there an’ the one
comin’ from N’York knock right into her, goin’ thirty or forty miles
an hour.”

“What’s the name of this place here?” demanded the officer.

“Hasn’t got any name.”

A pale well-dressed negro stepped near.

“It was a yellow car,” he said, “big yellow car. New.”

“See the accident?” asked the policeman.

“No, but the car passed me down the road, going faster’n forty. Going
fifty, sixty.”

“Come here and let’s have your name. Look out now. I want to get his
name.”

Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson, swaying in
the office door, for suddenly a new theme found voice among his
grasping cries:

“You don’t have to tell me what kind of car it was! I know what kind
of car it was!”

Watching Tom, I saw the wad of muscle back of his shoulder tighten
under his coat. He walked quickly over to Wilson and, standing in
front of him, seized him firmly by the upper arms.

“You’ve got to pull yourself together,” he said with soothing
gruffness.

Wilson’s eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes and then
would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom held him upright.

“Listen,” said Tom, shaking him a little. “I just got here a minute
ago, from New York. I was bringing you that coupé we’ve been talking
about. That yellow car I was driving this afternoon wasn’t mine—do you
hear? I haven’t seen it all afternoon.”

Only the negro and I were near enough to hear what he said, but the
policeman caught something in the tone and looked over with truculent
eyes.

“What’s all that?” he demanded.

“I’m a friend of his.” Tom turned his head but kept his hands firm on
Wilson’s body. “He says he knows the car that did it … It was a yellow
car.”

Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously at Tom.

“And what colour’s your car?”

“It’s a blue car, a coupé.”

“We’ve come straight from New York,” I said.

Someone who had been driving a little behind us confirmed this, and
the policeman turned away.

“Now, if you’ll let me have that name again correct—”

Picking up Wilson like a doll, Tom carried him into the office, set
him down in a chair, and came back.

“If somebody’ll come here and sit with him,” he snapped
authoritatively. He watched while the two men standing closest glanced
at each other and went unwillingly into the room. Then Tom shut the
door on them and came down the single step, his eyes avoiding the
table. As he passed close to me he whispered: “Let’s get out.”

Self-consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking the way, we
pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing a hurried doctor,
case in hand, who had been sent for in wild hope half an hour ago.

Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bend—then his foot came down
hard, and the coupé raced along through the night. In a little while I
heard a low husky sob, and saw that the tears were overflowing down
his face.

“The God damned coward!” he whimpered. “He didn’t even stop his car.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward us through the dark
rustling trees. Tom stopped beside the porch and looked up at the
second floor, where two windows bloomed with light among the vines.

“Daisy’s home,” he said. As we got out of the car he glanced at me and
frowned slightly.

“I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. There’s nothing we can
do tonight.”

A change had come over him, and he spoke gravely, and with decision.
As we walked across the moonlight gravel to the porch he disposed of
the situation in a few brisk phrases.

“I’ll telephone for a taxi to take you home, and while you’re waiting
you and Jordan better go in the kitchen and have them get you some
supper—if you want any.” He opened the door. “Come in.”

“No, thanks. But I’d be glad if you’d order me the taxi. I’ll wait
outside.”

Jordan put her hand on my arm.

“Won’t you come in, Nick?”

“No, thanks.”

I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But Jordan
lingered for a moment more.

“It’s only half-past nine,” she said.

I’d be damned if I’d go in; I’d had enough of all of them for one day,
and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must have seen something of
this in my expression, for she turned abruptly away and ran up the
porch steps into the house. I sat down for a few minutes with my head
in my hands, until I heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’s
voice calling a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from
the house, intending to wait by the gate.

I hadn’t gone twenty yards when I heard my name and Gatsby stepped
from between two bushes into the path. I must have felt pretty weird
by that time, because I could think of nothing except the luminosity
of his pink suit under the moon.

“What are you doing?” I inquired.

“Just standing here, old sport.”

Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I knew he was
going to rob the house in a moment; I wouldn’t have been surprised to
see sinister faces, the faces of “Wolfshiem’s people,” behind him in
the dark shrubbery.

“Did you see any trouble on the road?” he asked after a minute.

“Yes.”

He hesitated.

“Was she killed?”

“Yes.”

“I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. It’s better that the shock
should all come at once. She stood it pretty well.”

He spoke as if Daisy’s reaction was the only thing that mattered.

“I got to West Egg by a side road,” he went on, “and left the car in
my garage. I don’t think anybody saw us, but of course I can’t be
sure.”

I disliked him so much by this time that I didn’t find it necessary to
tell him he was wrong.

“Who was the woman?” he inquired.

“Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the garage. How the devil did
it happen?”

“Well, I tried to swing the wheel—” He broke off, and suddenly I
guessed at the truth.

“Was Daisy driving?”

“Yes,” he said after a moment, “but of course I’ll say I was. You see,
when we left New York she was very nervous and she thought it would
steady her to drive—and this woman rushed out at us just as we were
passing a car coming the other way. It all happened in a minute, but
it seemed to me that she wanted to speak to us, thought we were
somebody she knew. Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman toward
the other car, and then she lost her nerve and turned back. The second
my hand reached the wheel I felt the shock—it must have killed her
instantly.”

“It ripped her open—”

“Don’t tell me, old sport.” He winced. “Anyhow—Daisy stepped on it. I
tried to make her stop, but she couldn’t, so I pulled on the emergency
brake. Then she fell over into my lap and I drove on.

“She’ll be all right tomorrow,” he said presently. “I’m just going to
wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that unpleasantness
this afternoon. She’s locked herself into her room, and if he tries
any brutality she’s going to turn the light out and on again.”

“He won’t touch her,” I said. “He’s not thinking about her.”

“I don’t trust him, old sport.”

“How long are you going to wait?”

“All night, if necessary. Anyhow, till they all go to bed.”

A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose Tom found out that Daisy
had been driving. He might think he saw a connection in it—he might
think anything. I looked at the house; there were two or three bright
windows downstairs and the pink glow from Daisy’s room on the ground
floor.

“You wait here,” I said. “I’ll see if there’s any sign of a
commotion.”

I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the gravel
softly, and tiptoed up the veranda steps. The drawing-room curtains
were open, and I saw that the room was empty. Crossing the porch where
we had dined that June night three months before, I came to a small
rectangle of light which I guessed was the pantry window. The blind
was drawn, but I found a rift at the sill.

Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other at the kitchen table,
with a plate of cold fried chicken between them, and two bottles of
ale. He was talking intently across the table at her, and in his
earnestness his hand had fallen upon and covered her own. Once in a
while she looked up at him and nodded in agreement.

They weren’t happy, and neither of them had touched the chicken or the
ale—and yet they weren’t unhappy either. There was an unmistakable air
of natural intimacy about the picture, and anybody would have said
that they were conspiring together.

As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi feeling its way along the
dark road toward the house. Gatsby was waiting where I had left him in
the drive.

“Is it all quiet up there?” he asked anxiously.

“Yes, it’s all quiet.” I hesitated. “You’d better come home and get
some sleep.”

He shook his head.

“I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night, old sport.”

He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back eagerly to his
scrutiny of the house, as though my presence marred the sacredness of
the vigil. So I walked away and left him standing there in the
moonlight—watching over nothing.


                                 VIII

I couldn’t sleep all night; a foghorn was groaning incessantly on the
Sound, and I tossed half-sick between grotesque reality and savage,
frightening dreams. Toward dawn I heard a taxi go up Gatsby’s drive,
and immediately I jumped out of bed and began to dress—I felt that I
had something to tell him, something to warn him about, and morning
would be too late.

Crossing his lawn, I saw that his front door was still open and he was
leaning against a table in the hall, heavy with dejection or sleep.

“Nothing happened,” he said wanly. “I waited, and about four o’clock
she came to the window and stood there for a minute and then turned
out the light.”

His house had never seemed so enormous to me as it did that night when
we hunted through the great rooms for cigarettes. We pushed aside
curtains that were like pavilions, and felt over innumerable feet of
dark wall for electric light switches—once I tumbled with a sort of
splash upon the keys of a ghostly piano. There was an inexplicable
amount of dust everywhere, and the rooms were musty, as though they
hadn’t been aired for many days. I found the humidor on an unfamiliar
table, with two stale, dry cigarettes inside. Throwing open the French
windows of the drawing-room, we sat smoking out into the darkness.

“You ought to go away,” I said. “It’s pretty certain they’ll trace
your car.”

“Go away now, old sport?”

“Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to Montreal.”

He wouldn’t consider it. He couldn’t possibly leave Daisy until he
knew what she was going to do. He was clutching at some last hope and
I couldn’t bear to shake him free.

It was this night that he told me the strange story of his youth with
Dan Cody—told it to me because “Jay Gatsby” had broken up like glass
against Tom’s hard malice, and the long secret extravaganza was played
out. I think that he would have acknowledged anything now, without
reserve, but he wanted to talk about Daisy.

She was the first “nice” girl he had ever known. In various unrevealed
capacities he had come in contact with such people, but always with
indiscernible barbed wire between. He found her excitingly
desirable. He went to her house, at first with other officers from
Camp Taylor, then alone. It amazed him—he had never been in such a
beautiful house before. But what gave it an air of breathless
intensity, was that Daisy lived there—it was as casual a thing to her
as his tent out at camp was to him. There was a ripe mystery about it,
a hint of bedrooms upstairs more beautiful and cool than other
bedrooms, of gay and radiant activities taking place through its
corridors, and of romances that were not musty and laid away already
in lavender but fresh and breathing and redolent of this year’s
shining motorcars and of dances whose flowers were scarcely
withered. It excited him, too, that many men had already loved
Daisy—it increased her value in his eyes. He felt their presence all
about the house, pervading the air with the shades and echoes of still
vibrant emotions.

But he knew that he was in Daisy’s house by a colossal
accident. However glorious might be his future as Jay Gatsby, he was
at present a penniless young man without a past, and at any moment the
invisible cloak of his uniform might slip from his shoulders. So he
made the most of his time. He took what he could get, ravenously and
unscrupulously—eventually he took Daisy one still October night, took
her because he had no real right to touch her hand.

He might have despised himself, for he had certainly taken her under
false pretences. I don’t mean that he had traded on his phantom
millions, but he had deliberately given Daisy a sense of security; he
let her believe that he was a person from much the same strata as
herself—that he was fully able to take care of her. As a matter of
fact, he had no such facilities—he had no comfortable family standing
behind him, and he was liable at the whim of an impersonal government
to be blown anywhere about the world.

But he didn’t despise himself and it didn’t turn out as he had
imagined. He had intended, probably, to take what he could and go—but
now he found that he had committed himself to the following of a
grail. He knew that Daisy was extraordinary, but he didn’t realize
just how extraordinary a “nice” girl could be. She vanished into her
rich house, into her rich, full life, leaving Gatsby—nothing. He felt
married to her, that was all.

When they met again, two days later, it was Gatsby who was breathless,
who was, somehow, betrayed. Her porch was bright with the bought
luxury of star-shine; the wicker of the settee squeaked fashionably as
she turned toward him and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth. She
had caught a cold, and it made her voice huskier and more charming
than ever, and Gatsby was overwhelmingly aware of the youth and
mystery that wealth imprisons and preserves, of the freshness of many
clothes, and of Daisy, gleaming like silver, safe and proud above the
hot struggles of the poor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

“I can’t describe to you how surprised I was to find out I loved her,
old sport. I even hoped for a while that she’d throw me over, but she
didn’t, because she was in love with me too. She thought I knew a lot
because I knew different things from her … Well, there I was, way off
my ambitions, getting deeper in love every minute, and all of a sudden
I didn’t care. What was the use of doing great things if I could have
a better time telling her what I was going to do?”

On the last afternoon before he went abroad, he sat with Daisy in his
arms for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall day, with fire in the
room and her cheeks flushed. Now and then she moved and he changed his
arm a little, and once he kissed her dark shining hair. The afternoon
had made them tranquil for a while, as if to give them a deep memory
for the long parting the next day promised. They had never been closer
in their month of love, nor communicated more profoundly one with
another, than when she brushed silent lips against his coat’s shoulder
or when he touched the end of her fingers, gently, as though she were
asleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He did extraordinarily well in the war. He was a captain before he
went to the front, and following the Argonne battles he got his
majority and the command of the divisional machine-guns. After the
armistice he tried frantically to get home, but some complication or
misunderstanding sent him to Oxford instead. He was worried now—there
was a quality of nervous despair in Daisy’s letters. She didn’t see
why he couldn’t come. She was feeling the pressure of the world
outside, and she wanted to see him and feel his presence beside her
and be reassured that she was doing the right thing after all.

For Daisy was young and her artificial world was redolent of orchids
and pleasant, cheerful snobbery and orchestras which set the rhythm of
the year, summing up the sadness and suggestiveness of life in new
tunes. All night the saxophones wailed the hopeless comment of the
“Beale Street Blues” while a hundred pairs of golden and silver
slippers shuffled the shining dust. At the grey tea hour there were
always rooms that throbbed incessantly with this low, sweet fever,
while fresh faces drifted here and there like rose petals blown by the
sad horns around the floor.

Through this twilight universe Daisy began to move again with the
season; suddenly she was again keeping half a dozen dates a day with
half a dozen men, and drowsing asleep at dawn with the beads and
chiffon of an evening-dress tangled among dying orchids on the floor
beside her bed. And all the time something within her was crying for a
decision. She wanted her life shaped now, immediately—and the decision
must be made by some force—of love, of money, of unquestionable
practicality—that was close at hand.

That force took shape in the middle of spring with the arrival of Tom
Buchanan. There was a wholesome bulkiness about his person and his
position, and Daisy was flattered. Doubtless there was a certain
struggle and a certain relief. The letter reached Gatsby while he was
still at Oxford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was dawn now on Long Island and we went about opening the rest of
the windows downstairs, filling the house with grey-turning,
gold-turning light. The shadow of a tree fell abruptly across the dew
and ghostly birds began to sing among the blue leaves. There was a
slow, pleasant movement in the air, scarcely a wind, promising a cool,
lovely day.

“I don’t think she ever loved him.” Gatsby turned around from a window
and looked at me challengingly. “You must remember, old sport, she was
very excited this afternoon. He told her those things in a way that
frightened her—that made it look as if I was some kind of cheap
sharper. And the result was she hardly knew what she was saying.”

He sat down gloomily.

“Of course she might have loved him just for a minute, when they were
first married—and loved me more even then, do you see?”

Suddenly he came out with a curious remark.

“In any case,” he said, “it was just personal.”

What could you make of that, except to suspect some intensity in his
conception of the affair that couldn’t be measured?

He came back from France when Tom and Daisy were still on their
wedding trip, and made a miserable but irresistible journey to
Louisville on the last of his army pay. He stayed there a week,
walking the streets where their footsteps had clicked together through
the November night and revisiting the out-of-the-way places to which
they had driven in her white car. Just as Daisy’s house had always
seemed to him more mysterious and gay than other houses, so his idea
of the city itself, even though she was gone from it, was pervaded
with a melancholy beauty.

He left feeling that if he had searched harder, he might have found
her—that he was leaving her behind. The day-coach—he was penniless
now—was hot. He went out to the open vestibule and sat down on a
folding-chair, and the station slid away and the backs of unfamiliar
buildings moved by. Then out into the spring fields, where a yellow
trolley raced them for a minute with people in it who might once have
seen the pale magic of her face along the casual street.

The track curved and now it was going away from the sun, which, as it
sank lower, seemed to spread itself in benediction over the vanishing
city where she had drawn her breath. He stretched out his hand
desperately as if to snatch only a wisp of air, to save a fragment of
the spot that she had made lovely for him. But it was all going by too
fast now for his blurred eyes and he knew that he had lost that part
of it, the freshest and the best, forever.

It was nine o’clock when we finished breakfast and went out on the
porch. The night had made a sharp difference in the weather and there
was an autumn flavour in the air. The gardener, the last one of
Gatsby’s former servants, came to the foot of the steps.

“I’m going to drain the pool today, Mr. Gatsby. Leaves’ll start
falling pretty soon, and then there’s always trouble with the pipes.”

“Don’t do it today,” Gatsby answered. He turned to me apologetically.
“You know, old sport, I’ve never used that pool all summer?”

I looked at my watch and stood up.

“Twelve minutes to my train.”

I didn’t want to go to the city. I wasn’t worth a decent stroke of
work, but it was more than that—I didn’t want to leave Gatsby. I
missed that train, and then another, before I could get myself away.

“I’ll call you up,” I said finally.

“Do, old sport.”

“I’ll call you about noon.”

We walked slowly down the steps.

“I suppose Daisy’ll call too.” He looked at me anxiously, as if he
hoped I’d corroborate this.

“I suppose so.”

“Well, goodbye.”

We shook hands and I started away. Just before I reached the hedge I
remembered something and turned around.

“They’re a rotten crowd,” I shouted across the lawn. “You’re worth the
whole damn bunch put together.”

I’ve always been glad I said that. It was the only compliment I ever
gave him, because I disapproved of him from beginning to end. First he
nodded politely, and then his face broke into that radiant and
understanding smile, as if we’d been in ecstatic cahoots on that fact
all the time. His gorgeous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot of
colour against the white steps, and I thought of the night when I
first came to his ancestral home, three months before. The lawn and
drive had been crowded with the faces of those who guessed at his
corruption—and he had stood on those steps, concealing his
incorruptible dream, as he waved them goodbye.

I thanked him for his hospitality. We were always thanking him for
that—I and the others.

“Goodbye,” I called. “I enjoyed breakfast, Gatsby.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Up in the city, I tried for a while to list the quotations on an
interminable amount of stock, then I fell asleep in my swivel-chair.
Just before noon the phone woke me, and I started up with sweat
breaking out on my forehead. It was Jordan Baker; she often called me
up at this hour because the uncertainty of her own movements between
hotels and clubs and private houses made her hard to find in any other
way. Usually her voice came over the wire as something fresh and cool,
as if a divot from a green golf-links had come sailing in at the
office window, but this morning it seemed harsh and dry.

“I’ve left Daisy’s house,” she said. “I’m at Hempstead, and I’m going
down to Southampton this afternoon.”

Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisy’s house, but the act
annoyed me, and her next remark made me rigid.

“You weren’t so nice to me last night.”

“How could it have mattered then?”

Silence for a moment. Then:

“However—I want to see you.”

“I want to see you, too.”

“Suppose I don’t go to Southampton, and come into town this
afternoon?”

“No—I don’t think this afternoon.”

“Very well.”

“It’s impossible this afternoon. Various—”

We talked like that for a while, and then abruptly we weren’t talking
any longer. I don’t know which of us hung up with a sharp click, but I
know I didn’t care. I couldn’t have talked to her across a tea-table
that day if I never talked to her again in this world.

I called Gatsby’s house a few minutes later, but the line was busy. I
tried four times; finally an exasperated central told me the wire was
being kept open for long distance from Detroit. Taking out my
timetable, I drew a small circle around the three-fifty train. Then I
leaned back in my chair and tried to think. It was just noon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When I passed the ash-heaps on the train that morning I had crossed
deliberately to the other side of the car. I supposed there’d be a
curious crowd around there all day with little boys searching for dark
spots in the dust, and some garrulous man telling over and over what
had happened, until it became less and less real even to him and he
could tell it no longer, and Myrtle Wilson’s tragic achievement was
forgotten. Now I want to go back a little and tell what happened at
the garage after we left there the night before.

They had difficulty in locating the sister, Catherine. She must have
broken her rule against drinking that night, for when she arrived she
was stupid with liquor and unable to understand that the ambulance had
already gone to Flushing. When they convinced her of this, she
immediately fainted, as if that was the intolerable part of the
affair. Someone, kind or curious, took her in his car and drove her in
the wake of her sister’s body.

Until long after midnight a changing crowd lapped up against the front
of the garage, while George Wilson rocked himself back and forth on
the couch inside. For a while the door of the office was open, and
everyone who came into the garage glanced irresistibly through it.
Finally someone said it was a shame, and closed the door. Michaelis
and several other men were with him; first, four or five men, later
two or three men. Still later Michaelis had to ask the last stranger
to wait there fifteen minutes longer, while he went back to his own
place and made a pot of coffee. After that, he stayed there alone with
Wilson until dawn.

About three o’clock the quality of Wilson’s incoherent muttering
changed—he grew quieter and began to talk about the yellow car. He
announced that he had a way of finding out whom the yellow car
belonged to, and then he blurted out that a couple of months ago his
wife had come from the city with her face bruised and her nose
swollen.

But when he heard himself say this, he flinched and began to cry “Oh,
my God!” again in his groaning voice. Michaelis made a clumsy attempt
to distract him.

“How long have you been married, George? Come on there, try and sit
still a minute, and answer my question. How long have you been
married?”

“Twelve years.”

“Ever had any children? Come on, George, sit still—I asked you a
question. Did you ever have any children?”

The hard brown beetles kept thudding against the dull light, and
whenever Michaelis heard a car go tearing along the road outside it
sounded to him like the car that hadn’t stopped a few hours before.
He didn’t like to go into the garage, because the work bench was
stained where the body had been lying, so he moved uncomfortably
around the office—he knew every object in it before morning—and from
time to time sat down beside Wilson trying to keep him more quiet.

“Have you got a church you go to sometimes, George? Maybe even if you
haven’t been there for a long time? Maybe I could call up the church
and get a priest to come over and he could talk to you, see?”

“Don’t belong to any.”

“You ought to have a church, George, for times like this. You must
have gone to church once. Didn’t you get married in a church? Listen,
George, listen to me. Didn’t you get married in a church?”

“That was a long time ago.”

The effort of answering broke the rhythm of his rocking—for a moment
he was silent. Then the same half-knowing, half-bewildered look came
back into his faded eyes.

“Look in the drawer there,” he said, pointing at the desk.

“Which drawer?”

“That drawer—that one.”

Michaelis opened the drawer nearest his hand. There was nothing in it
but a small, expensive dog-leash, made of leather and braided
silver. It was apparently new.

“This?” he inquired, holding it up.

Wilson stared and nodded.

“I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried to tell me about it, but I
knew it was something funny.”

“You mean your wife bought it?”

“She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her bureau.”

Michaelis didn’t see anything odd in that, and he gave Wilson a dozen
reasons why his wife might have bought the dog-leash. But conceivably
Wilson had heard some of these same explanations before, from Myrtle,
because he began saying “Oh, my God!” again in a whisper—his comforter
left several explanations in the air.

“Then he killed her,” said Wilson. His mouth dropped open suddenly.

“Who did?”

“I have a way of finding out.”

“You’re morbid, George,” said his friend. “This has been a strain to
you and you don’t know what you’re saying. You’d better try and sit
quiet till morning.”

“He murdered her.”

“It was an accident, George.”

Wilson shook his head. His eyes narrowed and his mouth widened
slightly with the ghost of a superior “Hm!”

“I know,” he said definitely. “I’m one of these trusting fellas and I
don’t think any harm to nobody, but when I get to know a thing I know
it. It was the man in that car. She ran out to speak to him and he
wouldn’t stop.”

Michaelis had seen this too, but it hadn’t occurred to him that there
was any special significance in it. He believed that Mrs. Wilson had
been running away from her husband, rather than trying to stop any
particular car.

“How could she of been like that?”

“She’s a deep one,” said Wilson, as if that answered the question.
“Ah-h-h—”

He began to rock again, and Michaelis stood twisting the leash in his
hand.

“Maybe you got some friend that I could telephone for, George?”

This was a forlorn hope—he was almost sure that Wilson had no friend:
there was not enough of him for his wife. He was glad a little later
when he noticed a change in the room, a blue quickening by the window,
and realized that dawn wasn’t far off. About five o’clock it was blue
enough outside to snap off the light.

Wilson’s glazed eyes turned out to the ash-heaps, where small grey
clouds took on fantastic shapes and scurried here and there in the
faint dawn wind.

“I spoke to her,” he muttered, after a long silence. “I told her she
might fool me but she couldn’t fool God. I took her to the
window”—with an effort he got up and walked to the rear window and
leaned with his face pressed against it—“and I said ‘God knows what
you’ve been doing, everything you’ve been doing. You may fool me, but
you can’t fool God!’ ”

Standing behind him, Michaelis saw with a shock that he was looking at
the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg, which had just emerged, pale and
enormous, from the dissolving night.

“God sees everything,” repeated Wilson.

“That’s an advertisement,” Michaelis assured him. Something made him
turn away from the window and look back into the room. But Wilson
stood there a long time, his face close to the window pane, nodding
into the twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

By six o’clock Michaelis was worn out, and grateful for the sound of a
car stopping outside. It was one of the watchers of the night before
who had promised to come back, so he cooked breakfast for three, which
he and the other man ate together. Wilson was quieter now, and
Michaelis went home to sleep; when he awoke four hours later and
hurried back to the garage, Wilson was gone.

His movements—he was on foot all the time—were afterward traced to
Port Roosevelt and then to Gad’s Hill, where he bought a sandwich that
he didn’t eat, and a cup of coffee. He must have been tired and
walking slowly, for he didn’t reach Gad’s Hill until noon. Thus far
there was no difficulty in accounting for his time—there were boys who
had seen a man “acting sort of crazy,” and motorists at whom he stared
oddly from the side of the road. Then for three hours he disappeared
from view. The police, on the strength of what he said to Michaelis,
that he “had a way of finding out,” supposed that he spent that time
going from garage to garage thereabout, inquiring for a yellow car. On
the other hand, no garage man who had seen him ever came forward, and
perhaps he had an easier, surer way of finding out what he wanted to
know. By half-past two he was in West Egg, where he asked someone the
way to Gatsby’s house. So by that time he knew Gatsby’s name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At two o’clock Gatsby put on his bathing-suit and left word with the
butler that if anyone phoned word was to be brought to him at the
pool. He stopped at the garage for a pneumatic mattress that had
amused his guests during the summer, and the chauffeur helped him to
pump it up. Then he gave instructions that the open car wasn’t to be
taken out under any circumstances—and this was strange, because the
front right fender needed repair.

Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started for the pool. Once he
stopped and shifted it a little, and the chauffeur asked him if he
needed help, but he shook his head and in a moment disappeared among
the yellowing trees.

No telephone message arrived, but the butler went without his sleep
and waited for it until four o’clock—until long after there was anyone
to give it to if it came. I have an idea that Gatsby himself didn’t
believe it would come, and perhaps he no longer cared. If that was
true he must have felt that he had lost the old warm world, paid a
high price for living too long with a single dream. He must have
looked up at an unfamiliar sky through frightening leaves and shivered
as he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw the sunlight
was upon the scarcely created grass. A new world, material without
being real, where poor ghosts, breathing dreams like air, drifted
fortuitously about … like that ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward
him through the amorphous trees.

The chauffeur—he was one of Wolfshiem’s protégés—heard the
shots—afterwards he could only say that he hadn’t thought anything
much about them. I drove from the station directly to Gatsby’s house
and my rushing anxiously up the front steps was the first thing that
alarmed anyone. But they knew then, I firmly believe. With scarcely a
word said, four of us, the chauffeur, butler, gardener, and I hurried
down to the pool.

There was a faint, barely perceptible movement of the water as the
fresh flow from one end urged its way toward the drain at the other.
With little ripples that were hardly the shadows of waves, the laden
mattress moved irregularly down the pool. A small gust of wind that
scarcely corrugated the surface was enough to disturb its accidental
course with its accidental burden. The touch of a cluster of leaves
revolved it slowly, tracing, like the leg of transit, a thin red
circle in the water.

It was after we started with Gatsby toward the house that the gardener
saw Wilson’s body a little way off in the grass, and the holocaust was
complete.


                                  IX

After two years I remember the rest of that day, and that night and
the next day, only as an endless drill of police and photographers and
newspaper men in and out of Gatsby’s front door. A rope stretched
across the main gate and a policeman by it kept out the curious, but
little boys soon discovered that they could enter through my yard, and
there were always a few of them clustered open-mouthed about the
pool. Someone with a positive manner, perhaps a detective, used the
expression “madman” as he bent over Wilson’s body that afternoon, and
the adventitious authority of his voice set the key for the newspaper
reports next morning.

Most of those reports were a nightmare—grotesque, circumstantial,
eager, and untrue. When Michaelis’s testimony at the inquest brought
to light Wilson’s suspicions of his wife I thought the whole tale
would shortly be served up in racy pasquinade—but Catherine, who might
have said anything, didn’t say a word. She showed a surprising amount
of character about it too—looked at the coroner with determined eyes
under that corrected brow of hers, and swore that her sister had never
seen Gatsby, that her sister was completely happy with her husband,
that her sister had been into no mischief whatever. She convinced
herself of it, and cried into her handkerchief, as if the very
suggestion was more than she could endure. So Wilson was reduced to a
man “deranged by grief” in order that the case might remain in its
simplest form. And it rested there.

But all this part of it seemed remote and unessential. I found myself
on Gatsby’s side, and alone. From the moment I telephoned news of the
catastrophe to West Egg village, every surmise about him, and every
practical question, was referred to me. At first I was surprised and
confused; then, as he lay in his house and didn’t move or breathe or
speak, hour upon hour, it grew upon me that I was responsible, because
no one else was interested—interested, I mean, with that intense
personal interest to which everyone has some vague right at the end.

I called up Daisy half an hour after we found him, called her
instinctively and without hesitation. But she and Tom had gone away
early that afternoon, and taken baggage with them.

“Left no address?”

“No.”

“Say when they’d be back?”

“No.”

“Any idea where they are? How I could reach them?”

“I don’t know. Can’t say.”

I wanted to get somebody for him. I wanted to go into the room where
he lay and reassure him: “I’ll get somebody for you, Gatsby. Don’t
worry. Just trust me and I’ll get somebody for you—”

Meyer Wolfshiem’s name wasn’t in the phone book. The butler gave me
his office address on Broadway, and I called Information, but by the
time I had the number it was long after five, and no one answered the
phone.

“Will you ring again?”

“I’ve rung three times.”

“It’s very important.”

“Sorry. I’m afraid no one’s there.”

I went back to the drawing-room and thought for an instant that they
were chance visitors, all these official people who suddenly filled
it. But, though they drew back the sheet and looked at Gatsby with
shocked eyes, his protest continued in my brain:

“Look here, old sport, you’ve got to get somebody for me. You’ve got
to try hard. I can’t go through this alone.”

Someone started to ask me questions, but I broke away and going
upstairs looked hastily through the unlocked parts of his desk—he’d
never told me definitely that his parents were dead. But there was
nothing—only the picture of Dan Cody, a token of forgotten violence,
staring down from the wall.

Next morning I sent the butler to New York with a letter to Wolfshiem,
which asked for information and urged him to come out on the next
train. That request seemed superfluous when I wrote it. I was sure
he’d start when he saw the newspapers, just as I was sure there’d be a
wire from Daisy before noon—but neither a wire nor Mr. Wolfshiem
arrived; no one arrived except more police and photographers and
newspaper men. When the butler brought back Wolfshiem’s answer I began
to have a feeling of defiance, of scornful solidarity between Gatsby
and me against them all.

 Dear Mr. Carraway. This has been one of the most terrible shocks of
 my life to me I hardly can believe it that it is true at all. Such a
 mad act as that man did should make us all think. I cannot come down
 now as I am tied up in some very important business and cannot get
 mixed up in this thing now. If there is anything I can do a little
 later let me know in a letter by Edgar. I hardly know where I am when
 I hear about a thing like this and am completely knocked down and
 out.

                               Yours truly

                             Meyer Wolfshiem

and then hasty addenda beneath:

 Let me know about the funeral etc do not know his family at all.

When the phone rang that afternoon and Long Distance said Chicago was
calling I thought this would be Daisy at last. But the connection came
through as a man’s voice, very thin and far away.

“This is Slagle speaking …”

“Yes?” The name was unfamiliar.

“Hell of a note, isn’t it? Get my wire?”

“There haven’t been any wires.”

“Young Parke’s in trouble,” he said rapidly. “They picked him up when
he handed the bonds over the counter. They got a circular from New
York giving ’em the numbers just five minutes before. What d’you know
about that, hey? You never can tell in these hick towns—”

“Hello!” I interrupted breathlessly. “Look here—this isn’t Mr.
Gatsby. Mr. Gatsby’s dead.”

There was a long silence on the other end of the wire, followed by an
exclamation … then a quick squawk as the connection was broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I think it was on the third day that a telegram signed Henry C. Gatz
arrived from a town in Minnesota. It said only that the sender was
leaving immediately and to postpone the funeral until he came.

It was Gatsby’s father, a solemn old man, very helpless and dismayed,
bundled up in a long cheap ulster against the warm September day. His
eyes leaked continuously with excitement, and when I took the bag and
umbrella from his hands he began to pull so incessantly at his sparse
grey beard that I had difficulty in getting off his coat. He was on
the point of collapse, so I took him into the music-room and made him
sit down while I sent for something to eat. But he wouldn’t eat, and
the glass of milk spilled from his trembling hand.

“I saw it in the Chicago newspaper,” he said. “It was all in the
Chicago newspaper. I started right away.”

“I didn’t know how to reach you.”

His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the room.

“It was a madman,” he said. “He must have been mad.”

“Wouldn’t you like some coffee?” I urged him.

“I don’t want anything. I’m all right now, Mr.—”

“Carraway.”

“Well, I’m all right now. Where have they got Jimmy?”

I took him into the drawing-room, where his son lay, and left him
there. Some little boys had come up on the steps and were looking into
the hall; when I told them who had arrived, they went reluctantly
away.

After a little while Mr. Gatz opened the door and came out, his mouth
ajar, his face flushed slightly, his eyes leaking isolated and
unpunctual tears. He had reached an age where death no longer has the
quality of ghastly surprise, and when he looked around him now for the
first time and saw the height and splendour of the hall and the great
rooms opening out from it into other rooms, his grief began to be
mixed with an awed pride. I helped him to a bedroom upstairs; while he
took off his coat and vest I told him that all arrangements had been
deferred until he came.

“I didn’t know what you’d want, Mr. Gatsby—”

“Gatz is my name.”

“—Mr. Gatz. I thought you might want to take the body West.”

He shook his head.

“Jimmy always liked it better down East. He rose up to his position in
the East. Were you a friend of my boy’s, Mr.—?”

“We were close friends.”

“He had a big future before him, you know. He was only a young man,
but he had a lot of brain power here.”

He touched his head impressively, and I nodded.

“If he’d of lived, he’d of been a great man. A man like James J.
Hill. He’d of helped build up the country.”

“That’s true,” I said, uncomfortably.

He fumbled at the embroidered coverlet, trying to take it from the
bed, and lay down stiffly—was instantly asleep.

That night an obviously frightened person called up, and demanded to
know who I was before he would give his name.

“This is Mr. Carraway,” I said.

“Oh!” He sounded relieved. “This is Klipspringer.”

I was relieved too, for that seemed to promise another friend at
Gatsby’s grave. I didn’t want it to be in the papers and draw a
sightseeing crowd, so I’d been calling up a few people myself. They
were hard to find.

“The funeral’s tomorrow,” I said. “Three o’clock, here at the house.
I wish you’d tell anybody who’d be interested.”

“Oh, I will,” he broke out hastily. “Of course I’m not likely to see
anybody, but if I do.”

His tone made me suspicious.

“Of course you’ll be there yourself.”

“Well, I’ll certainly try. What I called up about is—”

“Wait a minute,” I interrupted. “How about saying you’ll come?”

“Well, the fact is—the truth of the matter is that I’m staying with
some people up here in Greenwich, and they rather expect me to be with
them tomorrow. In fact, there’s a sort of picnic or something. Of
course I’ll do my best to get away.”

I ejaculated an unrestrained “Huh!” and he must have heard me, for he
went on nervously:

“What I called up about was a pair of shoes I left there. I wonder if
it’d be too much trouble to have the butler send them on. You see,
they’re tennis shoes, and I’m sort of helpless without them. My
address is care of B. F.—”

I didn’t hear the rest of the name, because I hung up the receiver.

After that I felt a certain shame for Gatsby—one gentleman to whom I
telephoned implied that he had got what he deserved. However, that was
my fault, for he was one of those who used to sneer most bitterly at
Gatsby on the courage of Gatsby’s liquor, and I should have known
better than to call him.

The morning of the funeral I went up to New York to see Meyer
Wolfshiem; I couldn’t seem to reach him any other way. The door that I
pushed open, on the advice of an elevator boy, was marked “The
Swastika Holding Company,” and at first there didn’t seem to be anyone
inside. But when I’d shouted “hello” several times in vain, an
argument broke out behind a partition, and presently a lovely Jewess
appeared at an interior door and scrutinized me with black hostile
eyes.

“Nobody’s in,” she said. “Mr. Wolfshiem’s gone to Chicago.”

The first part of this was obviously untrue, for someone had begun to
whistle “The Rosary,” tunelessly, inside.

“Please say that Mr. Carraway wants to see him.”

“I can’t get him back from Chicago, can I?”

At this moment a voice, unmistakably Wolfshiem’s, called “Stella!”
from the other side of the door.

“Leave your name on the desk,” she said quickly. “I’ll give it to him
when he gets back.”

“But I know he’s there.”

She took a step toward me and began to slide her hands indignantly up
and down her hips.

“You young men think you can force your way in here any time,” she
scolded. “We’re getting sickantired of it. When I say he’s in Chicago,
he’s in Chicago.”

I mentioned Gatsby.

“Oh-h!” She looked at me over again. “Will you just—What was your
name?”

She vanished. In a moment Meyer Wolfshiem stood solemnly in the
doorway, holding out both hands. He drew me into his office, remarking
in a reverent voice that it was a sad time for all of us, and offered
me a cigar.

“My memory goes back to when first I met him,” he said. “A young major
just out of the army and covered over with medals he got in the war.
He was so hard up he had to keep on wearing his uniform because he
couldn’t buy some regular clothes. First time I saw him was when he
came into Winebrenner’s poolroom at Forty-third Street and asked for a
job. He hadn’t eat anything for a couple of days. ‘Come on have some
lunch with me,’ I said. He ate more than four dollars’ worth of food
in half an hour.”

“Did you start him in business?” I inquired.

“Start him! I made him.”

“Oh.”

“I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter. I saw right
away he was a fine-appearing, gentlemanly young man, and when he told
me he was at Oggsford I knew I could use him good. I got him to join
the American Legion and he used to stand high there. Right off he did
some work for a client of mine up to Albany. We were so thick like
that in everything”—he held up two bulbous fingers—“always together.”

I wondered if this partnership had included the World’s Series
transaction in 1919.

“Now he’s dead,” I said after a moment. “You were his closest friend,
so I know you’ll want to come to his funeral this afternoon.”

“I’d like to come.”

“Well, come then.”

The hair in his nostrils quivered slightly, and as he shook his head
his eyes filled with tears.

“I can’t do it—I can’t get mixed up in it,” he said.

“There’s nothing to get mixed up in. It’s all over now.”

“When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in it in any
way. I keep out. When I was a young man it was different—if a friend
of mine died, no matter how, I stuck with them to the end. You may
think that’s sentimental, but I mean it—to the bitter end.”

I saw that for some reason of his own he was determined not to come,
so I stood up.

“Are you a college man?” he inquired suddenly.

For a moment I thought he was going to suggest a “gonnegtion,” but he
only nodded and shook my hand.

“Let us learn to show our friendship for a man when he is alive and
not after he is dead,” he suggested. “After that my own rule is to let
everything alone.”

When I left his office the sky had turned dark and I got back to West
Egg in a drizzle. After changing my clothes I went next door and found
Mr. Gatz walking up and down excitedly in the hall. His pride in his
son and in his son’s possessions was continually increasing and now he
had something to show me.

“Jimmy sent me this picture.” He took out his wallet with trembling
fingers. “Look there.”

It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the corners and dirty
with many hands. He pointed out every detail to me eagerly. “Look
there!” and then sought admiration from my eyes. He had shown it so
often that I think it was more real to him now than the house itself.

“Jimmy sent it to me. I think it’s a very pretty picture. It shows up
well.”

“Very well. Had you seen him lately?”

“He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the house I live in
now. Of course we was broke up when he run off from home, but I see
now there was a reason for it. He knew he had a big future in front of
him. And ever since he made a success he was very generous with me.”

He seemed reluctant to put away the picture, held it for another
minute, lingeringly, before my eyes. Then he returned the wallet and
pulled from his pocket a ragged old copy of a book called Hopalong
Cassidy.

“Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy. It just shows
you.”

He opened it at the back cover and turned it around for me to see. On
the last flyleaf was printed the word schedule, and the date September
12, 1906. And underneath:

    Rise from bed                                  6:00      a.m.
    Dumbell exercise and wall-scaling              6:15-6:30 ”
    Study electricity, etc.                        7:15-8:15 ”
    Work                                           8:30-4:30 p.m.
    Baseball and sports                            4:30-5:00 ”
    Practise elocution, poise and how to attain it 5:00-6:00 ”
    Study needed inventions                        7:00-9:00 ”

               General Resolves

  * No wasting time at Shafters or [a name, indecipherable]

  * No more smokeing or chewing.

  * Bath every other day

  * Read one improving book or magazine per week

  * Save $5.00 [crossed out] $3.00 per week

  * Be better to parents

“I came across this book by accident,” said the old man. “It just
shows you, don’t it?”

“It just shows you.”

“Jimmy was bound to get ahead. He always had some resolves like this
or something. Do you notice what he’s got about improving his mind? He
was always great for that. He told me I et like a hog once, and I beat
him for it.”

He was reluctant to close the book, reading each item aloud and then
looking eagerly at me. I think he rather expected me to copy down the
list for my own use.

A little before three the Lutheran minister arrived from Flushing, and
I began to look involuntarily out the windows for other cars. So did
Gatsby’s father. And as the time passed and the servants came in and
stood waiting in the hall, his eyes began to blink anxiously, and he
spoke of the rain in a worried, uncertain way. The minister glanced
several times at his watch, so I took him aside and asked him to wait
for half an hour. But it wasn’t any use. Nobody came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

About five o’clock our procession of three cars reached the cemetery
and stopped in a thick drizzle beside the gate—first a motor hearse,
horribly black and wet, then Mr. Gatz and the minister and me in the
limousine, and a little later four or five servants and the postman
from West Egg, in Gatsby’s station wagon, all wet to the skin. As we
started through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and then
the sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy ground. I
looked around. It was the man with owl-eyed glasses whom I had found
marvelling over Gatsby’s books in the library one night three months
before.

I’d never seen him since then. I don’t know how he knew about the
funeral, or even his name. The rain poured down his thick glasses, and
he took them off and wiped them to see the protecting canvas unrolled
from Gatsby’s grave.

I tried to think about Gatsby then for a moment, but he was already
too far away, and I could only remember, without resentment, that
Daisy hadn’t sent a message or a flower. Dimly I heard someone murmur
“Blessed are the dead that the rain falls on,” and then the owl-eyed
man said “Amen to that,” in a brave voice.

We straggled down quickly through the rain to the cars. Owl-eyes spoke
to me by the gate.

“I couldn’t get to the house,” he remarked.

“Neither could anybody else.”

“Go on!” He started. “Why, my God! they used to go there by the
hundreds.”

He took off his glasses and wiped them again, outside and in.

“The poor son-of-a-bitch,” he said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of my most vivid memories is of coming back West from prep school
and later from college at Christmas time. Those who went farther than
Chicago would gather in the old dim Union Station at six o’clock of a
December evening, with a few Chicago friends, already caught up into
their own holiday gaieties, to bid them a hasty goodbye. I remember
the fur coats of the girls returning from Miss This-or-That’s and the
chatter of frozen breath and the hands waving overhead as we caught
sight of old acquaintances, and the matchings of invitations: “Are you
going to the Ordways’? the Herseys’? the Schultzes’?” and the long
green tickets clasped tight in our gloved hands. And last the murky
yellow cars of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul railroad looking
cheerful as Christmas itself on the tracks beside the gate.

When we pulled out into the winter night and the real snow, our snow,
began to stretch out beside us and twinkle against the windows, and
the dim lights of small Wisconsin stations moved by, a sharp wild
brace came suddenly into the air. We drew in deep breaths of it as we
walked back from dinner through the cold vestibules, unutterably aware
of our identity with this country for one strange hour, before we
melted indistinguishably into it again.

That’s my Middle West—not the wheat or the prairies or the lost Swede
towns, but the thrilling returning trains of my youth, and the street
lamps and sleigh bells in the frosty dark and the shadows of holly
wreaths thrown by lighted windows on the snow. I am part of that, a
little solemn with the feel of those long winters, a little complacent
from growing up in the Carraway house in a city where dwellings are
still called through decades by a family’s name. I see now that this
has been a story of the West, after all—Tom and Gatsby, Daisy and
Jordan and I, were all Westerners, and perhaps we possessed some
deficiency in common which made us subtly unadaptable to Eastern life.

Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware
of its superiority to the bored, sprawling, swollen towns beyond the
Ohio, with their interminable inquisitions which spared only the
children and the very old—even then it had always for me a quality of
distortion. West Egg, especially, still figures in my more fantastic
dreams. I see it as a night scene by El Greco: a hundred houses, at
once conventional and grotesque, crouching under a sullen, overhanging
sky and a lustreless moon. In the foreground four solemn men in dress
suits are walking along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies a
drunken woman in a white evening dress. Her hand, which dangles over
the side, sparkles cold with jewels. Gravely the men turn in at a
house—the wrong house. But no one knows the woman’s name, and no one
cares.

After Gatsby’s death the East was haunted for me like that, distorted
beyond my eyes’ power of correction. So when the blue smoke of brittle
leaves was in the air and the wind blew the wet laundry stiff on the
line I decided to come back home.

There was one thing to be done before I left, an awkward, unpleasant
thing that perhaps had better have been let alone. But I wanted to
leave things in order and not just trust that obliging and indifferent
sea to sweep my refuse away. I saw Jordan Baker and talked over and
around what had happened to us together, and what had happened
afterward to me, and she lay perfectly still, listening, in a big
chair.

She was dressed to play golf, and I remember thinking she looked like
a good illustration, her chin raised a little jauntily, her hair the
colour of an autumn leaf, her face the same brown tint as the
fingerless glove on her knee. When I had finished she told me without
comment that she was engaged to another man. I doubted that, though
there were several she could have married at a nod of her head, but I
pretended to be surprised. For just a minute I wondered if I wasn’t
making a mistake, then I thought it all over again quickly and got up
to say goodbye.

“Nevertheless you did throw me over,” said Jordan suddenly. “You threw
me over on the telephone. I don’t give a damn about you now, but it
was a new experience for me, and I felt a little dizzy for a while.”

We shook hands.

“Oh, and do you remember”—she added—“a conversation we had once about
driving a car?”

“Why—not exactly.”

“You said a bad driver was only safe until she met another bad driver?
Well, I met another bad driver, didn’t I? I mean it was careless of me
to make such a wrong guess. I thought you were rather an honest,
straightforward person. I thought it was your secret pride.”

“I’m thirty,” I said. “I’m five years too old to lie to myself and
call it honour.”

She didn’t answer. Angry, and half in love with her, and tremendously
sorry, I turned away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One afternoon late in October I saw Tom Buchanan. He was walking ahead
of me along Fifth Avenue in his alert, aggressive way, his hands out a
little from his body as if to fight off interference, his head moving
sharply here and there, adapting itself to his restless eyes. Just as
I slowed up to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning into
the windows of a jewellery store. Suddenly he saw me and walked back,
holding out his hand.

“What’s the matter, Nick? Do you object to shaking hands with me?”

“Yes. You know what I think of you.”

“You’re crazy, Nick,” he said quickly. “Crazy as hell. I don’t know
what’s the matter with you.”

“Tom,” I inquired, “what did you say to Wilson that afternoon?”

He stared at me without a word, and I knew I had guessed right about
those missing hours. I started to turn away, but he took a step after
me and grabbed my arm.

“I told him the truth,” he said. “He came to the door while we were
getting ready to leave, and when I sent down word that we weren’t in
he tried to force his way upstairs. He was crazy enough to kill me if
I hadn’t told him who owned the car. His hand was on a revolver in his
pocket every minute he was in the house—” He broke off defiantly.
“What if I did tell him? That fellow had it coming to him. He threw
dust into your eyes just like he did in Daisy’s, but he was a tough
one. He ran over Myrtle like you’d run over a dog and never even
stopped his car.”

There was nothing I could say, except the one unutterable fact that it
wasn’t true.

“And if you think I didn’t have my share of suffering—look here, when
I went to give up that flat and saw that damn box of dog biscuits
sitting there on the sideboard, I sat down and cried like a baby. By
God it was awful—”

I couldn’t forgive him or like him, but I saw that what he had done
was, to him, entirely justified. It was all very careless and
confused. They were careless people, Tom and Daisy—they smashed up
things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their
vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let
other people clean up the mess they had made …

I shook hands with him; it seemed silly not to, for I felt suddenly as
though I were talking to a child. Then he went into the jewellery
store to buy a pearl necklace—or perhaps only a pair of cuff
buttons—rid of my provincial squeamishness forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gatsby’s house was still empty when I left—the grass on his lawn had
grown as long as mine. One of the taxi drivers in the village never
took a fare past the entrance gate without stopping for a minute and
pointing inside; perhaps it was he who drove Daisy and Gatsby over to
East Egg the night of the accident, and perhaps he had made a story
about it all his own. I didn’t want to hear it and I avoided him when
I got off the train.

I spent my Saturday nights in New York because those gleaming,
dazzling parties of his were with me so vividly that I could still
hear the music and the laughter, faint and incessant, from his garden,
and the cars going up and down his drive. One night I did hear a
material car there, and saw its lights stop at his front steps. But I
didn’t investigate. Probably it was some final guest who had been away
at the ends of the earth and didn’t know that the party was over.

On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold to the grocer,
I went over and looked at that huge incoherent failure of a house once
more. On the white steps an obscene word, scrawled by some boy with a
piece of brick, stood out clearly in the moonlight, and I erased it,
drawing my shoe raspingly along the stone. Then I wandered down to the
beach and sprawled out on the sand.

Most of the big shore places were closed now and there were hardly any
lights except the shadowy, moving glow of a ferryboat across the
Sound. And as the moon rose higher the inessential houses began to
melt away until gradually I became aware of the old island here that
flowered once for Dutch sailors’ eyes—a fresh, green breast of the new
world. Its vanished trees, the trees that had made way for Gatsby’s
house, had once pandered in whispers to the last and greatest of all
human dreams; for a transitory enchanted moment man must have held his
breath in the presence of this continent, compelled into an aesthetic
contemplation he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the
last time in history with something commensurate to his capacity for
wonder.

And as I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world, I thought of
Gatsby’s wonder when he first picked out the green light at the end of
Daisy’s dock. He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dream
must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it. He
did not know that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that
vast obscurity beyond the city, where the dark fields of the republic
rolled on under the night.

Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgastic future that year by
year recedes before us. It eluded us then, but that’s no
matter—tomorrow we will run faster, stretch out our arms further … And
one fine morning—

So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into
the past.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT GATSBY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Doll's House : a play
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Doll's House : a play

Author: Henrik Ibsen

Release date: March 1, 2001 [eBook #2542]
                Most recently updated: March 27, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Martin Adamson and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DOLL'S HOUSE : A PLAY ***




A Doll’s House

by Henrik Ibsen


Contents

 ACT I.
 ACT II.
 ACT III.


 DRAMATIS PERSONAE

Torvald Helmer.
Nora, his wife.
Doctor Rank.
Mrs Linde.
Nils Krogstad.
Helmer’s three young children.
Anne, their nurse.
A Housemaid.
A Porter.

_[The action takes place in Helmer’s house.]_




A DOLL’S HOUSE




ACT I


_[SCENE.—A room furnished comfortably and tastefully, but not
extravagantly. At the back, a door to the right leads to the
entrance-hall, another to the left leads to Helmer’s study. Between the
doors stands a piano. In the middle of the left-hand wall is a door,
and beyond it a window. Near the window are a round table, arm-chairs
and a small sofa. In the right-hand wall, at the farther end, another
door; and on the same side, nearer the footlights, a stove, two easy
chairs and a rocking-chair; between the stove and the door, a small
table. Engravings on the walls; a cabinet with china and other small
objects; a small book-case with well-bound books. The floors are
carpeted, and a fire burns in the stove. It is winter._

_A bell rings in the hall; shortly afterwards the door is heard to
open. Enter NORA, humming a tune and in high spirits. She is in outdoor
dress and carries a number of parcels; these she lays on the table to
the right. She leaves the outer door open after her, and through it is
seen a PORTER who is carrying a Christmas Tree and a basket, which he
gives to the MAID who has opened the door.]_

NORA.
Hide the Christmas Tree carefully, Helen. Be sure the children do not
see it until this evening, when it is dressed. _[To the PORTER, taking
out her purse.]_ How much?

PORTER.
Sixpence.

NORA.
There is a shilling. No, keep the change. _[The PORTER thanks her, and
goes out. NORA shuts the door. She is laughing to herself, as she takes
off her hat and coat. She takes a packet of macaroons from her pocket
and eats one or two; then goes cautiously to her husband’s door and
listens.]_ Yes, he is in. _[Still humming, she goes to the table on the
right.]_

HELMER.
_[calls out from his room]_. Is that my little lark twittering out
there?

NORA.
_[busy opening some of the parcels]_. Yes, it is!

HELMER.
Is it my little squirrel bustling about?

NORA.
Yes!

HELMER.
When did my squirrel come home?

NORA.
Just now. _[Puts the bag of macaroons into her pocket and wipes her
mouth.]_ Come in here, Torvald, and see what I have bought.

HELMER.
Don’t disturb me. _[A little later, he opens the door and looks into
the room, pen in hand.]_ Bought, did you say? All these things? Has my
little spendthrift been wasting money again?

NORA.
Yes but, Torvald, this year we really can let ourselves go a little.
This is the first Christmas that we have not needed to economise.

HELMER.
Still, you know, we can’t spend money recklessly.

NORA.
Yes, Torvald, we may be a wee bit more reckless now, mayn’t we? Just a
tiny wee bit! You are going to have a big salary and earn lots and lots
of money.

HELMER.
Yes, after the New Year; but then it will be a whole quarter before the
salary is due.

NORA.
Pooh! we can borrow until then.

HELMER.
Nora! _[Goes up to her and takes her playfully by the ear.]_ The same
little featherhead! Suppose, now, that I borrowed fifty pounds today,
and you spent it all in the Christmas week, and then on New Year’s Eve
a slate fell on my head and killed me, and—

NORA.
_[putting her hands over his mouth]_. Oh! don’t say such horrid things.

HELMER.
Still, suppose that happened,—what then?

NORA.
If that were to happen, I don’t suppose I should care whether I owed
money or not.

HELMER.
Yes, but what about the people who had lent it?

NORA.
They? Who would bother about them? I should not know who they were.

HELMER.
That is like a woman! But seriously, Nora, you know what I think about
that. No debt, no borrowing. There can be no freedom or beauty about a
home life that depends on borrowing and debt. We two have kept bravely
on the straight road so far, and we will go on the same way for the
short time longer that there need be any struggle.

NORA.
_[moving towards the stove]_. As you please, Torvald.

HELMER.
_[following her]_. Come, come, my little skylark must not droop her
wings. What is this! Is my little squirrel out of temper? _[Taking out
his purse.]_ Nora, what do you think I have got here?

NORA.
_[turning round quickly]_. Money!

HELMER.
There you are. _[Gives her some money.]_ Do you think I don’t know what
a lot is wanted for housekeeping at Christmas-time?

NORA.
_[counting]_. Ten shillings—a pound—two pounds! Thank you, thank you,
Torvald; that will keep me going for a long time.

HELMER.
Indeed it must.

NORA.
Yes, yes, it will. But come here and let me show you what I have
bought. And all so cheap! Look, here is a new suit for Ivar, and a
sword; and a horse and a trumpet for Bob; and a doll and dolly’s
bedstead for Emmy,—they are very plain, but anyway she will soon break
them in pieces. And here are dress-lengths and handkerchiefs for the
maids; old Anne ought really to have something better.

HELMER.
And what is in this parcel?

NORA.
_[crying out]_. No, no! you mustn’t see that until this evening.

HELMER.
Very well. But now tell me, you extravagant little person, what would
you like for yourself?

NORA.
For myself? Oh, I am sure I don’t want anything.

HELMER.
Yes, but you must. Tell me something reasonable that you would
particularly like to have.

NORA.
No, I really can’t think of anything—unless, Torvald—

HELMER.
Well?

NORA.
_[playing with his coat buttons, and without raising her eyes to his]_.
If you really want to give me something, you might—you might—

HELMER.
Well, out with it!

NORA.
_[speaking quickly]_. You might give me money, Torvald. Only just as
much as you can afford; and then one of these days I will buy something
with it.

HELMER.
But, Nora—

NORA.
Oh, do! dear Torvald; please, please do! Then I will wrap it up in
beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the Christmas Tree. Wouldn’t that
be fun?

HELMER.
What are little people called that are always wasting money?

NORA.
Spendthrifts—I know. Let us do as you suggest, Torvald, and then I
shall have time to think what I am most in want of. That is a very
sensible plan, isn’t it?

HELMER.
_[smiling]_. Indeed it is—that is to say, if you were really to save
out of the money I give you, and then really buy something for
yourself. But if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of
unnecessary things, then I merely have to pay up again.

NORA.
Oh but, Torvald—

HELMER.
You can’t deny it, my dear little Nora. _[Puts his arm round her
waist.]_ It’s a sweet little spendthrift, but she uses up a deal of
money. One would hardly believe how expensive such little persons are!

NORA.
It’s a shame to say that. I do really save all I can.

HELMER.
_[laughing]_. That’s very true,—all you can. But you can’t save
anything!

NORA.
_[smiling quietly and happily]_. You haven’t any idea how many expenses
we skylarks and squirrels have, Torvald.

HELMER.
You are an odd little soul. Very like your father. You always find some
new way of wheedling money out of me, and, as soon as you have got it,
it seems to melt in your hands. You never know where it has gone.
Still, one must take you as you are. It is in the blood; for indeed it
is true that you can inherit these things, Nora.

NORA.
Ah, I wish I had inherited many of papa’s qualities.

HELMER.
And I would not wish you to be anything but just what you are, my sweet
little skylark. But, do you know, it strikes me that you are looking
rather—what shall I say—rather uneasy today?

NORA.
Do I?

HELMER.
You do, really. Look straight at me.

NORA.
_[looks at him]_. Well?

HELMER.
_[wagging his finger at her]_. Hasn’t Miss Sweet Tooth been breaking
rules in town today?

NORA.
No; what makes you think that?

HELMER.
Hasn’t she paid a visit to the confectioner’s?

NORA.
No, I assure you, Torvald—

HELMER.
Not been nibbling sweets?

NORA.
No, certainly not.

HELMER.
Not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?

NORA.
No, Torvald, I assure you really—

HELMER.
There, there, of course I was only joking.

NORA.
_[going to the table on the right]_. I should not think of going
against your wishes.

HELMER.
No, I am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word— _[Going up to
her.]_ Keep your little Christmas secrets to yourself, my darling. They
will all be revealed tonight when the Christmas Tree is lit, no doubt.

NORA.
Did you remember to invite Doctor Rank?

HELMER.
No. But there is no need; as a matter of course he will come to dinner
with us. However, I will ask him when he comes in this morning. I have
ordered some good wine. Nora, you can’t think how I am looking forward
to this evening.

NORA.
So am I! And how the children will enjoy themselves, Torvald!

HELMER.
It is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe appointment, and a
big enough income. It’s delightful to think of, isn’t it?

NORA.
It’s wonderful!

HELMER.
Do you remember last Christmas? For a full three weeks beforehand you
shut yourself up every evening until long after midnight, making
ornaments for the Christmas Tree, and all the other fine things that
were to be a surprise to us. It was the dullest three weeks I ever
spent!

NORA.
I didn’t find it dull.

HELMER.
_[smiling]_. But there was precious little result, Nora.

NORA.
Oh, you shouldn’t tease me about that again. How could I help the cat’s
going in and tearing everything to pieces?

HELMER.
Of course you couldn’t, poor little girl. You had the best of
intentions to please us all, and that’s the main thing. But it is a
good thing that our hard times are over.

NORA.
Yes, it is really wonderful.

HELMER.
This time I needn’t sit here and be dull all alone, and you needn’t
ruin your dear eyes and your pretty little hands—

NORA.
_[clapping her hands]_. No, Torvald, I needn’t any longer, need I! It’s
wonderfully lovely to hear you say so! _[Taking his arm.]_ Now I will
tell you how I have been thinking we ought to arrange things, Torvald.
As soon as Christmas is over—_[A bell rings in the hall.]_ There’s the
bell. _[She tidies the room a little.]_ There’s some one at the door.
What a nuisance!

HELMER.
If it is a caller, remember I am not at home.

MAID.
_[in the doorway]_. A lady to see you, ma’am,—a stranger.

NORA.
Ask her to come in.

MAID.
_[to HELMER]_. The doctor came at the same time, sir.

HELMER.
Did he go straight into my room?

MAID.
Yes, sir.

_[HELMER goes into his room. The MAID ushers in Mrs Linde, who is in
travelling dress, and shuts the door.]_

MRS LINDE.
_[in a dejected and timid voice]_. How do you do, Nora?

NORA.
_[doubtfully]_. How do you do—

MRS LINDE.
You don’t recognise me, I suppose.

NORA.
No, I don’t know—yes, to be sure, I seem to—_[Suddenly.]_ Yes!
Christine! Is it really you?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, it is I.

NORA.
Christine! To think of my not recognising you! And yet how could I—_[In
a gentle voice.]_ How you have altered, Christine!

MRS LINDE.
Yes, I have indeed. In nine, ten long years—

NORA.
Is it so long since we met? I suppose it is. The last eight years have
been a happy time for me, I can tell you. And so now you have come into
the town, and have taken this long journey in winter—that was plucky of
you.

MRS LINDE.
I arrived by steamer this morning.

NORA.
To have some fun at Christmas-time, of course. How delightful! We will
have such fun together! But take off your things. You are not cold, I
hope. _[Helps her.]_ Now we will sit down by the stove, and be cosy.
No, take this armchair; I will sit here in the rocking-chair. _[Takes
her hands.]_ Now you look like your old self again; it was only the
first moment—You are a little paler, Christine, and perhaps a little
thinner.

MRS LINDE.
And much, much older, Nora.

NORA.
Perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much. _[Stops
suddenly and speaks seriously.]_ What a thoughtless creature I am,
chattering away like this. My poor, dear Christine, do forgive me.

MRS LINDE.
What do you mean, Nora?

NORA.
_[gently]_. Poor Christine, you are a widow.

MRS LINDE.
Yes; it is three years ago now.

NORA.
Yes, I knew; I saw it in the papers. I assure you, Christine, I meant
ever so often to write to you at the time, but I always put it off and
something always prevented me.

MRS LINDE.
I quite understand, dear.

NORA.
It was very bad of me, Christine. Poor thing, how you must have
suffered. And he left you nothing?

MRS LINDE.
No.

NORA.
And no children?

MRS LINDE.
No.

NORA.
Nothing at all, then.

MRS LINDE.
Not even any sorrow or grief to live upon.

NORA.
_[looking incredulously at her]_. But, Christine, is that possible?

MRS LINDE.
_[smiles sadly and strokes her hair]_. It sometimes happens, Nora.

NORA.
So you are quite alone. How dreadfully sad that must be. I have three
lovely children. You can’t see them just now, for they are out with
their nurse. But now you must tell me all about it.

MRS LINDE.
No, no; I want to hear about you.

NORA.
No, you must begin. I mustn’t be selfish today; today I must only think
of your affairs. But there is one thing I must tell you. Do you know we
have just had a great piece of good luck?

MRS LINDE.
No, what is it?

NORA.
Just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the Bank!

MRS LINDE.
Your husband? What good luck!

NORA.
Yes, tremendous! A barrister’s profession is such an uncertain thing,
especially if he won’t undertake unsavoury cases; and naturally Torvald
has never been willing to do that, and I quite agree with him. You may
imagine how pleased we are! He is to take up his work in the Bank at
the New Year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of
commissions. For the future we can live quite differently—we can do
just as we like. I feel so relieved and so happy, Christine! It will be
splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won’t
it?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, anyhow I think it would be delightful to have what one needs.

NORA.
No, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.

MRS LINDE.
_[smiling]_. Nora, Nora, haven’t you learned sense yet? In our
schooldays you were a great spendthrift.

NORA.
_[laughing]_. Yes, that is what Torvald says now. _[Wags her finger at
her.]_ But “Nora, Nora” is not so silly as you think. We have not been
in a position for me to waste money. We have both had to work.

MRS LINDE.
You too?

NORA.
Yes; odds and ends, needlework, crotchet-work, embroidery, and that
kind of thing. _[Dropping her voice.]_ And other things as well. You
know Torvald left his office when we were married? There was no
prospect of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than
before. But during the first year he over-worked himself dreadfully.
You see, he had to make money every way he could, and he worked early
and late; but he couldn’t stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the
doctors said it was necessary for him to go south.

MRS LINDE.
You spent a whole year in Italy, didn’t you?

NORA.
Yes. It was no easy matter to get away, I can tell you. It was just
after Ivar was born; but naturally we had to go. It was a wonderfully
beautiful journey, and it saved Torvald’s life. But it cost a
tremendous lot of money, Christine.

MRS LINDE.
So I should think.

NORA.
It cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. That’s a lot, isn’t it?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the money.

NORA.
I ought to tell you that we had it from papa.

MRS LINDE.
Oh, I see. It was just about that time that he died, wasn’t it?

NORA.
Yes; and, just think of it, I couldn’t go and nurse him. I was
expecting little Ivar’s birth every day and I had my poor sick Torvald
to look after. My dear, kind father—I never saw him again, Christine.
That was the saddest time I have known since our marriage.

MRS LINDE.
I know how fond you were of him. And then you went off to Italy?

NORA.
Yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our going,
so we started a month later.

MRS LINDE.
And your husband came back quite well?

NORA.
As sound as a bell!

MRS LINDE.
But—the doctor?

NORA.
What doctor?

MRS LINDE.
I thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here just as I did,
was the doctor?

NORA.
Yes, that was Doctor Rank, but he doesn’t come here professionally. He
is our greatest friend, and comes in at least once every day. No,
Torvald has not had an hour’s illness since then, and our children are
strong and healthy and so am I. _[Jumps up and claps her hands.]_
Christine! Christine! it’s good to be alive and happy!—But how horrid
of me; I am talking of nothing but my own affairs. _[Sits on a stool
near her, and rests her arms on her knees.]_ You mustn’t be angry with
me. Tell me, is it really true that you did not love your husband? Why
did you marry him?

MRS LINDE.
My mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless, and I had to
provide for my two younger brothers; so I did not think I was justified
in refusing his offer.

NORA.
No, perhaps you were quite right. He was rich at that time, then?

MRS LINDE.
I believe he was quite well off. But his business was a precarious one;
and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was nothing left.

NORA.
And then?—

MRS LINDE.
Well, I had to turn my hand to anything I could find—first a small
shop, then a small school, and so on. The last three years have seemed
like one long working-day, with no rest. Now it is at an end, Nora. My
poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the boys do not need
me either; they have got situations and can shift for themselves.

NORA.
What a relief you must feel if—

MRS LINDE.
No, indeed; I only feel my life unspeakably empty. No one to live for
anymore. _[Gets up restlessly.]_ That was why I could not stand the
life in my little backwater any longer. I hope it may be easier here to
find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts. If only I
could have the good luck to get some regular work—office work of some
kind—

NORA.
But, Christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look tired out
now. You had far better go away to some watering-place.

MRS LINDE.
_[walking to the window]_. I have no father to give me money for a
journey, Nora.

NORA.
_[rising]_. Oh, don’t be angry with me!

MRS LINDE.
_[going up to her]_. It is you that must not be angry with me, dear.
The worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so bitter. No
one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for
chances. One must live, and so one becomes selfish. When you told me of
the happy turn your fortunes have taken—you will hardly believe it—I
was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.

NORA.
How do you mean?—Oh, I understand. You mean that perhaps Torvald could
get you something to do.

MRS LINDE.
Yes, that was what I was thinking of.

NORA.
He must, Christine. Just leave it to me; I will broach the subject very
cleverly—I will think of something that will please him very much. It
will make me so happy to be of some use to you.

MRS LINDE.
How kind you are, Nora, to be so anxious to help me! It is doubly kind
in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles of life.

NORA.
I—? I know so little of them?

MRS LINDE.
_[smiling]_. My dear! Small household cares and that sort of thing!—You
are a child, Nora.

NORA.
_[tosses her head and crosses the stage]_. You ought not to be so
superior.

MRS LINDE.
No?

NORA.
You are just like the others. They all think that I am incapable of
anything really serious—

MRS LINDE.
Come, come—

NORA.
—that I have gone through nothing in this world of cares.

MRS LINDE.
But, my dear Nora, you have just told me all your troubles.

NORA.
Pooh!—those were trifles. _[Lowering her voice.]_ I have not told you
the important thing.

MRS LINDE.
The important thing? What do you mean?

NORA.
You look down upon me altogether, Christine—but you ought not to. You
are proud, aren’t you, of having worked so hard and so long for your
mother?

MRS LINDE.
Indeed, I don’t look down on anyone. But it is true that I am both
proud and glad to think that I was privileged to make the end of my
mother’s life almost free from care.

NORA.
And you are proud to think of what you have done for your brothers?

MRS LINDE.
I think I have the right to be.

NORA.
I think so, too. But now, listen to this; I too have something to be
proud and glad of.

MRS LINDE.
I have no doubt you have. But what do you refer to?

NORA.
Speak low. Suppose Torvald were to hear! He mustn’t on any account—no
one in the world must know, Christine, except you.

MRS LINDE.
But what is it?

NORA.
Come here. _[Pulls her down on the sofa beside her.]_ Now I will show
you that I too have something to be proud and glad of. It was I who
saved Torvald’s life.

MRS LINDE.
“Saved”? How?

NORA.
I told you about our trip to Italy. Torvald would never have recovered
if he had not gone there—

MRS LINDE.
Yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.

NORA.
_[smiling]_. Yes, that is what Torvald and all the others think, but—

MRS LINDE.
But—

NORA.
Papa didn’t give us a shilling. It was I who procured the money.

MRS LINDE.
You? All that large sum?

NORA.
Two hundred and fifty pounds. What do you think of that?

MRS LINDE.
But, Nora, how could you possibly do it? Did you win a prize in the
Lottery?

NORA.
_[contemptuously]_. In the Lottery? There would have been no credit in
that.

MRS LINDE.
But where did you get it from, then? Nora _[humming and smiling with an
air of mystery]_. Hm, hm! Aha!

MRS LINDE.
Because you couldn’t have borrowed it.

NORA.
Couldn’t I? Why not?

MRS LINDE.
No, a wife cannot borrow without her husband’s consent.

NORA.
_[tossing her head]_. Oh, if it is a wife who has any head for
business—a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever—

MRS LINDE.
I don’t understand it at all, Nora.

NORA.
There is no need you should. I never said I had borrowed the money. I
may have got it some other way. _[Lies back on the sofa.]_ Perhaps I
got it from some other admirer. When anyone is as attractive as I am—

MRS LINDE.
You are a mad creature.

NORA.
Now, you know you’re full of curiosity, Christine.

MRS LINDE.
Listen to me, Nora dear. Haven’t you been a little bit imprudent?

NORA.
_[sits up straight]_. Is it imprudent to save your husband’s life?

MRS LINDE.
It seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to—

NORA.
But it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! My goodness,
can’t you understand that? It was necessary he should have no idea what
a dangerous condition he was in. It was to me that the doctors came and
said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to save him
was to live in the south. Do you suppose I didn’t try, first of all, to
get what I wanted as if it were for myself? I told him how much I
should love to travel abroad like other young wives; I tried tears and
entreaties with him; I told him that he ought to remember the condition
I was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; I even
hinted that he might raise a loan. That nearly made him angry,
Christine. He said I was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my
husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices—as I believe he
called them. Very well, I thought, you must be saved—and that was how I
came to devise a way out of the difficulty—

MRS LINDE.
And did your husband never get to know from your father that the money
had not come from him?

NORA.
No, never. Papa died just at that time. I had meant to let him into the
secret and beg him never to reveal it. But he was so ill then—alas,
there never was any need to tell him.

MRS LINDE.
And since then have you never told your secret to your husband?

NORA.
Good Heavens, no! How could you think so? A man who has such strong
opinions about these things! And besides, how painful and humiliating
it would be for Torvald, with his manly independence, to know that he
owed me anything! It would upset our mutual relations altogether; our
beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.

MRS LINDE.
Do you mean never to tell him about it?

NORA.
_[meditatively, and with a half smile]_. Yes—someday, perhaps, after
many years, when I am no longer as nice-looking as I am now. Don’t
laugh at me! I mean, of course, when Torvald is no longer as devoted to
me as he is now; when my dancing and dressing-up and reciting have
palled on him; then it may be a good thing to have something in
reserve—_[Breaking off.]_ What nonsense! That time will never come.
Now, what do you think of my great secret, Christine? Do you still
think I am of no use? I can tell you, too, that this affair has caused
me a lot of worry. It has been by no means easy for me to meet my
engagements punctually. I may tell you that there is something that is
called, in business, quarterly interest, and another thing called
payment in installments, and it is always so dreadfully difficult to
manage them. I have had to save a little here and there, where I could,
you understand. I have not been able to put aside much from my
housekeeping money, for Torvald must have a good table. I couldn’t let
my children be shabbily dressed; I have felt obliged to use up all he
gave me for them, the sweet little darlings!

MRS LINDE.
So it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of life, poor
Nora?

NORA.
Of course. Besides, I was the one responsible for it. Whenever Torvald
has given me money for new dresses and such things, I have never spent
more than half of it; I have always bought the simplest and cheapest
things. Thank Heaven, any clothes look well on me, and so Torvald has
never noticed it. But it was often very hard on me, Christine—because
it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn’t it?

MRS LINDE.
Quite so.

NORA.
Well, then I have found other ways of earning money. Last winter I was
lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so I locked myself up and
sat writing every evening until quite late at night. Many a time I was
desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to sit
there working and earning money. It was like being a man.

MRS LINDE.
How much have you been able to pay off in that way?

NORA.
I can’t tell you exactly. You see, it is very difficult to keep an
account of a business matter of that kind. I only know that I have paid
every penny that I could scrape together. Many a time I was at my wits’
end. _[Smiles.]_ Then I used to sit here and imagine that a rich old
gentleman had fallen in love with me—

MRS LINDE.
What! Who was it?

NORA.
Be quiet!—that he had died; and that when his will was opened it
contained, written in big letters, the instruction: “The lovely Mrs
Nora Helmer is to have all I possess paid over to her at once in cash.”

MRS LINDE.
But, my dear Nora—who could the man be?

NORA.
Good gracious, can’t you understand? There was no old gentleman at all;
it was only something that I used to sit here and imagine, when I
couldn’t think of any way of procuring money. But it’s all the same
now; the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as I am
concerned; I don’t care about him or his will either, for I am free
from care now. _[Jumps up.]_ My goodness, it’s delightful to think of,
Christine! Free from care! To be able to be free from care, quite free
from care; to be able to play and romp with the children; to be able to
keep the house beautifully and have everything just as Torvald likes
it! And, think of it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky!
Perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip—perhaps I shall see the
sea again! Oh, it’s a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. _[A
bell is heard in the hall.]_

MRS LINDE.
_[rising]_. There is the bell; perhaps I had better go.

NORA.
No, don’t go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for Torvald.

SERVANT.
_[at the hall door]_. Excuse me, ma’am—there is a gentleman to see the
master, and as the doctor is with him—

NORA.
Who is it?

KROGSTAD.
_[at the door]_. It is I, Mrs Helmer. _[Mrs LINDE starts, trembles, and
turns to the window.]_

NORA.
_[takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained, low voice]_. You?
What is it? What do you want to see my husband about?

KROGSTAD.
Bank business—in a way. I have a small post in the Bank, and I hear
your husband is to be our chief now—

NORA.
Then it is—

KROGSTAD.
Nothing but dry business matters, Mrs Helmer; absolutely nothing else.

NORA.
Be so good as to go into the study, then. _[She bows indifferently to
him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back and makes up the
fire in the stove.]_

MRS LINDE.
Nora—who was that man?

NORA.
A lawyer, of the name of Krogstad.

MRS LINDE.
Then it really was he.

NORA.
Do you know the man?

MRS LINDE.
I used to—many years ago. At one time he was a solicitor’s clerk in our
town.

NORA.
Yes, he was.

MRS LINDE.
He is greatly altered.

NORA.
He made a very unhappy marriage.

MRS LINDE.
He is a widower now, isn’t he?

NORA.
With several children. There now, it is burning up. [Shuts the door of
the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside.]

MRS LINDE.
They say he carries on various kinds of business.

NORA.
Really! Perhaps he does; I don’t know anything about it. But don’t let
us think of business; it is so tiresome.

DOCTOR RANK.
_[comes out of HELMER’S study. Before he shuts the door he calls to
him]_. No, my dear fellow, I won’t disturb you; I would rather go in to
your wife for a little while. _[Shuts the door and sees Mrs LINDE.]_ I
beg your pardon; I am afraid I am disturbing you too.

NORA.
No, not at all. _[Introducing him]_. Doctor Rank, Mrs Linde.

RANK.
I have often heard Mrs Linde’s name mentioned here. I think I passed
you on the stairs when I arrived, Mrs Linde?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, I go up very slowly; I can’t manage stairs well.

RANK.
Ah! some slight internal weakness?

MRS LINDE.
No, the fact is I have been overworking myself.

RANK.
Nothing more than that? Then I suppose you have come to town to amuse
yourself with our entertainments?

MRS LINDE.
I have come to look for work.

RANK.
Is that a good cure for overwork?

MRS LINDE.
One must live, Doctor Rank.

RANK.
Yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

NORA.
Look here, Doctor Rank—you know you want to live.

RANK.
Certainly. However wretched I may feel, I want to prolong the agony as
long as possible. All my patients are like that. And so are those who
are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case too, is at this very
moment with Helmer—

MRS LINDE.
_[sadly]_. Ah!

NORA.
Whom do you mean?

RANK.
A lawyer of the name of Krogstad, a fellow you don’t know at all. He
suffers from a diseased moral character, Mrs Helmer; but even he began
talking of its being highly important that he should live.

NORA.
Did he? What did he want to speak to Torvald about?

RANK.
I have no idea; I only heard that it was something about the Bank.

NORA.
I didn’t know this—what’s his name—Krogstad had anything to do with the
Bank.

RANK.
Yes, he has some sort of appointment there. _[To Mrs Linde.]_ I don’t
know whether you find also in your part of the world that there are
certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral
corruption, and, as soon as they have found some, put the person
concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on
him. Healthy natures are left out in the cold.

MRS LINDE.
Still I think the sick are those who most need taking care of.

RANK.
_[shrugging his shoulders]_. Yes, there you are. That is the sentiment
that is turning Society into a sick-house.

_[NORA, who has been absorbed in her thoughts, breaks out into
smothered laughter and claps her hands.]_

RANK.
Why do you laugh at that? Have you any notion what Society really is?

NORA.
What do I care about tiresome Society? I am laughing at something quite
different, something extremely amusing. Tell me, Doctor Rank, are all
the people who are employed in the Bank dependent on Torvald now?

RANK.
Is that what you find so extremely amusing?

NORA.
_[smiling and humming]_. That’s my affair! _[Walking about the room.]_
It’s perfectly glorious to think that we have—that Torvald has so much
power over so many people. _[Takes the packet from her pocket.]_ Doctor
Rank, what do you say to a macaroon?

RANK.
What, macaroons? I thought they were forbidden here.

NORA.
Yes, but these are some Christine gave me.

MRS LINDE.
What! I?—

NORA.
Oh, well, don’t be alarmed! You couldn’t know that Torvald had
forbidden them. I must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth. But, bah!—once in a way—That’s so, isn’t it, Doctor Rank? By
your leave! _[Puts a macaroon into his mouth.]_ You must have one too,
Christine. And I shall have one, just a little one—or at most two.
_[Walking about.]_ I am tremendously happy. There is just one thing in
the world now that I should dearly love to do.

RANK.
Well, what is that?

NORA.
It’s something I should dearly love to say, if Torvald could hear me.

RANK.
Well, why can’t you say it?

NORA.
No, I daren’t; it’s so shocking.

MRS LINDE.
Shocking?

RANK.
Well, I should not advise you to say it. Still, with us you might. What
is it you would so much like to say if Torvald could hear you?

NORA.
I should just love to say—Well, I’m damned!

RANK.
Are you mad?

MRS LINDE.
Nora, dear—!

RANK.
Say it, here he is!

NORA.
_[hiding the packet]_. Hush! Hush! Hush! _[HELMER comes out of his
room, with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand.]_

NORA.
Well, Torvald dear, have you got rid of him?

HELMER.
Yes, he has just gone.

NORA.
Let me introduce you—this is Christine, who has come to town.

HELMER.
Christine—? Excuse me, but I don’t know—

NORA.
Mrs Linde, dear; Christine Linde.

HELMER.
Of course. A school friend of my wife’s, I presume?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, we have known each other since then.

NORA.
And just think, she has taken a long journey in order to see you.

HELMER.
What do you mean?

MRS LINDE.
No, really, I—

NORA.
Christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is
frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect
herself—

HELMER.
Very sensible, Mrs Linde.

NORA.
And when she heard you had been appointed manager of the Bank—the news
was telegraphed, you know—she travelled here as quick as she could.
Torvald, I am sure you will be able to do something for Christine, for
my sake, won’t you?

HELMER.
Well, it is not altogether impossible. I presume you are a widow, Mrs
Linde?

MRS LINDE.
Yes.

HELMER.
And have had some experience of book-keeping?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, a fair amount.

HELMER.
Ah! well, it’s very likely I may be able to find something for you—

NORA.
_[clapping her hands]_. What did I tell you? What did I tell you?

HELMER.
You have just come at a fortunate moment, Mrs Linde.

MRS LINDE.
How am I to thank you?

HELMER.
There is no need. _[Puts on his coat.]_ But today you must excuse me—

RANK.
Wait a minute; I will come with you. _[Brings his fur coat from the
hall and warms it at the fire.]_

NORA.
Don’t be long away, Torvald dear.

HELMER.
About an hour, not more.

NORA.
Are you going too, Christine?

MRS LINDE.
_[putting on her cloak]_. Yes, I must go and look for a room.

HELMER.
Oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.

NORA.
_[helping her]_. What a pity it is we are so short of space here; I am
afraid it is impossible for us—

MRS LINDE.
Please don’t think of it! Goodbye, Nora dear, and many thanks.

NORA.
Goodbye for the present. Of course you will come back this evening. And
you too, Dr. Rank. What do you say? If you are well enough? Oh, you
must be! Wrap yourself up well. _[They go to the door all talking
together. Children’s voices are heard on the staircase.]_

NORA.
There they are! There they are! _[She runs to open the door. The NURSE
comes in with the children.]_ Come in! Come in! _[Stoops and kisses
them.]_ Oh, you sweet blessings! Look at them, Christine! Aren’t they
darlings?

RANK.
Don’t let us stand here in the draught.

HELMER.
Come along, Mrs Linde; the place will only be bearable for a mother
now!

_[RANK, HELMER, and Mrs Linde go downstairs. The NURSE comes forward
with the children; NORA shuts the hall door.]_

NORA.
How fresh and well you look! Such red cheeks like apples and roses.
_[The children all talk at once while she speaks to them.]_ Have you
had great fun? That’s splendid! What, you pulled both Emmy and Bob
along on the sledge? —both at once?—that was good. You are a clever
boy, Ivar. Let me take her for a little, Anne. My sweet little baby
doll! _[Takes the baby from the MAID and dances it up and down.]_ Yes,
yes, mother will dance with Bob too. What! Have you been snowballing? I
wish I had been there too! No, no, I will take their things off, Anne;
please let me do it, it is such fun. Go in now, you look half frozen.
There is some hot coffee for you on the stove.

_[The NURSE goes into the room on the left. NORA takes off the
children’s things and throws them about, while they all talk to her at
once.]_

NORA.
Really! Did a big dog run after you? But it didn’t bite you? No, dogs
don’t bite nice little dolly children. You mustn’t look at the parcels,
Ivar. What are they? Ah, I daresay you would like to know. No, no—it’s
something nasty! Come, let us have a game! What shall we play at? Hide
and Seek? Yes, we’ll play Hide and Seek. Bob shall hide first. Must I
hide? Very well, I’ll hide first. _[She and the children laugh and
shout, and romp in and out of the room; at last NORA hides under the
table, the children rush in and out for her, but do not see her; they
hear her smothered laughter, run to the table, lift up the cloth and
find her. Shouts of laughter. She crawls forward and pretends to
frighten them. Fresh laughter. Meanwhile there has been a knock at the
hall door, but none of them has noticed it. The door is half opened,
and KROGSTAD appears, he waits a little; the game goes on.]_

KROGSTAD.
Excuse me, Mrs Helmer.

NORA.
_[with a stifled cry, turns round and gets up on to her knees]_. Ah!
what do you want?

KROGSTAD.
Excuse me, the outer door was ajar; I suppose someone forgot to shut
it.

NORA.
_[rising]_. My husband is out, Mr. Krogstad.

KROGSTAD.
I know that.

NORA.
What do you want here, then?

KROGSTAD.
A word with you.

NORA.
With me?—_[To the children, gently.]_ Go in to nurse. What? No, the
strange man won’t do mother any harm. When he has gone we will have
another game. _[She takes the children into the room on the left, and
shuts the door after them.]_ You want to speak to me?

KROGSTAD.
Yes, I do.

NORA.
Today? It is not the first of the month yet.

KROGSTAD.
No, it is Christmas Eve, and it will depend on yourself what sort of a
Christmas you will spend.

NORA.
What do you mean? Today it is absolutely impossible for me—

KROGSTAD.
We won’t talk about that until later on. This is something different. I
presume you can give me a moment?

NORA.
Yes—yes, I can—although—

KROGSTAD.
Good. I was in Olsen’s Restaurant and saw your husband going down the
street—

NORA.
Yes?

KROGSTAD.
With a lady.

NORA.
What then?

KROGSTAD.
May I make so bold as to ask if it was a Mrs Linde?

NORA.
It was.

KROGSTAD.
Just arrived in town?

NORA.
Yes, today.

KROGSTAD.
She is a great friend of yours, isn’t she?

NORA.
She is. But I don’t see—

KROGSTAD.
I knew her too, once upon a time.

NORA.
I am aware of that.

KROGSTAD.
Are you? So you know all about it; I thought as much. Then I can ask
you, without beating about the bush—is Mrs Linde to have an appointment
in the Bank?

NORA.
What right have you to question me, Mr. Krogstad?—You, one of my
husband’s subordinates! But since you ask, you shall know. Yes, Mrs
Linde is to have an appointment. And it was I who pleaded her cause,
Mr. Krogstad, let me tell you that.

KROGSTAD.
I was right in what I thought, then.

NORA.
_[walking up and down the stage]_. Sometimes one has a tiny little bit
of influence, I should hope. Because one is a woman, it does not
necessarily follow that—. When anyone is in a subordinate position, Mr.
Krogstad, they should really be careful to avoid offending anyone
who—who—

KROGSTAD.
Who has influence?

NORA.
Exactly.

KROGSTAD.
_[changing his tone]_. Mrs Helmer, you will be so good as to use your
influence on my behalf.

NORA.
What? What do you mean?

KROGSTAD.
You will be so kind as to see that I am allowed to keep my subordinate
position in the Bank.

NORA.
What do you mean by that? Who proposes to take your post away from you?

KROGSTAD.
Oh, there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of ignorance. I can
quite understand that your friend is not very anxious to expose herself
to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me; and I quite understand,
too, whom I have to thank for being turned off.

NORA.
But I assure you—

KROGSTAD.
Very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come when I should
advise you to use your influence to prevent that.

NORA.
But, Mr. Krogstad, I have no influence.

KROGSTAD.
Haven’t you? I thought you said yourself just now—

NORA.
Naturally I did not mean you to put that construction on it. I! What
should make you think I have any influence of that kind with my
husband?

KROGSTAD.
Oh, I have known your husband from our student days. I don’t suppose he
is any more unassailable than other husbands.

NORA.
If you speak slightingly of my husband, I shall turn you out of the
house.

KROGSTAD.
You are bold, Mrs Helmer.

NORA.
I am not afraid of you any longer. As soon as the New Year comes, I
shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.

KROGSTAD.
_[controlling himself]_. Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. If necessary, I am
prepared to fight for my small post in the Bank as if I were fighting
for my life.

NORA.
So it seems.

KROGSTAD.
It is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that weighs least
with me in the matter. There is another reason—well, I may as well tell
you. My position is this. I daresay you know, like everybody else, that
once, many years ago, I was guilty of an indiscretion.

NORA.
I think I have heard something of the kind.

KROGSTAD.
The matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be closed to
me after that. So I took to the business that you know of. I had to do
something; and, honestly, I don’t think I’ve been one of the worst. But
now I must cut myself free from all that. My sons are growing up; for
their sake I must try and win back as much respect as I can in the
town. This post in the Bank was like the first step up for me—and now
your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.

NORA.
But you must believe me, Mr. Krogstad; it is not in my power to help
you at all.

KROGSTAD.
Then it is because you haven’t the will; but I have means to compel
you.

NORA.
You don’t mean that you will tell my husband that I owe you money?

KROGSTAD.
Hm!—suppose I were to tell him?

NORA.
It would be perfectly infamous of you. _[Sobbing.]_ To think of his
learning my secret, which has been my joy and pride, in such an ugly,
clumsy way—that he should learn it from you! And it would put me in a
horribly disagreeable position—

KROGSTAD.
Only disagreeable?

NORA.
_[impetuously]_. Well, do it, then!—and it will be the worse for you.
My husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you
certainly won’t keep your post then.

KROGSTAD.
I asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that you were
afraid of?

NORA.
If my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once pay you
what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with you.

KROGSTAD.
_[coming a step nearer]_. Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. Either you have a
very bad memory or you know very little of business. I shall be obliged
to remind you of a few details.

NORA.
What do you mean?

KROGSTAD.
When your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two hundred and
fifty pounds.

NORA.
I didn’t know anyone else to go to.

KROGSTAD.
I promised to get you that amount—

NORA.
Yes, and you did so.

KROGSTAD.
I promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions. Your mind was
so taken up with your husband’s illness, and you were so anxious to get
the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid no attention to
the conditions of our bargain. Therefore it will not be amiss if I
remind you of them. Now, I promised to get the money on the security of
a bond which I drew up.

NORA.
Yes, and which I signed.

KROGSTAD.
Good. But below your signature there were a few lines constituting your
father a surety for the money; those lines your father should have
signed.

NORA.
Should? He did sign them.

KROGSTAD.
I had left the date blank; that is to say, your father should himself
have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. Do you remember
that?

NORA.
Yes, I think I remember—

KROGSTAD.
Then I gave you the bond to send by post to your father. Is that not
so?

NORA.
Yes.

KROGSTAD.
And you naturally did so at once, because five or six days afterwards
you brought me the bond with your father’s signature. And then I gave
you the money.

NORA.
Well, haven’t I been paying it off regularly?

KROGSTAD.
Fairly so, yes. But—to come back to the matter in hand—that must have
been a very trying time for you, Mrs Helmer?

NORA.
It was, indeed.

KROGSTAD.
Your father was very ill, wasn’t he?

NORA.
He was very near his end.

KROGSTAD.
And died soon afterwards?

NORA.
Yes.

KROGSTAD.
Tell me, Mrs Helmer, can you by any chance remember what day your
father died?—on what day of the month, I mean.

NORA.
Papa died on the 29th of September.

KROGSTAD.
That is correct; I have ascertained it for myself. And, as that is so,
there is a discrepancy _[taking a paper from his pocket]_ which I
cannot account for.

NORA.
What discrepancy? I don’t know—

KROGSTAD.
The discrepancy consists, Mrs Helmer, in the fact that your father
signed this bond three days after his death.

NORA.
What do you mean? I don’t understand—

KROGSTAD.
Your father died on the 29th of September. But, look here; your father
has dated his signature the 2nd of October. It is a discrepancy, isn’t
it? _[NORA is silent.]_ Can you explain it to me? _[NORA is still
silent.]_ It is a remarkable thing, too, that the words “2nd of
October,” as well as the year, are not written in your father’s
handwriting but in one that I think I know. Well, of course it can be
explained; your father may have forgotten to date his signature, and
someone else may have dated it haphazard before they knew of his death.
There is no harm in that. It all depends on the signature of the name;
and that is genuine, I suppose, Mrs Helmer? It was your father himself
who signed his name here?

NORA.
_[after a short pause, throws her head up and looks defiantly at him]_.
No, it was not. It was I that wrote papa’s name.

KROGSTAD.
Are you aware that is a dangerous confession?

NORA.
In what way? You shall have your money soon.

KROGSTAD.
Let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to your
father?

NORA.
It was impossible; papa was so ill. If I had asked him for his
signature, I should have had to tell him what the money was to be used
for; and when he was so ill himself I couldn’t tell him that my
husband’s life was in danger—it was impossible.

KROGSTAD.
It would have been better for you if you had given up your trip abroad.

NORA.
No, that was impossible. That trip was to save my husband’s life; I
couldn’t give that up.

KROGSTAD.
But did it never occur to you that you were committing a fraud on me?

NORA.
I couldn’t take that into account; I didn’t trouble myself about you at
all. I couldn’t bear you, because you put so many heartless
difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my
husband was in.

KROGSTAD.
Mrs Helmer, you evidently do not realise clearly what it is that you
have been guilty of. But I can assure you that my one false step, which
lost me all my reputation, was nothing more or nothing worse than what
you have done.

NORA.
You? Do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run a risk
to save your wife’s life?

KROGSTAD.
The law cares nothing about motives.

NORA.
Then it must be a very foolish law.

KROGSTAD.
Foolish or not, it is the law by which you will be judged, if I produce
this paper in court.

NORA.
I don’t believe it. Is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her dying
father anxiety and care? Is a wife not to be allowed to save her
husband’s life? I don’t know much about law; but I am certain that
there must be laws permitting such things as that. Have you no
knowledge of such laws—you who are a lawyer? You must be a very poor
lawyer, Mr. Krogstad.

KROGSTAD.
Maybe. But matters of business—such business as you and I have had
together—do you think I don’t understand that? Very well. Do as you
please. But let me tell you this—if I lose my position a second time,
you shall lose yours with me. _[He bows, and goes out through the
hall.]_

NORA.
_[appears buried in thought for a short time, then tosses her head]_.
Nonsense! Trying to frighten me like that!—I am not so silly as he
thinks. _[Begins to busy herself putting the children’s things in
order.]_ And yet—? No, it’s impossible! I did it for love’s sake.

THE CHILDREN.
_[in the doorway on the left]_. Mother, the stranger man has gone out
through the gate.

NORA.
Yes, dears, I know. But, don’t tell anyone about the stranger man. Do
you hear? Not even papa.

CHILDREN.
No, mother; but will you come and play again?

NORA.
No, no,—not now.

CHILDREN.
But, mother, you promised us.

NORA.
Yes, but I can’t now. Run away in; I have such a lot to do. Run away
in, my sweet little darlings. _[She gets them into the room by degrees
and shuts the door on them; then sits down on the sofa, takes up a
piece of needlework and sews a few stitches, but soon stops.]_ No!
_[Throws down the work, gets up, goes to the hall door and calls out.]_
Helen! bring the Tree in. _[Goes to the table on the left, opens a
drawer, and stops again.]_ No, no! it is quite impossible!

MAID.
_[coming in with the Tree]_. Where shall I put it, ma’am?

NORA.
Here, in the middle of the floor.

MAID.
Shall I get you anything else?

NORA.
No, thank you. I have all I want. [Exit MAID.]

NORA.
_[begins dressing the tree]_. A candle here-and flowers here—The
horrible man! It’s all nonsense—there’s nothing wrong. The tree shall
be splendid! I will do everything I can think of to please you,
Torvald!—I will sing for you, dance for you—_[HELMER comes in with some
papers under his arm.]_ Oh! are you back already?

HELMER.
Yes. Has anyone been here?

NORA.
Here? No.

HELMER.
That is strange. I saw Krogstad going out of the gate.

NORA.
Did you? Oh yes, I forgot, Krogstad was here for a moment.

HELMER.
Nora, I can see from your manner that he has been here begging you to
say a good word for him.

NORA.
Yes.

HELMER.
And you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were to conceal
from me the fact of his having been here; didn’t he beg that of you
too?

NORA.
Yes, Torvald, but—

HELMER.
Nora, Nora, and you would be a party to that sort of thing? To have any
talk with a man like that, and give him any sort of promise? And to
tell me a lie into the bargain?

NORA.
A lie—?

HELMER.
Didn’t you tell me no one had been here? _[Shakes his finger at her.]_
My little songbird must never do that again. A songbird must have a
clean beak to chirp with—no false notes! _[Puts his arm round her
waist.]_ That is so, isn’t it? Yes, I am sure it is. _[Lets her go.]_
We will say no more about it. _[Sits down by the stove.]_ How warm and
snug it is here! _[Turns over his papers.]_

NORA.
_[after a short pause, during which she busies herself with the
Christmas Tree.]_ Torvald!

HELMER.
Yes.

NORA.
I am looking forward tremendously to the fancy-dress ball at the
Stenborgs’ the day after tomorrow.

HELMER.
And I am tremendously curious to see what you are going to surprise me
with.

NORA.
It was very silly of me to want to do that.

HELMER.
What do you mean?

NORA.
I can’t hit upon anything that will do; everything I think of seems so
silly and insignificant.

HELMER.
Does my little Nora acknowledge that at last?

NORA.
_[standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it]_. Are you
very busy, Torvald?

HELMER.
Well—

NORA.
What are all those papers?

HELMER.
Bank business.

NORA.
Already?

HELMER.
I have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake the
necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work;
and I must make use of the Christmas week for that, so as to have
everything in order for the new year.

NORA.
Then that was why this poor Krogstad—

HELMER.
Hm!

NORA.
_[leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair]_. If you
hadn’t been so busy I should have asked you a tremendously big favour,
Torvald.

HELMER.
What is that? Tell me.

NORA.
There is no one has such good taste as you. And I do so want to look
nice at the fancy-dress ball. Torvald, couldn’t you take me in hand and
decide what I shall go as, and what sort of a dress I shall wear?

HELMER.
Aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to come to
her rescue?

NORA.
Yes, Torvald, I can’t get along a bit without your help.

HELMER.
Very well, I will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon something.

NORA.
That is nice of you. _[Goes to the Christmas Tree. A short pause.]_ How
pretty the red flowers look—. But, tell me, was it really something
very bad that this Krogstad was guilty of?

HELMER.
He forged someone’s name. Have you any idea what that means?

NORA.
Isn’t it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?

HELMER.
Yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. I am not so heartless as
to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step of that
kind.

NORA.
No, you wouldn’t, would you, Torvald?

HELMER.
Many a man has been able to retrieve his character, if he has openly
confessed his fault and taken his punishment.

NORA.
Punishment—?

HELMER.
But Krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of it by a
cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.

NORA.
But do you think it would—?

HELMER.
Just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the hypocrite
with every one, how he has to wear a mask in the presence of those near
and dear to him, even before his own wife and children. And about the
children—that is the most terrible part of it all, Nora.

NORA.
How?

HELMER.
Because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the whole life
of a home. Each breath the children take in such a house is full of the
germs of evil.

NORA.
_[coming nearer him]_. Are you sure of that?

HELMER.
My dear, I have often seen it in the course of my life as a lawyer.
Almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a
deceitful mother.

NORA.
Why do you only say—mother?

HELMER.
It seems most commonly to be the mother’s influence, though naturally a
bad father’s would have the same result. Every lawyer is familiar with
the fact. This Krogstad, now, has been persistently poisoning his own
children with lies and dissimulation; that is why I say he has lost all
moral character. _[Holds out his hands to her.]_ That is why my sweet
little Nora must promise me not to plead his cause. Give me your hand
on it. Come, come, what is this? Give me your hand. There now, that’s
settled. I assure you it would be quite impossible for me to work with
him; I literally feel physically ill when I am in the company of such
people.

NORA.
_[takes her hand out of his and goes to the opposite side of the
Christmas Tree]_. How hot it is in here; and I have such a lot to do.

HELMER.
_[getting up and putting his papers in order]_. Yes, and I must try and
read through some of these before dinner; and I must think about your
costume, too. And it is just possible I may have something ready in
gold paper to hang up on the Tree. _[Puts his hand on her head.]_ My
precious little singing-bird! _[He goes into his room and shuts the
door after him.]_

NORA.
_[after a pause, whispers]_. No, no—it isn’t true. It’s impossible; it
must be impossible.

_[The NURSE opens the door on the left.]_

NURSE.
The little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to mamma.

NORA.
No, no, no! Don’t let them come in to me! You stay with them, Anne.

NURSE.
Very well, ma’am. _[Shuts the door.]_

NORA.
_[pale with terror]_. Deprave my little children? Poison my home? _[A
short pause. Then she tosses her head.]_ It’s not true. It can’t
possibly be true.




ACT II


_[THE SAME SCENE.—THE Christmas Tree is in the corner by the piano,
stripped of its ornaments and with burnt-down candle-ends on its
dishevelled branches. NORA’S cloak and hat are lying on the sofa. She
is alone in the room, walking about uneasily. She stops by the sofa and
takes up her cloak.]_

NORA.
_[drops her cloak]_. Someone is coming now! _[Goes to the door and
listens.]_ No—it is no one. Of course, no one will come today,
Christmas Day—nor tomorrow either. But, perhaps—_[opens the door and
looks out]_. No, nothing in the letterbox; it is quite empty. _[Comes
forward.]_ What rubbish! of course he can’t be in earnest about it.
Such a thing couldn’t happen; it is impossible—I have three little
children.

_[Enter the NURSE from the room on the left, carrying a big cardboard
box.]_

NURSE.
At last I have found the box with the fancy dress.

NORA.
Thanks; put it on the table.

NURSE.
_[doing so]_. But it is very much in want of mending.

NORA.
I should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.

NURSE.
What an idea! It can easily be put in order—just a little patience.

NORA.
Yes, I will go and get Mrs Linde to come and help me with it.

NURSE.
What, out again? In this horrible weather? You will catch cold, ma’am,
and make yourself ill.

NORA.
Well, worse than that might happen. How are the children?

NURSE.
The poor little souls are playing with their Christmas presents, but—

NORA.
Do they ask much for me?

NURSE.
You see, they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them.

NORA.
Yes, but, nurse, I shall not be able to be so much with them now as I
was before.

NURSE.
Oh well, young children easily get accustomed to anything.

NORA.
Do you think so? Do you think they would forget their mother if she
went away altogether?

NURSE.
Good heavens!—went away altogether?

NORA.
Nurse, I want you to tell me something I have often wondered about—how
could you have the heart to put your own child out among strangers?

NURSE.
I was obliged to, if I wanted to be little Nora’s nurse.

NORA.
Yes, but how could you be willing to do it?

NURSE.
What, when I was going to get such a good place by it? A poor girl who
has got into trouble should be glad to. Besides, that wicked man didn’t
do a single thing for me.

NORA.
But I suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you.

NURSE.
No, indeed she hasn’t. She wrote to me when she was confirmed, and when
she was married.

NORA.
_[putting her arms round her neck]_. Dear old Anne, you were a good
mother to me when I was little.

NURSE.
Little Nora, poor dear, had no other mother but me.

NORA.
And if my little ones had no other mother, I am sure you would—What
nonsense I am talking! _[Opens the box.]_ Go in to them. Now I must—.
You will see tomorrow how charming I shall look.

NURSE.
I am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you, ma’am.
_[Goes into the room on the left.]_

NORA.
_[begins to unpack the box, but soon pushes it away from her]_. If only
I dared go out. If only no one would come. If only I could be sure
nothing would happen here in the meantime. Stuff and nonsense! No one
will come. Only I mustn’t think about it. I will brush my muff. What
lovely, lovely gloves! Out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! One,
two, three, four, five, six— _[Screams.]_ Ah! there is someone coming—.
_[Makes a movement towards the door, but stands irresolute.]_

_[Enter Mrs Linde from the hall, where she has taken off her cloak and
hat.]_

NORA.
Oh, it’s you, Christine. There is no one else out there, is there? How
good of you to come!

MRS LINDE.
I heard you were up asking for me.

NORA.
Yes, I was passing by. As a matter of fact, it is something you could
help me with. Let us sit down here on the sofa. Look here. Tomorrow
evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs’, who live
above us; and Torvald wants me to go as a Neapolitan fisher-girl, and
dance the Tarantella that I learned at Capri.

MRS LINDE.
I see; you are going to keep up the character.

NORA.
Yes, Torvald wants me to. Look, here is the dress; Torvald had it made
for me there, but now it is all so torn, and I haven’t any idea—

MRS LINDE.
We will easily put that right. It is only some of the trimming come
unsewn here and there. Needle and thread? Now then, that’s all we want.

NORA.
It is nice of you.

MRS LINDE.
_[sewing]_. So you are going to be dressed up tomorrow Nora. I will
tell you what—I shall come in for a moment and see you in your fine
feathers. But I have completely forgotten to thank you for a delightful
evening yesterday.

NORA.
_[gets up, and crosses the stage]_. Well, I don’t think yesterday was
as pleasant as usual. You ought to have come to town a little earlier,
Christine. Certainly Torvald does understand how to make a house dainty
and attractive.

MRS LINDE.
And so do you, it seems to me; you are not your father’s daughter for
nothing. But tell me, is Doctor Rank always as depressed as he was
yesterday?

NORA.
No; yesterday it was very noticeable. I must tell you that he suffers
from a very dangerous disease. He has consumption of the spine, poor
creature. His father was a horrible man who committed all sorts of
excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do you
understand?

MRS LINDE.
_[dropping her sewing]_. But, my dearest Nora, how do you know anything
about such things?

NORA.
_[walking about]_. Pooh! When you have three children, you get visits
now and then from—from married women, who know something of medical
matters, and they talk about one thing and another.

MRS LINDE.
_[goes on sewing. A short silence]_. Does Doctor Rank come here
everyday?

NORA.
Everyday regularly. He is Torvald’s most intimate friend, and a great
friend of mine too. He is just like one of the family.

MRS LINDE.
But tell me this—is he perfectly sincere? I mean, isn’t he the kind of
man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

NORA.
Not in the least. What makes you think that?

MRS LINDE.
When you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he had often heard
my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards I noticed that your
husband hadn’t the slightest idea who I was. So how could Doctor Rank—?

NORA.
That is quite right, Christine. Torvald is so absurdly fond of me that
he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. At first he used to seem
almost jealous if I mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so
naturally I gave up doing so. But I often talk about such things with
Doctor Rank, because he likes hearing about them.

MRS LINDE.
Listen to me, Nora. You are still very like a child in many things, and
I am older than you in many ways and have a little more experience. Let
me tell you this—you ought to make an end of it with Doctor Rank.

NORA.
What ought I to make an end of?

MRS LINDE.
Of two things, I think. Yesterday you talked some nonsense about a rich
admirer who was to leave you money—

NORA.
An admirer who doesn’t exist, unfortunately! But what then?

MRS LINDE.
Is Doctor Rank a man of means?

NORA.
Yes, he is.

MRS LINDE.
And has no one to provide for?

NORA.
No, no one; but—

MRS LINDE.
And comes here everyday?

NORA.
Yes, I told you so.

MRS LINDE.
But how can this well-bred man be so tactless?

NORA.
I don’t understand you at all.

MRS LINDE.
Don’t prevaricate, Nora. Do you suppose I don’t guess who lent you the
two hundred and fifty pounds?

NORA.
Are you out of your senses? How can you think of such a thing! A friend
of ours, who comes here everyday! Do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

MRS LINDE.
Then it really isn’t he?

NORA.
No, certainly not. It would never have entered into my head for a
moment. Besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money
afterwards.

MRS LINDE.
Well, I think that was lucky for you, my dear Nora.

NORA.
No, it would never have come into my head to ask Doctor Rank. Although
I am quite sure that if I had asked him—

MRS LINDE.
But of course you won’t.

NORA.
Of course not. I have no reason to think it could possibly be
necessary. But I am quite sure that if I told Doctor Rank—

MRS LINDE.
Behind your husband’s back?

NORA.
I must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be behind
his back too. I must make an end of it with him.

MRS LINDE.
Yes, that is what I told you yesterday, but—

NORA.
_[walking up and down]_. A man can put a thing like that straight much
easier than a woman—

MRS LINDE.
One’s husband, yes.

NORA.
Nonsense! _[Standing still.]_ When you pay off a debt you get your bond
back, don’t you?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, as a matter of course.

NORA.
And can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces, and burn it up—the
nasty dirty paper!

MRS LINDE.
_[looks hard at her, lays down her sewing and gets up slowly]_. Nora,
you are concealing something from me.

NORA.
Do I look as if I were?

MRS LINDE.
Something has happened to you since yesterday morning. Nora, what is
it?

NORA.
_[going nearer to her]_. Christine! _[Listens.]_ Hush! there’s Torvald
come home. Do you mind going in to the children for the present?
Torvald can’t bear to see dressmaking going on. Let Anne help you.

MRS LINDE.
_[gathering some of the things together]_. Certainly—but I am not going
away from here until we have had it out with one another. _[She goes
into the room on the left, as HELMER comes in from the hall.]_

NORA.
_[going up to HELMER]_. I have wanted you so much, Torvald dear.

HELMER.
Was that the dressmaker?

NORA.
No, it was Christine; she is helping me to put my dress in order. You
will see I shall look quite smart.

HELMER.
Wasn’t that a happy thought of mine, now?

NORA.
Splendid! But don’t you think it is nice of me, too, to do as you wish?

HELMER.
Nice?—because you do as your husband wishes? Well, well, you little
rogue, I am sure you did not mean it in that way. But I am not going to
disturb you; you will want to be trying on your dress, I expect.

NORA.
I suppose you are going to work.

HELMER.
Yes. _[Shows her a bundle of papers.]_ Look at that. I have just been
into the bank. _[Turns to go into his room.]_

NORA.
Torvald.

HELMER.
Yes.

NORA.
If your little squirrel were to ask you for something very, very
prettily—?

HELMER.
What then?

NORA.
Would you do it?

HELMER.
I should like to hear what it is, first.

NORA.
Your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would be
nice, and do what she wants.

HELMER.
Speak plainly.

NORA.
Your skylark would chirp about in every room, with her song rising and
falling—

HELMER.
Well, my skylark does that anyhow.

NORA.
I would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight, Torvald.

HELMER.
Nora—you surely don’t mean that request you made to me this morning?

NORA.
_[going near him]_. Yes, Torvald, I beg you so earnestly—

HELMER.
Have you really the courage to open up that question again?

NORA.
Yes, dear, you must do as I ask; you must let Krogstad keep his post in
the bank.

HELMER.
My dear Nora, it is his post that I have arranged Mrs Linde shall have.

NORA.
Yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just as well
dismiss some other clerk instead of Krogstad.

HELMER.
This is simply incredible obstinacy! Because you chose to give him a
thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, I am expected to—

NORA.
That isn’t the reason, Torvald. It is for your own sake. This fellow
writes in the most scurrilous newspapers; you have told me so yourself.
He can do you an unspeakable amount of harm. I am frightened to death
of him—

HELMER.
Ah, I understand; it is recollections of the past that scare you.

NORA.
What do you mean?

HELMER.
Naturally you are thinking of your father.

NORA.
Yes—yes, of course. Just recall to your mind what these malicious
creatures wrote in the papers about papa, and how horribly they
slandered him. I believe they would have procured his dismissal if the
Department had not sent you over to inquire into it, and if you had not
been so kindly disposed and helpful to him.

HELMER.
My little Nora, there is an important difference between your father
and me. Your father’s reputation as a public official was not above
suspicion. Mine is, and I hope it will continue to be so, as long as I
hold my office.

NORA.
You never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. We ought to be
so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home, and have no
cares—you and I and the children, Torvald! That is why I beg you so
earnestly—

HELMER.
And it is just by interceding for him that you make it impossible for
me to keep him. It is already known at the Bank that I mean to dismiss
Krogstad. Is it to get about now that the new manager has changed his
mind at his wife’s bidding—

NORA.
And what if it did?

HELMER.
Of course!—if only this obstinate little person can get her way! Do you
suppose I am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole staff, to
let people think that I am a man to be swayed by all sorts of outside
influence? I should very soon feel the consequences of it, I can tell
you! And besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible for
me to have Krogstad in the Bank as long as I am manager.

NORA.
Whatever is that?

HELMER.
His moral failings I might perhaps have overlooked, if necessary—

NORA.
Yes, you could—couldn’t you?

HELMER.
And I hear he is a good worker, too. But I knew him when we were boys.
It was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an incubus in
afterlife. I may as well tell you plainly, we were once on very
intimate terms with one another. But this tactless fellow lays no
restraint on himself when other people are present. On the contrary, he
thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me, and
every minute it is “I say, Helmer, old fellow!” and that sort of thing.
I assure you it is extremely painful for me. He would make my position
in the Bank intolerable.

NORA.
Torvald, I don’t believe you mean that.

HELMER.
Don’t you? Why not?

NORA.
Because it is such a narrow-minded way of looking at things.

HELMER.
What are you saying? Narrow-minded? Do you think I am narrow-minded?

NORA.
No, just the opposite, dear—and it is exactly for that reason.

HELMER.
It’s the same thing. You say my point of view is narrow-minded, so I
must be so too. Narrow-minded! Very well—I must put an end to this.
_[Goes to the hall door and calls.]_ Helen!

NORA.
What are you going to do?

HELMER.
_[looking among his papers]_. Settle it. _[Enter MAID.]_ Look here;
take this letter and go downstairs with it at once. Find a messenger
and tell him to deliver it, and be quick. The address is on it, and
here is the money.

MAID.
Very well, sir. _[Exit with the letter.]_

HELMER.
_[putting his papers together]_. Now then, little Miss Obstinate.

NORA.
_[breathlessly]_. Torvald—what was that letter?

HELMER.
Krogstad’s dismissal.

NORA.
Call her back, Torvald! There is still time. Oh Torvald, call her back!
Do it for my sake—for your own sake—for the children’s sake! Do you
hear me, Torvald? Call her back! You don’t know what that letter can
bring upon us.

HELMER.
It’s too late.

NORA.
Yes, it’s too late.

HELMER.
My dear Nora, I can forgive the anxiety you are in, although really it
is an insult to me. It is, indeed. Isn’t it an insult to think that I
should be afraid of a starving quill-driver’s vengeance? But I forgive
you nevertheless, because it is such eloquent witness to your great
love for me. _[Takes her in his arms.]_ And that is as it should be, my
own darling Nora. Come what will, you may be sure I shall have both
courage and strength if they be needed. You will see I am man enough to
take everything upon myself.

NORA.
_[in a horror-stricken voice]_. What do you mean by that?

HELMER.
Everything, I say—

NORA.
_[recovering herself]_. You will never have to do that.

HELMER.
That’s right. Well, we will share it, Nora, as man and wife should.
That is how it shall be. _[Caressing her.]_ Are you content now? There!
There!—not these frightened dove’s eyes! The whole thing is only the
wildest fancy!—Now, you must go and play through the Tarantella and
practise with your tambourine. I shall go into the inner office and
shut the door, and I shall hear nothing; you can make as much noise as
you please. _[Turns back at the door.]_ And when Rank comes, tell him
where he will find me. _[Nods to her, takes his papers and goes into
his room, and shuts the door after him.]_

NORA.
_[bewildered with anxiety, stands as if rooted to the spot, and
whispers]_. He was capable of doing it. He will do it. He will do it in
spite of everything.—No, not that! Never, never! Anything rather than
that! Oh, for some help, some way out of it! _[The door-bell rings.]_
Doctor Rank! Anything rather than that—anything, whatever it is! _[She
puts her hands over her face, pulls herself together, goes to the door
and opens it. RANK is standing without, hanging up his coat. During the
following dialogue it begins to grow dark.]_

NORA.
Good day, Doctor Rank. I knew your ring. But you mustn’t go in to
Torvald now; I think he is busy with something.

RANK.
And you?

NORA.
_[brings him in and shuts the door after him]_. Oh, you know very well
I always have time for you.

RANK.
Thank you. I shall make use of as much of it as I can.

NORA.
What do you mean by that? As much of it as you can?

RANK.
Well, does that alarm you?

NORA.
It was such a strange way of putting it. Is anything likely to happen?

RANK.
Nothing but what I have long been prepared for. But I certainly didn’t
expect it to happen so soon.

NORA.
_[gripping him by the arm]_. What have you found out? Doctor Rank, you
must tell me.

RANK.
_[sitting down by the stove]_. It is all up with me. And it can’t be
helped.

NORA.
_[with a sigh of relief]_. Is it about yourself?

RANK.
Who else? It is no use lying to one’s self. I am the most wretched of
all my patients, Mrs Helmer. Lately I have been taking stock of my
internal economy. Bankrupt! Probably within a month I shall lie rotting
in the churchyard.

NORA.
What an ugly thing to say!

RANK.
The thing itself is cursedly ugly, and the worst of it is that I shall
have to face so much more that is ugly before that. I shall only make
one more examination of myself; when I have done that, I shall know
pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will
begin. There is something I want to tell you. Helmer’s refined nature
gives him an unconquerable disgust at everything that is ugly; I won’t
have him in my sick-room.

NORA.
Oh, but, Doctor Rank—

RANK.
I won’t have him there. Not on any account. I bar my door to him. As
soon as I am quite certain that the worst has come, I shall send you my
card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the
loathsome end has begun.

NORA.
You are quite absurd today. And I wanted you so much to be in a really
good humour.

RANK.
With death stalking beside me?—To have to pay this penalty for another
man’s sin? Is there any justice in that? And in every single family, in
one way or another, some such inexorable retribution is being exacted—

NORA.
_[putting her hands over her ears]_. Rubbish! Do talk of something
cheerful.

RANK.
Oh, it’s a mere laughing matter, the whole thing. My poor innocent
spine has to suffer for my father’s youthful amusements.

NORA.
_[sitting at the table on the left]_. I suppose you mean that he was
too partial to asparagus and pate de foie gras, don’t you?

RANK.
Yes, and to truffles.

NORA.
Truffles, yes. And oysters too, I suppose?

RANK.
Oysters, of course, that goes without saying.

NORA.
And heaps of port and champagne. It is sad that all these nice things
should take their revenge on our bones.

RANK.
Especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky bones of
those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.

NORA.
Yes, that’s the saddest part of it all.

RANK.
_[with a searching look at her]_. Hm!—

NORA.
_[after a short pause]_. Why did you smile?

RANK.
No, it was you that laughed.

NORA.
No, it was you that smiled, Doctor Rank!

RANK.
_[rising]_. You are a greater rascal than I thought.

NORA.
I am in a silly mood today.

RANK.
So it seems.

NORA.
_[putting her hands on his shoulders]_. Dear, dear Doctor Rank, death
mustn’t take you away from Torvald and me.

RANK.
It is a loss you would easily recover from. Those who are gone are soon
forgotten.

NORA.
_[looking at him anxiously]_. Do you believe that?

RANK.
People form new ties, and then—

NORA.
Who will form new ties?

RANK.
Both you and Helmer, when I am gone. You yourself are already on the
high road to it, I think. What did that Mrs Linde want here last night?

NORA.
Oho!—you don’t mean to say you are jealous of poor Christine?

RANK.
Yes, I am. She will be my successor in this house. When I am done for,
this woman will—

NORA.
Hush! don’t speak so loud. She is in that room.

RANK.
Today again. There, you see.

NORA.
She has only come to sew my dress for me. Bless my soul, how
unreasonable you are! _[Sits down on the sofa.]_ Be nice now, Doctor
Rank, and tomorrow you will see how beautifully I shall dance, and you
can imagine I am doing it all for you—and for Torvald too, of course.
_[Takes various things out of the box.]_ Doctor Rank, come and sit down
here, and I will show you something.

RANK.
_[sitting down]_. What is it?

NORA.
Just look at those!

RANK.
Silk stockings.

NORA.
Flesh-coloured. Aren’t they lovely? It is so dark here now, but
tomorrow—. No, no, no! you must only look at the feet. Oh well, you may
have leave to look at the legs too.

RANK.
Hm!—

NORA.
Why are you looking so critical? Don’t you think they will fit me?

RANK.
I have no means of forming an opinion about that.

NORA.
_[looks at him for a moment]_. For shame! _[Hits him lightly on the ear
with the stockings.]_ That’s to punish you. _[Folds them up again.]_

RANK.
And what other nice things am I to be allowed to see?

NORA.
Not a single thing more, for being so naughty. _[She looks among the
things, humming to herself.]_

RANK.
_[after a short silence]_. When I am sitting here, talking to you as
intimately as this, I cannot imagine for a moment what would have
become of me if I had never come into this house.

NORA.
_[smiling]_. I believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us.

RANK.
_[in a lower voice, looking straight in front of him]_. And to be
obliged to leave it all—

NORA.
Nonsense, you are not going to leave it.

RANK.
_[as before]_. And not be able to leave behind one the slightest token
of one’s gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret—nothing but an
empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.

NORA.
And if I asked you now for a—? No!

RANK.
For what?

NORA.
For a big proof of your friendship—

RANK.
Yes, yes!

NORA.
I mean a tremendously big favour—

RANK.
Would you really make me so happy for once?

NORA.
Ah, but you don’t know what it is yet.

RANK.
No—but tell me.

NORA.
I really can’t, Doctor Rank. It is something out of all reason; it
means advice, and help, and a favour—

RANK.
The bigger a thing it is the better. I can’t conceive what it is you
mean. Do tell me. Haven’t I your confidence?

NORA.
More than anyone else. I know you are my truest and best friend, and so
I will tell you what it is. Well, Doctor Rank, it is something you must
help me to prevent. You know how devotedly, how inexpressibly deeply
Torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give his life
for me.

RANK.
_[leaning towards her]_. Nora—do you think he is the only one—?

NORA.
_[with a slight start]_. The only one—?

RANK.
The only one who would gladly give his life for your sake.

NORA.
_[sadly]_. Is that it?

RANK.
I was determined you should know it before I went away, and there will
never be a better opportunity than this. Now you know it, Nora. And now
you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no one else.

NORA.
_[rises, deliberately and quietly]_. Let me pass.

RANK.
_[makes room for her to pass him, but sits still]_. Nora!

NORA.
_[at the hall door]_. Helen, bring in the lamp. _[Goes over to the
stove.]_ Dear Doctor Rank, that was really horrid of you.

RANK.
To have loved you as much as anyone else does? Was that horrid?

NORA.
No, but to go and tell me so. There was really no need—

RANK.
What do you mean? Did you know—? _[MAID enters with lamp, puts it down
on the table, and goes out.]_ Nora—Mrs Helmer—tell me, had you any idea
of this?

NORA.
Oh, how do I know whether I had or whether I hadn’t? I really can’t
tell you—To think you could be so clumsy, Doctor Rank! We were getting
on so nicely.

RANK.
Well, at all events you know now that you can command me, body and
soul. So won’t you speak out?

NORA.
_[looking at him]_. After what happened?

RANK.
I beg you to let me know what it is.

NORA.
I can’t tell you anything now.

RANK.
Yes, yes. You mustn’t punish me in that way. Let me have permission to
do for you whatever a man may do.

NORA.
You can do nothing for me now. Besides, I really don’t need any help at
all. You will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my part. It
really is so—of course it is! _[Sits down in the rocking-chair, and
looks at him with a smile.]_ You are a nice sort of man, Doctor
Rank!—don’t you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has come?

RANK.
Not a bit. But perhaps I had better go—for ever?

NORA.
No, indeed, you shall not. Of course you must come here just as before.
You know very well Torvald can’t do without you.

RANK.
Yes, but you?

NORA.
Oh, I am always tremendously pleased when you come.

RANK.
It is just that, that put me on the wrong track. You are a riddle to
me. I have often thought that you would almost as soon be in my company
as in Helmer’s.

NORA.
Yes—you see there are some people one loves best, and others whom one
would almost always rather have as companions.

RANK.
Yes, there is something in that.

NORA.
When I was at home, of course I loved papa best. But I always thought
it tremendous fun if I could steal down into the maids’ room, because
they never moralised at all, and talked to each other about such
entertaining things.

RANK.
I see—it is their place I have taken.

NORA.
_[jumping up and going to him]_. Oh, dear, nice Doctor Rank, I never
meant that at all. But surely you can understand that being with
Torvald is a little like being with papa—_[Enter MAID from the hall.]_

MAID.
If you please, ma’am. _[Whispers and hands her a card.]_

NORA.
_[glancing at the card]_. Oh! _[Puts it in her pocket.]_

RANK.
Is there anything wrong?

NORA.
No, no, not in the least. It is only something—it is my new dress—

RANK.
What? Your dress is lying there.

NORA.
Oh, yes, that one; but this is another. I ordered it. Torvald mustn’t
know about it—

RANK.
Oho! Then that was the great secret.

NORA.
Of course. Just go in to him; he is sitting in the inner room. Keep him
as long as—

RANK.
Make your mind easy; I won’t let him escape.

_[Goes into HELMER’S room.]_

NORA.
_[to the MAID]_. And he is standing waiting in the kitchen?

MAID.
Yes; he came up the back stairs.

NORA.
But didn’t you tell him no one was in?

MAID.
Yes, but it was no good.

NORA.
He won’t go away?

MAID.
No; he says he won’t until he has seen you, ma’am.

NORA.
Well, let him come in—but quietly. Helen, you mustn’t say anything
about it to anyone. It is a surprise for my husband.

MAID.
Yes, ma’am, I quite understand. _[Exit.]_

NORA.
This dreadful thing is going to happen! It will happen in spite of me!
No, no, no, it can’t happen—it shan’t happen! _[She bolts the door of
HELMER’S room. The MAID opens the hall door for KROGSTAD and shuts it
after him. He is wearing a fur coat, high boots and a fur cap.]_

NORA.
_[advancing towards him]_. Speak low—my husband is at home.

KROGSTAD.
No matter about that.

NORA.
What do you want of me?

KROGSTAD.
An explanation of something.

NORA.
Make haste then. What is it?

KROGSTAD.
You know, I suppose, that I have got my dismissal.

NORA.
I couldn’t prevent it, Mr. Krogstad. I fought as hard as I could on
your side, but it was no good.

KROGSTAD.
Does your husband love you so little, then? He knows what I can expose
you to, and yet he ventures—

NORA.
How can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?

KROGSTAD.
I didn’t suppose so at all. It would not be the least like our dear
Torvald Helmer to show so much courage—

NORA.
Mr. Krogstad, a little respect for my husband, please.

KROGSTAD.
Certainly—all the respect he deserves. But since you have kept the
matter so carefully to yourself, I make bold to suppose that you have a
little clearer idea, than you had yesterday, of what it actually is
that you have done?

NORA.
More than you could ever teach me.

KROGSTAD.
Yes, such a bad lawyer as I am.

NORA.
What is it you want of me?

KROGSTAD.
Only to see how you were, Mrs Helmer. I have been thinking about you
all day long. A mere cashier, a quill-driver, a—well, a man like
me—even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.

NORA.
Show it, then; think of my little children.

KROGSTAD.
Have you and your husband thought of mine? But never mind about that. I
only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter too
seriously. In the first place there will be no accusation made on my
part.

NORA.
No, of course not; I was sure of that.

KROGSTAD.
The whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason why anyone
should know anything about it. It will remain a secret between us
three.

NORA.
My husband must never get to know anything about it.

KROGSTAD.
How will you be able to prevent it? Am I to understand that you can pay
the balance that is owing?

NORA.
No, not just at present.

KROGSTAD.
Or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the money soon?

NORA.
No expedient that I mean to make use of.

KROGSTAD.
Well, in any case, it would have been of no use to you now. If you
stood there with ever so much money in your hand, I would never part
with your bond.

NORA.
Tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.

KROGSTAD.
I shall only preserve it—keep it in my possession. No one who is not
concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it. So that if
the thought of it has driven you to any desperate resolution—

NORA.
It has.

KROGSTAD.
If you had it in your mind to run away from your home—

NORA.
I had.

KROGSTAD.
Or even something worse—

NORA.
How could you know that?

KROGSTAD.
Give up the idea.

NORA.
How did you know I had thought of that?

KROGSTAD.
Most of us think of that at first. I did, too—but I hadn’t the courage.

NORA.
_[faintly]_. No more had I.

KROGSTAD.
_[in a tone of relief]_. No, that’s it, isn’t it—you hadn’t the courage
either?

NORA.
No, I haven’t—I haven’t.

KROGSTAD.
Besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. Once the first
storm at home is over—. I have a letter for your husband in my pocket.

NORA.
Telling him everything?

KROGSTAD.
In as lenient a manner as I possibly could.

NORA.
_[quickly]_. He mustn’t get the letter. Tear it up. I will find some
means of getting money.

KROGSTAD.
Excuse me, Mrs Helmer, but I think I told you just now—

NORA.
I am not speaking of what I owe you. Tell me what sum you are asking my
husband for, and I will get the money.

KROGSTAD.
I am not asking your husband for a penny.

NORA.
What do you want, then?

KROGSTAD.
I will tell you. I want to rehabilitate myself, Mrs Helmer; I want to
get on; and in that your husband must help me. For the last year and a
half I have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, amid all that
time I have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. I was
content to work my way up step by step. Now I am turned out, and I am
not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again. I
want to get on, I tell you. I want to get into the Bank again, in a
higher position. Your husband must make a place for me—

NORA.
That he will never do!

KROGSTAD.
He will; I know him; he dare not protest. And as soon as I am in there
again with him, then you will see! Within a year I shall be the
manager’s right hand. It will be Nils Krogstad and not Torvald Helmer
who manages the Bank.

NORA.
That’s a thing you will never see!

KROGSTAD.
Do you mean that you will—?

NORA.
I have courage enough for it now.

KROGSTAD.
Oh, you can’t frighten me. A fine, spoilt lady like you—

NORA.
You will see, you will see.

KROGSTAD.
Under the ice, perhaps? Down into the cold, coal-black water? And then,
in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible and
unrecognisable, with your hair fallen out—

NORA.
You can’t frighten me.

KROGSTAD.
Nor you me. People don’t do such things, Mrs Helmer. Besides, what use
would it be? I should have him completely in my power all the same.

NORA.
Afterwards? When I am no longer—

KROGSTAD.
Have you forgotten that it is I who have the keeping of your
reputation? _[NORA stands speechlessly looking at him.]_ Well, now, I
have warned you. Do not do anything foolish. When Helmer has had my
letter, I shall expect a message from him. And be sure you remember
that it is your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as
this again. I will never forgive him for that. Goodbye, Mrs Helmer.
_[Exit through the hall.]_

NORA.
_[goes to the hall door, opens it slightly and listens.]_ He is going.
He is not putting the letter in the box. Oh no, no! that’s impossible!
_[Opens the door by degrees.]_ What is that? He is standing outside. He
is not going downstairs. Is he hesitating? Can he—? _[A letter drops
into the box; then KROGSTAD’S footsteps are heard, until they die away
as he goes downstairs. NORA utters a stifled cry, and runs across the
room to the table by the sofa. A short pause.]_

NORA.
In the letter-box. _[Steals across to the hall door.]_ There it
lies—Torvald, Torvald, there is no hope for us now!

_[Mrs Linde comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress.]_

MRS LINDE.
There, I can’t see anything more to mend now. Would you like to try it
on—?

NORA.
_[in a hoarse whisper]_. Christine, come here.

MRS LINDE.
_[throwing the dress down on the sofa]_. What is the matter with you?
You look so agitated!

NORA.
Come here. Do you see that letter? There, look—you can see it through
the glass in the letter-box.

MRS LINDE.
Yes, I see it.

NORA.
That letter is from Krogstad.

MRS LINDE.
Nora—it was Krogstad who lent you the money!

NORA.
Yes, and now Torvald will know all about it.

MRS LINDE.
Believe me, Nora, that’s the best thing for both of you.

NORA.
You don’t know all. I forged a name.

MRS LINDE.
Good heavens—!

NORA.
I only want to say this to you, Christine—you must be my witness.

MRS LINDE.
Your witness? What do you mean? What am I to—?

NORA.
If I should go out of my mind—and it might easily happen—

MRS LINDE.
Nora!

NORA.
Or if anything else should happen to me—anything, for instance, that
might prevent my being here—

MRS LINDE.
Nora! Nora! you are quite out of your mind.

NORA.
And if it should happen that there were some one who wanted to take all
the responsibility, all the blame, you understand—

MRS LINDE.
Yes, yes—but how can you suppose—?

NORA.
Then you must be my witness, that it is not true, Christine. I am not
out of my mind at all; I am in my right senses now, and I tell you no
one else has known anything about it; I, and I alone, did the whole
thing. Remember that.

MRS LINDE.
I will, indeed. But I don’t understand all this.

NORA.
How should you understand it? A wonderful thing is going to happen!

MRS LINDE.
A wonderful thing?

NORA.
Yes, a wonderful thing!—But it is so terrible, Christine; it mustn’t
happen, not for all the world.

MRS LINDE.
I will go at once and see Krogstad.

NORA.
Don’t go to him; he will do you some harm.

MRS LINDE.
There was a time when he would gladly do anything for my sake.

NORA.
He?

MRS LINDE.
Where does he live?

NORA.
How should I know—? Yes _[feeling in her pocket]_, here is his card.
But the letter, the letter—!

HELMER.
_[calls from his room, knocking at the door]_. Nora!

NORA.
_[cries out anxiously]_. Oh, what’s that? What do you want?

HELMER.
Don’t be so frightened. We are not coming in; you have locked the door.
Are you trying on your dress?

NORA.
Yes, that’s it. I look so nice, Torvald.

MRS LINDE.
_[who has read the card]_. I see he lives at the corner here.

NORA.
Yes, but it’s no use. It is hopeless. The letter is lying there in the
box.

MRS LINDE.
And your husband keeps the key?

NORA.
Yes, always.

MRS LINDE.
Krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find some
pretence—

NORA.
But it is just at this time that Torvald generally—

MRS LINDE.
You must delay him. Go in to him in the meantime. I will come back as
soon as I can. _[She goes out hurriedly through the hall door.]_

NORA.
_[goes to HELMER’S door, opens it and peeps in]_. Torvald!

HELMER.
_[from the inner room]_. Well? May I venture at last to come into my
own room again? Come along, Rank, now you will see— _[Halting in the
doorway.]_ But what is this?

NORA.
What is what, dear?

HELMER.
Rank led me to expect a splendid transformation.

RANK.
_[in the doorway]_. I understood so, but evidently I was mistaken.

NORA.
Yes, nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress until
tomorrow.

HELMER.
But, my dear Nora, you look so worn out. Have you been practising too
much?

NORA.
No, I have not practised at all.

HELMER.
But you will need to—

NORA.
Yes, indeed I shall, Torvald. But I can’t get on a bit without you to
help me; I have absolutely forgotten the whole thing.

HELMER.
Oh, we will soon work it up again.

NORA.
Yes, help me, Torvald. Promise that you will! I am so nervous about
it—all the people—. You must give yourself up to me entirely this
evening. Not the tiniest bit of business—you mustn’t even take a pen in
your hand. Will you promise, Torvald dear?

HELMER.
I promise. This evening I will be wholly and absolutely at your
service, you helpless little mortal. Ah, by the way, first of all I
will just— _[Goes towards the hall door.]_

NORA.
What are you going to do there?

HELMER.
Only see if any letters have come.

NORA.
No, no! don’t do that, Torvald!

HELMER.
Why not?

NORA.
Torvald, please don’t. There is nothing there.

HELMER.
Well, let me look. _[Turns to go to the letter-box. NORA, at the piano,
plays the first bars of the Tarantella. HELMER stops in the doorway.]_
Aha!

NORA.
I can’t dance tomorrow if I don’t practise with you.

HELMER.
_[going up to her]_. Are you really so afraid of it, dear?

NORA.
Yes, so dreadfully afraid of it. Let me practise at once; there is time
now, before we go to dinner. Sit down and play for me, Torvald dear;
criticise me, and correct me as you play.

HELMER.
With great pleasure, if you wish me to. _[Sits down at the piano.]_

NORA.
_[takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl. She
hastily drapes the shawl round her. Then she springs to the front of
the stage and calls out]_. Now play for me! I am going to dance!

_[HELMER plays and NORA dances. RANK stands by the piano behind HELMER,
and looks on.]_

HELMER.
_[as he plays]_. Slower, slower!

NORA.
I can’t do it any other way.

HELMER.
Not so violently, Nora!

NORA.
This is the way.

HELMER.
_[stops playing]_. No, no—that is not a bit right.

NORA.
_[laughing and swinging the tambourine]_. Didn’t I tell you so?

RANK.
Let me play for her.

HELMER.
_[getting up]_. Yes, do. I can correct her better then.

_[RANK sits down at the piano and plays. NORA dances more and more
wildly. HELMER has taken up a position beside the stove, and during her
dance gives her frequent instructions. She does not seem to hear him;
her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no attention
to it, but goes on dancing. Enter Mrs Linde.]_

MRS LINDE.
_[standing as if spell-bound in the doorway]_. Oh!—

NORA.
_[as she dances]_. Such fun, Christine!

HELMER.
My dear darling Nora, you are dancing as if your life depended on it.

NORA.
So it does.

HELMER.
Stop, Rank; this is sheer madness. Stop, I tell you! _[RANK stops
playing, and NORA suddenly stands still. HELMER goes up to her.]_ I
could never have believed it. You have forgotten everything I taught
you.

NORA.
_[throwing away the tambourine]_. There, you see.

HELMER.
You will want a lot of coaching.

NORA.
Yes, you see how much I need it. You must coach me up to the last
minute. Promise me that, Torvald!

HELMER.
You can depend on me.

NORA.
You must not think of anything but me, either today or tomorrow; you
mustn’t open a single letter—not even open the letter-box—

HELMER.
Ah, you are still afraid of that fellow—

NORA.
Yes, indeed I am.

HELMER.
Nora, I can tell from your looks that there is a letter from him lying
there.

NORA.
I don’t know; I think there is; but you must not read anything of that
kind now. Nothing horrid must come between us until this is all over.

RANK.
_[whispers to HELMER]_. You mustn’t contradict her.

HELMER.
_[taking her in his arms]_. The child shall have her way. But tomorrow
night, after you have danced—

NORA.
Then you will be free. _[The MAID appears in the doorway to the
right.]_

MAID.
Dinner is served, ma’am.

NORA.
We will have champagne, Helen.

MAID.
Very good, ma’am. _[Exit.]_

HELMER.
Hullo!—are we going to have a banquet?

NORA.
Yes, a champagne banquet until the small hours. _[Calls out.]_ And a
few macaroons, Helen—lots, just for once!

HELMER.
Come, come, don’t be so wild and nervous. Be my own little skylark, as
you used.

NORA.
Yes, dear, I will. But go in now and you too, Doctor Rank. Christine,
you must help me to do up my hair.

RANK.
_[whispers to HELMER as they go out]_. I suppose there is nothing—she
is not expecting anything?

HELMER.
Far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than this
childish nervousness I was telling you of. _[They go into the
right-hand room.]_

NORA.
Well!

MRS LINDE.
Gone out of town.

NORA.
I could tell from your face.

MRS LINDE.
He is coming home tomorrow evening. I wrote a note for him.

NORA.
You should have let it alone; you must prevent nothing. After all, it
is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen.

MRS LINDE.
What is it that you are waiting for?

NORA.
Oh, you wouldn’t understand. Go in to them, I will come in a moment.
_[Mrs Linde goes into the dining-room. NORA stands still for a little
while, as if to compose herself. Then she looks at her watch.]_ Five
o’clock. Seven hours until midnight; and then four-and-twenty hours
until the next midnight. Then the Tarantella will be over. Twenty-four
and seven? Thirty-one hours to live.

HELMER.
_[from the doorway on the right]_. Where’s my little skylark?

NORA.
_[going to him with her arms outstretched]_. Here she is!




ACT III


_[THE SAME SCENE.—The table has been placed in the middle of the stage,
with chairs around it. A lamp is burning on the table. The door into
the hall stands open. Dance music is heard in the room above. Mrs Linde
is sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she
tries to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. Every
now and then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door.]_

MRS LINDE.
_[looking at her watch]_. Not yet—and the time is nearly up. If only he
does not—. _[Listens again.]_ Ah, there he is. _[Goes into the hall and
opens the outer door carefully. Light footsteps are heard on the
stairs. She whispers.]_ Come in. There is no one here.

KROGSTAD.
_[in the doorway]_. I found a note from you at home. What does this
mean?

MRS LINDE.
It is absolutely necessary that I should have a talk with you.

KROGSTAD.
Really? And is it absolutely necessary that it should be here?

MRS LINDE.
It is impossible where I live; there is no private entrance to my
rooms. Come in; we are quite alone. The maid is asleep, and the Helmers
are at the dance upstairs.

KROGSTAD.
_[coming into the room]_. Are the Helmers really at a dance tonight?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, why not?

KROGSTAD.
Certainly—why not?

MRS LINDE.
Now, Nils, let us have a talk.

KROGSTAD.
Can we two have anything to talk about?

MRS LINDE.
We have a great deal to talk about.

KROGSTAD.
I shouldn’t have thought so.

MRS LINDE.
No, you have never properly understood me.

KROGSTAD.
Was there anything else to understand except what was obvious to all
the world—a heartless woman jilts a man when a more lucrative chance
turns up?

MRS LINDE.
Do you believe I am as absolutely heartless as all that? And do you
believe that I did it with a light heart?

KROGSTAD.
Didn’t you?

MRS LINDE.
Nils, did you really think that?

KROGSTAD.
If it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at the time?

MRS LINDE.
I could do nothing else. As I had to break with you, it was my duty
also to put an end to all that you felt for me.

KROGSTAD.
_[wringing his hands]_. So that was it. And all this—only for the sake
of money!

MRS LINDE.
You must not forget that I had a helpless mother and two little
brothers. We couldn’t wait for you, Nils; your prospects seemed
hopeless then.

KROGSTAD.
That may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for anyone else’s
sake.

MRS LINDE.
Indeed I don’t know. Many a time did I ask myself if I had the right to
do it.

KROGSTAD.
_[more gently]_. When I lost you, it was as if all the solid ground
went from under my feet. Look at me now—I am a shipwrecked man clinging
to a bit of wreckage.

MRS LINDE.
But help may be near.

KROGSTAD.
It was near; but then you came and stood in my way.

MRS LINDE.
Unintentionally, Nils. It was only today that I learned it was your
place I was going to take in the Bank.

KROGSTAD.
I believe you, if you say so. But now that you know it, are you not
going to give it up to me?

MRS LINDE.
No, because that would not benefit you in the least.

KROGSTAD.
Oh, benefit, benefit—I would have done it whether or no.

MRS LINDE.
I have learned to act prudently. Life, and hard, bitter necessity have
taught me that.

KROGSTAD.
And life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.

MRS LINDE.
Then life has taught you something very reasonable. But deeds you must
believe in?

KROGSTAD.
What do you mean by that?

MRS LINDE.
You said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some wreckage.

KROGSTAD.
I had good reason to say so.

MRS LINDE.
Well, I am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some wreckage—no one to
mourn for, no one to care for.

KROGSTAD.
It was your own choice.

MRS LINDE.
There was no other choice—then.

KROGSTAD.
Well, what now?

MRS LINDE.
Nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could join forces?

KROGSTAD.
What are you saying?

MRS LINDE.
Two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better chance than each
on their own.

KROGSTAD.
Christine I...

MRS LINDE.
What do you suppose brought me to town?

KROGSTAD.
Do you mean that you gave me a thought?

MRS LINDE.
I could not endure life without work. All my life, as long as I can
remember, I have worked, and it has been my greatest and only pleasure.
But now I am quite alone in the world—my life is so dreadfully empty
and I feel so forsaken. There is not the least pleasure in working for
one’s self. Nils, give me someone and something to work for.

KROGSTAD.
I don’t trust that. It is nothing but a woman’s overstrained sense of
generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of yourself.

MRS LINDE.
Have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

KROGSTAD.
Could you really do it? Tell me—do you know all about my past life?

MRS LINDE.
Yes.

KROGSTAD.
And do you know what they think of me here?

MRS LINDE.
You seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been quite
another man.

KROGSTAD.
I am certain of it.

MRS LINDE.
Is it too late now?

KROGSTAD.
Christine, are you saying this deliberately? Yes, I am sure you are. I
see it in your face. Have you really the courage, then—?

MRS LINDE.
I want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a mother. We
two need each other. Nils, I have faith in your real character—I can
dare anything together with you.

KROGSTAD.
_[grasps her hands]_. Thanks, thanks, Christine! Now I shall find a way
to clear myself in the eyes of the world. Ah, but I forgot—

MRS LINDE.
_[listening]_. Hush! The Tarantella! Go, go!

KROGSTAD.
Why? What is it?

MRS LINDE.
Do you hear them up there? When that is over, we may expect them back.

KROGSTAD.
Yes, yes—I will go. But it is all no use. Of course you are not aware
what steps I have taken in the matter of the Helmers.

MRS LINDE.
Yes, I know all about that.

KROGSTAD.
And in spite of that have you the courage to—?

MRS LINDE.
I understand very well to what lengths a man like you might be driven
by despair.

KROGSTAD.
If I could only undo what I have done!

MRS LINDE.
You cannot. Your letter is lying in the letter-box now.

KROGSTAD.
Are you sure of that?

MRS LINDE.
Quite sure, but—

KROGSTAD.
_[with a searching look at her]_. Is that what it all means?—that you
want to save your friend at any cost? Tell me frankly. Is that it?

MRS LINDE.
Nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another’s sake, doesn’t do
it a second time.

KROGSTAD.
I will ask for my letter back.

MRS LINDE.
No, no.

KROGSTAD.
Yes, of course I will. I will wait here until Helmer comes; I will tell
him he must give me my letter back—that it only concerns my
dismissal—that he is not to read it—

MRS LINDE.
No, Nils, you must not recall your letter.

KROGSTAD.
But, tell me, wasn’t it for that very purpose that you asked me to meet
you here?

MRS LINDE.
In my first moment of fright, it was. But twenty-four hours have
elapsed since then, and in that time I have witnessed incredible things
in this house. Helmer must know all about it. This unhappy secret must
be disclosed; they must have a complete understanding between them,
which is impossible with all this concealment and falsehood going on.

KROGSTAD.
Very well, if you will take the responsibility. But there is one thing
I can do in any case, and I shall do it at once.

MRS LINDE.
_[listening]_. You must be quick and go! The dance is over; we are not
safe a moment longer.

KROGSTAD.
I will wait for you below.

MRS LINDE.
Yes, do. You must see me back to my door...

KROGSTAD.
I have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my life!
_[Goes out through the outer door. The door between the room and the
hall remains open.]_

MRS LINDE.
_[tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready]_. What a
difference! what a difference! Someone to work for and live for—a home
to bring comfort into. That I will do, indeed. I wish they would be
quick and come—_[Listens.]_ Ah, there they are now. I must put on my
things. _[Takes up her hat and cloak. HELMER’S and NORA’S voices are
heard outside; a key is turned, and HELMER brings NORA almost by force
into the hall. She is in an Italian costume with a large black shawl
around her; he is in evening dress, and a black domino which is flying
open.]_

NORA.
_[hanging back in the doorway, and struggling with him]_. No, no,
no!—don’t take me in. I want to go upstairs again; I don’t want to
leave so early.

HELMER.
But, my dearest Nora—

NORA.
Please, Torvald dear—please, please—only an hour more.

HELMER.
Not a single minute, my sweet Nora. You know that was our agreement.
Come along into the room; you are catching cold standing there. _[He
brings her gently into the room, in spite of her resistance.]_

MRS LINDE.
Good evening.

NORA.
Christine!

HELMER.
You here, so late, Mrs Linde?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, you must excuse me; I was so anxious to see Nora in her dress.

NORA.
Have you been sitting here waiting for me?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, unfortunately I came too late, you had already gone upstairs; and
I thought I couldn’t go away again without having seen you.

HELMER.
_[taking off NORA’S shawl]_. Yes, take a good look at her. I think she
is worth looking at. Isn’t she charming, Mrs Linde?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, indeed she is.

HELMER.
Doesn’t she look remarkably pretty? Everyone thought so at the dance.
But she is terribly self-willed, this sweet little person. What are we
to do with her? You will hardly believe that I had almost to bring her
away by force.

NORA.
Torvald, you will repent not having let me stay, even if it were only
for half an hour.

HELMER.
Listen to her, Mrs Linde! She had danced her Tarantella, and it had
been a tremendous success, as it deserved—although possibly the
performance was a trifle too realistic—a little more so, I mean, than
was strictly compatible with the limitations of art. But never mind
about that! The chief thing is, she had made a success—she had made a
tremendous success. Do you think I was going to let her remain there
after that, and spoil the effect? No, indeed! I took my charming little
Capri maiden—my capricious little Capri maiden, I should say—on my arm;
took one quick turn round the room; a curtsey on either side, and, as
they say in novels, the beautiful apparition disappeared. An exit ought
always to be effective, Mrs Linde; but that is what I cannot make Nora
understand. Pooh! this room is hot. _[Throws his domino on a chair, and
opens the door of his room.]_ Hullo! it’s all dark in here. Oh, of
course—excuse me—. _[He goes in, and lights some candles.]_

NORA.
_[in a hurried and breathless whisper]_. Well?

MRS LINDE.
_[in a low voice]_. I have had a talk with him.

NORA.
Yes, and—

MRS LINDE.
Nora, you must tell your husband all about it.

NORA.
_[in an expressionless voice]_. I knew it.

MRS LINDE.
You have nothing to be afraid of as far as Krogstad is concerned; but
you must tell him.

NORA.
I won’t tell him.

MRS LINDE.
Then the letter will.

NORA.
Thank you, Christine. Now I know what I must do. Hush—!

HELMER.
_[coming in again]_. Well, Mrs Linde, have you admired her?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, and now I will say goodnight.

HELMER.
What, already? Is this yours, this knitting?

MRS LINDE.
_[taking it]_. Yes, thank you, I had very nearly forgotten it.

HELMER.
So you knit?

MRS LINDE.
Of course.

HELMER.
Do you know, you ought to embroider.

MRS LINDE.
Really? Why?

HELMER.
Yes, it’s far more becoming. Let me show you. You hold the embroidery
thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the right—like
this—with a long, easy sweep. Do you see?

MRS LINDE.
Yes, perhaps—

HELMER.
But in the case of knitting—that can never be anything but ungraceful;
look here—the arms close together, the knitting-needles going up and
down—it has a sort of Chinese effect—. That was really excellent
champagne they gave us.

MRS LINDE.
Well,—goodnight, Nora, and don’t be self-willed any more.

HELMER.
That’s right, Mrs Linde.

MRS LINDE.
Goodnight, Mr. Helmer.

HELMER.
_[accompanying her to the door]_. Goodnight, goodnight. I hope you will
get home all right. I should be very happy to—but you haven’t any great
distance to go. Goodnight, goodnight. _[She goes out; he shuts the door
after her, and comes in again.]_ Ah!—at last we have got rid of her.
She is a frightful bore, that woman.

NORA.
Aren’t you very tired, Torvald?

HELMER.
No, not in the least.

NORA.
Nor sleepy?

HELMER.
Not a bit. On the contrary, I feel extraordinarily lively. And you?—you
really look both tired and sleepy.

NORA.
Yes, I am very tired. I want to go to sleep at once.

HELMER.
There, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay there any
longer.

NORA.
Everything you do is quite right, Torvald.

HELMER.
_[kissing her on the forehead]_. Now my little skylark is speaking
reasonably. Did you notice what good spirits Rank was in this evening?

NORA.
Really? Was he? I didn’t speak to him at all.

HELMER.
And I very little, but I have not for a long time seen him in such good
form. _[Looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to her.]_ It is
delightful to be at home by ourselves again, to be all alone with
you—you fascinating, charming little darling!

NORA.
Don’t look at me like that, Torvald.

HELMER.
Why shouldn’t I look at my dearest treasure?—at all the beauty that is
mine, all my very own?

NORA.
_[going to the other side of the table]_. You mustn’t say things like
that to me tonight.

HELMER.
_[following her]_. You have still got the Tarantella in your blood, I
see. And it makes you more captivating than ever. Listen—the guests are
beginning to go now. _[In a lower voice.]_ Nora—soon the whole house
will be quiet.

NORA.
Yes, I hope so.

HELMER.
Yes, my own darling Nora. Do you know, when I am out at a party with
you like this, why I speak so little to you, keep away from you, and
only send a stolen glance in your direction now and then?—do you know
why I do that? It is because I make believe to myself that we are
secretly in love, and you are my secretly promised bride, and that no
one suspects there is anything between us.

NORA.
Yes, yes—I know very well your thoughts are with me all the time.

HELMER.
And when we are leaving, and I am putting the shawl over your beautiful
young shoulders—on your lovely neck—then I imagine that you are my
young bride and that we have just come from the wedding, and I am
bringing you for the first time into our home—to be alone with you for
the first time—quite alone with my shy little darling! All this evening
I have longed for nothing but you. When I watched the seductive figures
of the Tarantella, my blood was on fire; I could endure it no longer,
and that was why I brought you down so early—

NORA.
Go away, Torvald! You must let me go. I won’t—

HELMER.
What’s that? You’re joking, my little Nora! You won’t—you won’t? Am I
not your husband—? _[A knock is heard at the outer door.]_

NORA.
_[starting]_. Did you hear—?

HELMER.
_[going into the hall]_. Who is it?

RANK.
_[outside]_. It is I. May I come in for a moment?

HELMER.
_[in a fretful whisper]_. Oh, what does he want now? _[Aloud.]_ Wait a
minute! _[Unlocks the door.]_ Come, that’s kind of you not to pass by
our door.

RANK.
I thought I heard your voice, and felt as if I should like to look in.
_[With a swift glance round.]_ Ah, yes!—these dear familiar rooms. You
are very happy and cosy in here, you two.

HELMER.
It seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well upstairs too.

RANK.
Excellently. Why shouldn’t I? Why shouldn’t one enjoy everything in
this world?—at any rate as much as one can, and as long as one can. The
wine was capital—

HELMER.
Especially the champagne.

RANK.
So you noticed that too? It is almost incredible how much I managed to
put away!

NORA.
Torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight too.

RANK.
Did he?

NORA.
Yes, and he is always in such good spirits afterwards.

RANK.
Well, why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a well-spent day?

HELMER.
Well spent? I am afraid I can’t take credit for that.

RANK.
_[clapping him on the back]_. But I can, you know!

NORA.
Doctor Rank, you must have been occupied with some scientific
investigation today.

RANK.
Exactly.

HELMER.
Just listen!—little Nora talking about scientific investigations!

NORA.
And may I congratulate you on the result?

RANK.
Indeed you may.

NORA.
Was it favourable, then?

RANK.
The best possible, for both doctor and patient—certainty.

NORA.
_[quickly and searchingly]_. Certainty?

RANK.
Absolute certainty. So wasn’t I entitled to make a merry evening of it
after that?

NORA.
Yes, you certainly were, Doctor Rank.

HELMER.
I think so too, so long as you don’t have to pay for it in the morning.

RANK.
Oh well, one can’t have anything in this life without paying for it.

NORA.
Doctor Rank—are you fond of fancy-dress balls?

RANK.
Yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.

NORA.
Tell me—what shall we two wear at the next?

HELMER.
Little featherbrain!—are you thinking of the next already?

RANK.
We two? Yes, I can tell you. You shall go as a good fairy—

HELMER.
Yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for that?

RANK.
Let your wife go dressed just as she is in everyday life.

HELMER.
That was really very prettily turned. But can’t you tell us what you
will be?

RANK.
Yes, my dear friend, I have quite made up my mind about that.

HELMER.
Well?

RANK.
At the next fancy-dress ball I shall be invisible.

HELMER.
That’s a good joke!

RANK.
There is a big black hat—have you never heard of hats that make you
invisible? If you put one on, no one can see you.

HELMER.
_[suppressing a smile]_. Yes, you are quite right.

RANK.
But I am clean forgetting what I came for. Helmer, give me a cigar—one
of the dark Havanas.

HELMER.
With the greatest pleasure. _[Offers him his case.]_

RANK.
_[takes a cigar and cuts off the end]_. Thanks.

NORA.
_[striking a match]_. Let me give you a light.

RANK.
Thank you. _[She holds the match for him to light his cigar.]_ And now
goodbye!

HELMER.
Goodbye, goodbye, dear old man!

NORA.
Sleep well, Doctor Rank.

RANK.
Thank you for that wish.

NORA.
Wish me the same.

RANK.
You? Well, if you want me to sleep well! And thanks for the light. _[He
nods to them both and goes out.]_

HELMER.
_[in a subdued voice]_. He has drunk more than he ought.

NORA.
_[absently]_. Maybe. _[HELMER takes a bunch of keys out of his pocket
and goes into the hall.]_ Torvald! what are you going to do there?

HELMER.
Emptying the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room to put
the newspaper in tomorrow morning.

NORA.
Are you going to work tonight?

HELMER.
You know quite well I’m not. What is this? Someone has been at the
lock.

NORA.
At the lock—?

HELMER.
Yes, someone has. What can it mean? I should never have thought the
maid—. Here is a broken hairpin. Nora, it is one of yours.

NORA.
_[quickly]_. Then it must have been the children—

HELMER.
Then you must get them out of those ways. There, at last I have got it
open. _[Takes out the contents of the letter-box, and calls to the
kitchen.]_ Helen!—Helen, put out the light over the front door. _[Goes
back into the room and shuts the door into the hall. He holds out his
hand full of letters.]_ Look at that—look what a heap of them there
are. _[Turning them over.]_ What on earth is that?

NORA.
_[at the window]_. The letter—No! Torvald, no!

HELMER.
Two cards—of Rank’s.

NORA.
Of Doctor Rank’s?

HELMER.
_[looking at them]_. Doctor Rank. They were on the top. He must have
put them in when he went out.

NORA.
Is there anything written on them?

HELMER.
There is a black cross over the name. Look there—what an uncomfortable
idea! It looks as if he were announcing his own death.

NORA.
It is just what he is doing.

HELMER.
What? Do you know anything about it? Has he said anything to you?

NORA.
Yes. He told me that when the cards came it would be his leave-taking
from us. He means to shut himself up and die.

HELMER.
My poor old friend! Certainly I knew we should not have him very long
with us. But so soon! And so he hides himself away like a wounded
animal.

NORA.
If it has to happen, it is best it should be without a word—don’t you
think so, Torvald?

HELMER.
_[walking up and down]_. He had so grown into our lives. I can’t think
of him as having gone out of them. He, with his sufferings and his
loneliness, was like a cloudy background to our sunlit happiness. Well,
perhaps it is best so. For him, anyway. _[Standing still.]_ And perhaps
for us too, Nora. We two are thrown quite upon each other now. _[Puts
his arms round her.]_ My darling wife, I don’t feel as if I could hold
you tight enough. Do you know, Nora, I have often wished that you might
be threatened by some great danger, so that I might risk my life’s
blood, and everything, for your sake.

NORA.
_[disengages herself, and says firmly and decidedly]_. Now you must
read your letters, Torvald.

HELMER.
No, no; not tonight. I want to be with you, my darling wife.

NORA.
With the thought of your friend’s death—

HELMER.
You are right, it has affected us both. Something ugly has come between
us—the thought of the horrors of death. We must try and rid our minds
of that. Until then—we will each go to our own room.

NORA.
_[hanging on his neck]_. Goodnight, Torvald—Goodnight!

HELMER.
_[kissing her on the forehead]_. Goodnight, my little singing-bird.
Sleep sound, Nora. Now I will read my letters through. _[He takes his
letters and goes into his room, shutting the door after him.]_

NORA.
_[gropes distractedly about, seizes HELMER’S domino, throws it round
her, while she says in quick, hoarse, spasmodic whispers]_. Never to
see him again. Never! Never! _[Puts her shawl over her head.]_ Never to
see my children again either—never again. Never! Never!—Ah! the icy,
black water—the unfathomable depths—If only it were over! He has got it
now—now he is reading it. Goodbye, Torvald and my children! _[She is
about to rush out through the hall, when HELMER opens his door
hurriedly and stands with an open letter in his hand.]_

HELMER.
Nora!

NORA.
Ah!—

HELMER.
What is this? Do you know what is in this letter?

NORA.
Yes, I know. Let me go! Let me get out!

HELMER.
_[holding her back]_. Where are you going?

NORA.
_[trying to get free]_. You shan’t save me, Torvald!

HELMER.
_[reeling]_. True? Is this true, that I read here? Horrible! No, no—it
is impossible that it can be true.

NORA.
It is true. I have loved you above everything else in the world.

HELMER.
Oh, don’t let us have any silly excuses.

NORA.
_[taking a step towards him]_. Torvald—!

HELMER.
Miserable creature—what have you done?

NORA.
Let me go. You shall not suffer for my sake. You shall not take it upon
yourself.

HELMER.
No tragic airs, please. _[Locks the hall door.]_ Here you shall stay
and give me an explanation. Do you understand what you have done?
Answer me! Do you understand what you have done?

NORA.
_[looks steadily at him and says with a growing look of coldness in her
face]_. Yes, now I am beginning to understand thoroughly.

HELMER.
_[walking about the room]_. What a horrible awakening! All these eight
years—she who was my joy and pride—a hypocrite, a liar—worse, worse—a
criminal! The unutterable ugliness of it all!—For shame! For shame!
_[NORA is silent and looks steadily at him. He stops in front of her.]_
I ought to have suspected that something of the sort would happen. I
ought to have foreseen it. All your father’s want of principle—be
silent!—all your father’s want of principle has come out in you. No
religion, no morality, no sense of duty—. How I am punished for having
winked at what he did! I did it for your sake, and this is how you
repay me.

NORA.
Yes, that’s just it.

HELMER.
Now you have destroyed all my happiness. You have ruined all my future.
It is horrible to think of! I am in the power of an unscrupulous man;
he can do what he likes with me, ask anything he likes of me, give me
any orders he pleases—I dare not refuse. And I must sink to such
miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!

NORA.
When I am out of the way, you will be free.

HELMER.
No fine speeches, please. Your father had always plenty of those ready,
too. What good would it be to me if you were out of the way, as you
say? Not the slightest. He can make the affair known everywhere; and if
he does, I may be falsely suspected of having been a party to your
criminal action. Very likely people will think I was behind it all—that
it was I who prompted you! And I have to thank you for all this—you
whom I have cherished during the whole of our married life. Do you
understand now what it is you have done for me?

NORA.
_[coldly and quietly]_. Yes.

HELMER.
It is so incredible that I can’t take it in. But we must come to some
understanding. Take off that shawl. Take it off, I tell you. I must try
and appease him some way or another. The matter must be hushed up at
any cost. And as for you and me, it must appear as if everything
between us were just as before—but naturally only in the eyes of the
world. You will still remain in my house, that is a matter of course.
But I shall not allow you to bring up the children; I dare not trust
them to you. To think that I should be obliged to say so to one whom I
have loved so dearly, and whom I still—. No, that is all over. From
this moment happiness is not the question; all that concerns us is to
save the remains, the fragments, the appearance—

_[A ring is heard at the front-door bell.]_

HELMER.
_[with a start]_. What is that? So late! Can the worst—? Can he—? Hide
yourself, Nora. Say you are ill.

_[NORA stands motionless. HELMER goes and unlocks the hall door.]_

MAID.
_[half-dressed, comes to the door]_. A letter for the mistress.

HELMER.
Give it to me. _[Takes the letter, and shuts the door.]_ Yes, it is
from him. You shall not have it; I will read it myself.

NORA.
Yes, read it.

HELMER.
_[standing by the lamp]_. I scarcely have the courage to do it. It may
mean ruin for both of us. No, I must know. _[Tears open the letter,
runs his eye over a few lines, looks at a paper enclosed, and gives a
shout of joy.]_ Nora! _[She looks at him questioningly.]_ Nora!—No, I
must read it once again—. Yes, it is true! I am saved! Nora, I am
saved!

NORA.
And I?

HELMER.
You too, of course; we are both saved, both you and I. Look, he sends
you your bond back. He says he regrets and repents—that a happy change
in his life—never mind what he says! We are saved, Nora! No one can do
anything to you. Oh, Nora, Nora!—no, first I must destroy these hateful
things. Let me see—. _[Takes a look at the bond.]_ No, no, I won’t look
at it. The whole thing shall be nothing but a bad dream to me. _[Tears
up the bond and both letters, throws them all into the stove, and
watches them burn.]_ There—now it doesn’t exist any longer. He says
that since Christmas Eve you—. These must have been three dreadful days
for you, Nora.

NORA.
I have fought a hard fight these three days.

HELMER.
And suffered agonies, and seen no way out but—. No, we won’t call any
of the horrors to mind. We will only shout with joy, and keep saying,
“It’s all over! It’s all over!” Listen to me, Nora. You don’t seem to
realise that it is all over. What is this?—such a cold, set face! My
poor little Nora, I quite understand; you don’t feel as if you could
believe that I have forgiven you. But it is true, Nora, I swear it; I
have forgiven you everything. I know that what you did, you did out of
love for me.

NORA.
That is true.

HELMER.
You have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband. Only you had not
sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used. But do you suppose
you are any the less dear to me, because you don’t understand how to
act on your own responsibility? No, no; only lean on me; I will advise
you and direct you. I should not be a man if this womanly helplessness
did not just give you a double attractiveness in my eyes. You must not
think anymore about the hard things I said in my first moment of
consternation, when I thought everything was going to overwhelm me. I
have forgiven you, Nora; I swear to you I have forgiven you.

NORA.
Thank you for your forgiveness. _[She goes out through the door to the
right.]_

HELMER.
No, don’t go—. _[Looks in.]_ What are you doing in there?

NORA.
_[from within]_. Taking off my fancy dress.

HELMER.
_[standing at the open door]_. Yes, do. Try and calm yourself, and make
your mind easy again, my frightened little singing-bird. Be at rest,
and feel secure; I have broad wings to shelter you under. _[Walks up
and down by the door.]_ How warm and cosy our home is, Nora. Here is
shelter for you; here I will protect you like a hunted dove that I have
saved from a hawk’s claws; I will bring peace to your poor beating
heart. It will come, little by little, Nora, believe me. Tomorrow
morning you will look upon it all quite differently; soon everything
will be just as it was before. Very soon you won’t need me to assure
you that I have forgiven you; you will yourself feel the certainty that
I have done so. Can you suppose I should ever think of such a thing as
repudiating you, or even reproaching you? You have no idea what a true
man’s heart is like, Nora. There is something so indescribably sweet
and satisfying, to a man, in the knowledge that he has forgiven his
wife—forgiven her freely, and with all his heart. It seems as if that
had made her, as it were, doubly his own; he has given her a new life,
so to speak; and she has in a way become both wife and child to him. So
you shall be for me after this, my little scared, helpless darling.
Have no anxiety about anything, Nora; only be frank and open with me,
and I will serve as will and conscience both to you—. What is this? Not
gone to bed? Have you changed your things?

NORA.
_[in everyday dress]_. Yes, Torvald, I have changed my things now.

HELMER.
But what for?—so late as this.

NORA.
I shall not sleep tonight.

HELMER.
But, my dear Nora—

NORA.
_[looking at her watch]_. It is not so very late. Sit down here,
Torvald. You and I have much to say to one another. _[She sits down at
one side of the table.]_

HELMER.
Nora—what is this?—this cold, set face?

NORA.
Sit down. It will take some time; I have a lot to talk over with you.

HELMER.
_[sits down at the opposite side of the table]_. You alarm me,
Nora!—and I don’t understand you.

NORA.
No, that is just it. You don’t understand me, and I have never
understood you either—before tonight. No, you mustn’t interrupt me. You
must simply listen to what I say. Torvald, this is a settling of
accounts.

HELMER.
What do you mean by that?

NORA.
_[after a short silence]_. Isn’t there one thing that strikes you as
strange in our sitting here like this?

HELMER.
What is that?

NORA.
We have been married now eight years. Does it not occur to you that
this is the first time we two, you and I, husband and wife, have had a
serious conversation?

HELMER.
What do you mean by serious?

NORA.
In all these eight years—longer than that—from the very beginning of
our acquaintance, we have never exchanged a word on any serious
subject.

HELMER.
Was it likely that I would be continually and forever telling you about
worries that you could not help me to bear?

NORA.
I am not speaking about business matters. I say that we have never sat
down in earnest together to try and get at the bottom of anything.

HELMER.
But, dearest Nora, would it have been any good to you?

NORA.
That is just it; you have never understood me. I have been greatly
wronged, Torvald—first by papa and then by you.

HELMER.
What! By us two—by us two, who have loved you better than anyone else
in the world?

NORA.
_[shaking her head]_. You have never loved me. You have only thought it
pleasant to be in love with me.

HELMER.
Nora, what do I hear you saying?

NORA.
It is perfectly true, Torvald. When I was at home with papa, he told me
his opinion about everything, and so I had the same opinions; and if I
differed from him I concealed the fact, because he would not have liked
it. He called me his doll-child, and he played with me just as I used
to play with my dolls. And when I came to live with you—

HELMER.
What sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?

NORA.
_[undisturbed]_. I mean that I was simply transferred from papa’s hands
into yours. You arranged everything according to your own taste, and so
I got the same tastes as you—or else I pretended to, I am really not
quite sure which—I think sometimes the one and sometimes the other.
When I look back on it, it seems to me as if I had been living here
like a poor woman—just from hand to mouth. I have existed merely to
perform tricks for you, Torvald. But you would have it so. You and papa
have committed a great sin against me. It is your fault that I have
made nothing of my life.

HELMER.
How unreasonable and how ungrateful you are, Nora! Have you not been
happy here?

NORA.
No, I have never been happy. I thought I was, but it has never really
been so.

HELMER.
Not—not happy!

NORA.
No, only merry. And you have always been so kind to me. But our home
has been nothing but a playroom. I have been your doll-wife, just as at
home I was papa’s doll-child; and here the children have been my dolls.
I thought it great fun when you played with me, just as they thought it
great fun when I played with them. That is what our marriage has been,
Torvald.

HELMER.
There is some truth in what you say—exaggerated and strained as your
view of it is. But for the future it shall be different. Playtime shall
be over, and lesson-time shall begin.

NORA.
Whose lessons? Mine, or the children’s?

HELMER.
Both yours and the children’s, my darling Nora.

NORA.
Alas, Torvald, you are not the man to educate me into being a proper
wife for you.

HELMER.
And you can say that!

NORA.
And I—how am I fitted to bring up the children?

HELMER.
Nora!

NORA.
Didn’t you say so yourself a little while ago—that you dare not trust
me to bring them up?

HELMER.
In a moment of anger! Why do you pay any heed to that?

NORA.
Indeed, you were perfectly right. I am not fit for the task. There is
another task I must undertake first. I must try and educate myself—you
are not the man to help me in that. I must do that for myself. And that
is why I am going to leave you now.

HELMER.
_[springing up]_. What do you say?

NORA.
I must stand quite alone, if I am to understand myself and everything
about me. It is for that reason that I cannot remain with you any
longer.

HELMER.
Nora, Nora!

NORA.
I am going away from here now, at once. I am sure Christine will take
me in for the night—

HELMER.
You are out of your mind! I won’t allow it! I forbid you!

NORA.
It is no use forbidding me anything any longer. I will take with me
what belongs to myself. I will take nothing from you, either now or
later.

HELMER.
What sort of madness is this!

NORA.
Tomorrow I shall go home—I mean, to my old home. It will be easiest for
me to find something to do there.

HELMER.
You blind, foolish woman!

NORA.
I must try and get some sense, Torvald.

HELMER.
To desert your home, your husband and your children! And you don’t
consider what people will say!

NORA.
I cannot consider that at all. I only know that it is necessary for me.

HELMER.
It’s shocking. This is how you would neglect your most sacred duties.

NORA.
What do you consider my most sacred duties?

HELMER.
Do I need to tell you that? Are they not your duties to your husband
and your children?

NORA.
I have other duties just as sacred.

HELMER.
That you have not. What duties could those be?

NORA.
Duties to myself.

HELMER.
Before all else, you are a wife and a mother.

NORA.
I don’t believe that any longer. I believe that before all else I am a
reasonable human being, just as you are—or, at all events, that I must
try and become one. I know quite well, Torvald, that most people would
think you right, and that views of that kind are to be found in books;
but I can no longer content myself with what most people say, or with
what is found in books. I must think over things for myself and get to
understand them.

HELMER.
Can you not understand your place in your own home? Have you not a
reliable guide in such matters as that?—have you no religion?

NORA.
I am afraid, Torvald, I do not exactly know what religion is.

HELMER.
What are you saying?

NORA.
I know nothing but what the clergyman said, when I went to be
confirmed. He told us that religion was this, and that, and the other.
When I am away from all this, and am alone, I will look into that
matter too. I will see if what the clergyman said is true, or at all
events if it is true for me.

HELMER.
This is unheard of in a girl of your age! But if religion cannot lead
you aright, let me try and awaken your conscience. I suppose you have
some moral sense? Or—answer me—am I to think you have none?

NORA.
I assure you, Torvald, that is not an easy question to answer. I really
don’t know. The thing perplexes me altogether. I only know that you and
I look at it in quite a different light. I am learning, too, that the
law is quite another thing from what I supposed; but I find it
impossible to convince myself that the law is right. According to it a
woman has no right to spare her old dying father, or to save her
husband’s life. I can’t believe that.

HELMER.
You talk like a child. You don’t understand the conditions of the world
in which you live.

NORA.
No, I don’t. But now I am going to try. I am going to see if I can make
out who is right, the world or I.

HELMER.
You are ill, Nora; you are delirious; I almost think you are out of
your mind.

NORA.
I have never felt my mind so clear and certain as tonight.

HELMER.
And is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your husband
and your children?

NORA.
Yes, it is.

HELMER.
Then there is only one possible explanation.

NORA.
What is that?

HELMER.
You do not love me anymore.

NORA.
No, that is just it.

HELMER.
Nora!—and you can say that?

NORA.
It gives me great pain, Torvald, for you have always been so kind to
me, but I cannot help it. I do not love you any more.

HELMER.
_[regaining his composure]_. Is that a clear and certain conviction
too?

NORA.
Yes, absolutely clear and certain. That is the reason why I will not
stay here any longer.

HELMER.
And can you tell me what I have done to forfeit your love?

NORA.
Yes, indeed I can. It was tonight, when the wonderful thing did not
happen; then I saw you were not the man I had thought you were.

HELMER.
Explain yourself better. I don’t understand you.

NORA.
I have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows, I knew
very well that wonderful things don’t happen every day. Then this
horrible misfortune came upon me; and then I felt quite certain that
the wonderful thing was going to happen at last. When Krogstad’s letter
was lying out there, never for a moment did I imagine that you would
consent to accept this man’s conditions. I was so absolutely certain
that you would say to him: Publish the thing to the whole world. And
when that was done—

HELMER.
Yes, what then?—when I had exposed my wife to shame and disgrace?

NORA.
When that was done, I was so absolutely certain, you would come forward
and take everything upon yourself, and say: I am the guilty one.

HELMER.
Nora—!

NORA.
You mean that I would never have accepted such a sacrifice on your
part? No, of course not. But what would my assurances have been worth
against yours? That was the wonderful thing which I hoped for and
feared; and it was to prevent that, that I wanted to kill myself.

HELMER.
I would gladly work night and day for you, Nora—bear sorrow and want
for your sake. But no man would sacrifice his honour for the one he
loves.

NORA.
It is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done.

HELMER.
Oh, you think and talk like a heedless child.

NORA.
Maybe. But you neither think nor talk like the man I could bind myself
to. As soon as your fear was over—and it was not fear for what
threatened me, but for what might happen to you—when the whole thing
was past, as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at
all had happened. Exactly as before, I was your little skylark, your
doll, which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care, because
it was so brittle and fragile. _[Getting up.]_ Torvald—it was then it
dawned upon me that for eight years I had been living here with a
strange man, and had borne him three children—. Oh, I can’t bear to
think of it! I could tear myself into little bits!

HELMER.
_[sadly]_. I see, I see. An abyss has opened between us—there is no
denying it. But, Nora, would it not be possible to fill it up?

NORA.
As I am now, I am no wife for you.

HELMER.
I have it in me to become a different man.

NORA.
Perhaps—if your doll is taken away from you.

HELMER.
But to part!—to part from you! No, no, Nora, I can’t understand that
idea.

NORA.
_[going out to the right]_. That makes it all the more certain that it
must be done. _[She comes back with her cloak and hat and a small bag
which she puts on a chair by the table.]_

HELMER.
Nora, Nora, not now! Wait until tomorrow.

NORA.
_[putting on her cloak]_. I cannot spend the night in a strange man’s
room.

HELMER.
But can’t we live here like brother and sister—?

NORA.
_[putting on her hat]_. You know very well that would not last long.
_[Puts the shawl round her.]_ Goodbye, Torvald. I won’t see the little
ones. I know they are in better hands than mine. As I am now, I can be
of no use to them.

HELMER.
But some day, Nora—some day?

NORA.
How can I tell? I have no idea what is going to become of me.

HELMER.
But you are my wife, whatever becomes of you.

NORA.
Listen, Torvald. I have heard that when a wife deserts her husband’s
house, as I am doing now, he is legally freed from all obligations
towards her. In any case, I set you free from all your obligations. You
are not to feel yourself bound in the slightest way, any more than I
shall. There must be perfect freedom on both sides. See, here is your
ring back. Give me mine.

HELMER.
That too?

NORA.
That too.

HELMER.
Here it is.

NORA.
That’s right. Now it is all over. I have put the keys here. The maids
know all about everything in the house—better than I do. Tomorrow,
after I have left her, Christine will come here and pack up my own
things that I brought with me from home. I will have them sent after
me.

HELMER.
All over! All over!—Nora, shall you never think of me again?

NORA.
I know I shall often think of you, the children, and this house.

HELMER.
May I write to you, Nora?

NORA.
No—never. You must not do that.

HELMER.
But at least let me send you—

NORA.
Nothing—nothing—

HELMER.
Let me help you if you are in want.

NORA.
No. I can receive nothing from a stranger.

HELMER.
Nora—can I never be anything more than a stranger to you?

NORA.
_[taking her bag]_. Ah, Torvald, the most wonderful thing of all would
have to happen.

HELMER.
Tell me what that would be!

NORA.
Both you and I would have to be so changed that—. Oh, Torvald, I don’t
believe any longer in wonderful things happening.

HELMER.
But I will believe in it. Tell me! So changed that—?

NORA.
That our life together would be a real wedlock. Goodbye. _[She goes out
through the hall.]_

HELMER.
_[sinks down on a chair at the door and buries his face in his hands]_.
Nora! Nora! _[Looks round, and rises.]_ Empty. She is gone. _[A hope
flashes across his mind.]_ The most wonderful thing of all—?

_[The sound of a door shutting is heard from below.]_








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DOLL'S HOUSE : A PLAY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Roderick Random
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventures of Roderick Random

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: May 1, 2003 [eBook #4085]
                Most recently updated: August 5, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Tapio Riikonen and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM ***




The Adventures of Roderick Random

by Tobias Smollett


Contents

 THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE
 APOLOGUE
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.
 CHAPTER XI.
 CHAPTER XII.
 CHAPTER XIII.
 CHAPTER XIV.
 CHAPTER XV.
 CHAPTER XVI.
 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XVIII.
 CHAPTER XIX.
 CHAPTER XX.
 CHAPTER XXI.
 CHAPTER XXII.
 CHAPTER XXIII.
 CHAPTER XXIV.
 CHAPTER XXV.
 CHAPTER XXVI.
 CHAPTER XXVII.
 CHAPTER XXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXIX.
 CHAPTER XXX.
 CHAPTER XXXI.
 CHAPTER XXXII.
 CHAPTER XXXIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIV.
 CHAPTER XXXV.
 CHAPTER XXXVI.
 CHAPTER XXXVII.
 CHAPTER XXXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIX.
 CHAPTER XL.
 CHAPTER XLI.
 CHAPTER XLII.
 CHAPTER XLIII.
 CHAPTER XLIV.
 CHAPTER XLV.
 CHAPTER XLVI.
 CHAPTER XLVII.
 CHAPTER XLVIII.
 CHAPTER XLIX.
 CHAPTER L.
 CHAPTER LI.
 CHAPTER LII.
 CHAPTER LIII.
 CHAPTER LIV.
 CHAPTER LV.
 CHAPTER LVI.
 CHAPTER LVII.
 CHAPTER LVIII.
 CHAPTER LIX.
 CHAPTER LX.
 CHAPTER LXI.
 CHAPTER LXII.
 CHAPTER LXIII.
 CHAPTER LXIV.
 CHAPTER LXV.
 CHAPTER LXVI.
 CHAPTER LXVII.
 CHAPTER LXVIII.
 CHAPTER LXIX.




THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE


Of all kinds of satire, there is none so entertaining and universally
improving, as that which is introduced, as it were occasionally, in the
course of an interesting story, which brings every incident home to
life, and by representing familiar scenes in an uncommon and amusing
point of view, invests them with all the graces of novelty, while
nature is appealed to in every particular. The reader gratifies his
curiosity in pursuing the adventures of a person in whose favour he is
prepossessed; he espouses his cause, he sympathises with him in his
distress, his indignation is heated against the authors of his
calamity: the humane passions are inflamed; the contrast between
dejected virtue and insulting vice appears with greater aggravation,
and every impression having a double force on the imagination, the
memory retains the circumstance, and the heart improves by the example.
The attention is not tired with a bare catalogue of characters, but
agreeably diverted with all the variety of invention; and the
vicissitudes of life appear in their peculiar circumstances, opening an
ample field for wit and humour.

Romance, no doubt, owes its origin to ignorance, vanity, and
superstition. In the dark ages of the World, when a man had rendered
himself famous for wisdom or valour, his family and adherents availed
themselves of his superior qualities, magnified his virtues, and
represented his character and person as sacred and supernatural. The
vulgar easily swallowed the bait, implored his protection, and yielded
the tribute of homage and praise, even to adoration; his exploits were
handed down to posterity with a thousand exaggerations; they were
repeated as incitements to virtue; divine honours were paid, and altars
erected to his memory, for the encouragement of those who attempted to
imitate his example; and hence arose the heathen mythology, which is no
other than a collection of extravagant romances. As learning advanced,
and genius received cultivation, these stories were embellished with
the graces of poetry, that they might the better recommend themselves
to the attention; they were sung in public, at festivals, for the
instruction and delight of the audience; and rehearsed before battle,
as incentives to deeds of glory. Thus tragedy and the epic muse were
born, and, in the progress of taste, arrived at perfection. It is no
wonder that the ancients could not relish a fable in prose, after they
had seen so many remarkable events celebrated in verse by their best
poets; we therefore find no romance among them during the era of their
excellence, unless the _Cyropædia_ of Xenophon may be so called; and it
was not till arts and sciences began to revive after the irruption of
the barbarians into Europe, that anything of this kind appeared. But
when the minds of men were debauched by the imposition of priestcraft
to the most absurd pitch of credulity, the authors of romance arose,
and losing sight of probability, filled their performances with the
most monstrous hyperboles. If they could not equal the ancient poets in
point of genius they were resolved to excel them in fiction, and apply
to the wonder, rather than the judgment, of their readers. Accordingly,
they brought necromancy to their aid, and instead of supporting the
character of their heroes by dignity of sentiment and practice,
distinguished them by their bodily strength, activity, and extravagance
of behaviour. Although nothing could be more ludicrous and unnatural
than the figures they drew, they did not want patrons and admirers; and
the world actually began to be infected with the spirit of
knight-errantry, when Cervantes, by an inimitable piece of ridicule,
reformed the taste of mankind, representing chivalry in the right point
of view, and converting romance to purposes far more useful and
entertaining, by making it assume the sock, and point out the follies
of ordinary life.

The same method has been practised by other Spanish and French authors,
and by none more successfully than by Monsieur Le Sage, who, in his
_Adventures of Gil Blas_, has described the knavery and foibles of
life, with infinite humour and sagacity. The following sheets I have
modelled on his plan, taking me liberty, however, to differ from him in
the execution, where I thought his particular situations were uncommon,
extravagant, or peculiar to the country in which the scene is laid. The
disgraces of Gil Blas are, for the most part, such as rather excite
mirth than compassion; he himself laughs at them; and his transitions
from distress to happiness, or at least ease, are so sudden, that
neither the reader has time to pity him, nor himself to be acquainted
with affliction. This conduct, in my opinion, not only deviates from
probability, but prevents that generous indignation, which ought to
animate the reader against the sordid and vicious disposition of the
world. I have attempted to represent modest merit struggling with every
difficulty to which a friendless orphan is exposed, from his own want
of experience, as well as from the selfishness, envy, malice, and base
indifference of mankind. To secure a favourable prepossession, I have
allowed him the advantages of birth and education, which in the series
of his misfortunes will, I hope, engage the ingenuous more warmly in
his behalf; and though I foresee, that some people will be offended at
the mean scenes in which he is involved, I persuade myself that the
judicious will not only perceive the necessity of describing those
situations to which he must of course be confined, in his low estate,
but also find entertainment in viewing those parts of life, where the
humours and passions are undisguised by affectation, ceremony, or
education; and the whimsical peculiarities of disposition appear as
nature has implanted them. But I believe I need not trouble myself in
vindicating a practice authorized by the best writers in this way, some
of whom I have already named.

Every intelligent reader will, at first sight, perceive I have not
deviated from nature in the facts, which are all true in the main,
although the circumstances are altered and disguised, to avoid personal
satire.

It now remains to give my reasons for making the chief personage of
this work a North Briton, which are chiefly these: I could, at a small
expense, bestow on him such education as I thought the dignity of his
birth and character required, which could not possibly be obtained in
England, by such slender means as the nature of my plan would afford.
In the next place, I could represent simplicity of manners in a remote
part of the kingdom, with more propriety than in any place near the
capital; and lastly, the disposition of the Scots, addicted to
travelling, justifies my conduct in deriving an adventurer from that
country. That the delicate reader may not be offended at the unmeaning
oaths which proceed from the mouths of some persons in these memoirs, I
beg leave to promise, that I imagined nothing could more effectually
expose the absurdity of such miserable expletives, than a natural and
verbal representation of the discourse in which they occur.




APOLOGUE


A young painter, indulging a vein of pleasantry, sketched a kind of
conversation piece, representing a bear, an owl, a monkey, and an ass;
and to render it more striking, humorous, and moral, distinguished
every figure by some emblem of human life. Bruin was exhibited in the
garb and attitude of an old, toothless, drunken soldier; the owl
perched upon the handle of a coffee-pot, with spectacle on nose, seemed
to contemplate a newspaper; and the ass, ornamented with a huge tie-wig
(which, however, could not conceal his long ears), sat for his picture
to the monkey, who appeared with the implements of painting. This
whimsical group afforded some mirth, and met with general approbation,
until some mischievous wag hinted that the whole—was a lampoon upon the
friends of the performer; an insinuation which was no sooner circulated
than those very people who applauded it before began to be alarmed, and
even to fancy themselves signified by the several figures of the piece.

Among others, a worthy personage in years, who had served in the army
with reputation, being incensed at the supposed outrage, repaired to
the lodging of the painter, and finding him at home, “Hark ye, Mr.
Monkey,” said he, “I have a good mind to convince you, that though the
bear has lost his teeth, he retains his paws, and that he is not so
drunk but he can perceive your impertinence.” “Sblood! sir, that
toothless jaw is a d—ned scandalous libel—but don’t you imagine me so
chopfallen as not to be able to chew the cud of resentment.” Here he
was interrupted by the arrival of a learned physician, who, advancing
to the culprit with fury in his aspect, exclaimed, “Suppose the
augmentation of the ass’s ears should prove the diminution of the
baboon’s—nay, seek not to prevaricate, for, by the beard of
Aesculapius! there is not one hair in this periwig that will not stand
up in judgment to convict thee of personal abuse. Do but observe,
captain, how this pitiful little fellow has copied the very curls—the
colour, indeed, is different, but then the form and foretop are quite
similar.” While he thus remonstrated in a strain of vociferation, a
venerable senator entered, and waddling up to the delinquent,
“Jackanapes!” cried he, “I will now let thee see I can read something
else than a newspaper, and that without the help of spectacles: here is
your own note of hand, sirrah, for money, which if I had not advanced,
you yourself would have resembled an owl, in not daring to show your
face by day, you ungrateful slanderous knave!”

In vain the astonished painter declared that he had no intention to
give offence, or to characterise particular persons: they affirmed the
resemblance was too palpable to be overlooked; they taxed him with
insolence, malice, and ingratitude; and their clamours being overheard
by the public, the captain was a bear, the doctor an ass, and the
senator an owl, to his dying day.

Christian reader, I beseech thee, in the bowels of the Lord, remember
this example “while thou art employed in the perusal of the following
sheets; and seek not to appropriate to thyself that which equally
belongs to five hundred different people. If thou shouldst meet with a
character that reflects thee in some ungracious particular, keep thy
own counsel; consider that one feature makes not a face, and that
though thou art, perhaps, distinguished by a bottle nose, twenty of thy
neighbours may be in the same predicament.”




THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM




CHAPTER I


Of my Birth and Parentage


I was born in the northern part of this united kingdom, in the house of
my grandfather, a gentleman of considerable fortune and influence, who
had on many occasions signalised himself in behalf of his country; and
was remarkable for his abilities in the law, which he exercised with
great success in the station of a judge, particularly against beggars,
for whom he had a singular aversion.

My father (his youngest son) falling in love with a poor relation, who
lived with the old gentleman in quality of a housekeeper, espoused her
privately; and I was the first fruit of that marriage. During her
pregnancy, a dream discomposed my mother so much that her husband,
tired with her importunity, at last consulted a highland seer, whose
favourable interpretation he would have secured beforehand by a bribe,
but found him incorruptible. She dreamed she was delivered of a
tennis-ball, which the devil (who, to her great surprise, acted the
part of a midwife) struck so forcibly with a racket that it disappeared
in an instant; and she was for some time inconsolable for the lost of
her offspring; when, all on a sudden, she beheld it return with equal
violence, and enter the earth, beneath her feet, whence immediately
sprang up a goodly tree covered with blossoms, the scent of which
operated so strongly on her nerves that she awoke. The attentive sage,
after some deliberation, assured my parents, that their firstborn would
be a great traveller; that he would undergo many dangers and
difficulties, and at last return to his native land, where he would
flourish in happiness and reputation. How truly this was foretold will
appear in the sequel. It was not long before some officious person
informed my grandfather of certain familiarities that passed between
his son and housekeeper which alarmed him so much that, a few days
after, he told my father it was high time for him to think of settling;
and that he had provided a match for him, to which he could in justice
have no objections. My father, finding it would be impossible to
conceal his situation much longer, frankly owned what he had done; and
excused himself for not having asked the consent of his father, by
saying, he knew it would have been to no purpose; and that, had his
inclination been known, my grandfather might have taken such measures
as would have effectually put the gratification of it out of his power:
he added, that no exceptions could be taken to his wife’s virtue,
birth, beauty, and good sense, and as for fortune, it was beneath his
care. The old gentleman, who kept all his passions, except one, in
excellent order, heard him to an end with great temper, and then calmly
asked, how he proposed to maintain himself and spouse? He replied, he
could be in no danger of wanting while his father’s tenderness
remained, which he and his wife should always cultivate with the utmost
veneration; and he was persuaded his allowance would be suitable to the
dignity and circumstances of his family, and to the provision already
made for his brothers and sisters, who were happily settled under his
protection. “Your brothers and sisters,” said my grandfather, “did not
think it beneath them to consult me in an affair of such importance as
matrimony; neither, I suppose, would you have omitted that piece of
duty, had you not some secret fund in reserve; to the comforts of which
I leave you, with a desire that you will this night seek out another
habitation for yourself and wife, whither, in a short time, I will send
you an account of the expense I have been at in your education, with a
view of being reimbursed. Sir, you have made the grand tour—you are a
polite gentleman—a very pretty gentleman—I wish you a great deal of
joy, and am your very humble servant.”

So saying, he left my father in a situation easily imagined. However,
he did not long hesitate; for, being perfectly well acquainted with his
father’s disposition, he did not doubt that he was glad of this
pretence to get rid of him; and his resolves being as invariable as the
laws of the Medes and Persians, he knew it would be to no purpose to
attempt him by prayers and entreaties; so without any farther
application, he betook himself, with his disconsolate bedfellow to a
farm-house, where an old servant of his mother dwelt: there they
remained some time in a situation but ill adapted to the elegance of
their desires and tenderness of their love; which nevertheless my
father chose to endure, rather than supplicate an unnatural and
inflexible parent but my mother, foreseeing the inconveniences to which
she must have been exposed, had she been delivered in this place (and
her pregnancy was very far advanced), without communicating her design
to her husband, went in disguise to the house of my grandfather, hoping
that her tears and condition would move him to compassion, and
reconcile him to an event which was now irrecoverably past.

She found means to deceive the servants, and get introduced as an
unfortunate lady, who wanted to complain of some matrimonial
grievances, it being my grandfather’s particular province to decide in
all cases of scandal. She was accordingly admitted into his presence,
where, discovering herself, she fell at his feet, and in the most
affecting manner implored his forgiveness; at the same time
representing the danger that threatened not only her life, but that of
his own grandchild, which was about to see the light. He told her he
was sorry that the indiscretion of her and his son had compelled him to
make a vow, which put it out of his power to give them any assistance;
that he had already imparted his thoughts on that subject to her
husband, and was surprised that they should disturb his peace with any
farther importunity. This said, he retired.

The violence of my mother’s affliction had such an effect on her
constitution that she was immediately seized with the pains of
childbed; and had not an old maidservant, to whom she was very dear,
afforded her pity and assistance, at the hazard of incurring my
grandfather’s displeasure, she and the innocent fruit of her womb must
have fallen miserable victims to his rigour and inhumanity. By the
friendship of this poor woman she was carried up to a garret, and
immediately delivered of a man child, the story of whose unfortunate
birth he himself now relates. My father, being informed of what had
happened, flew to the embraces of his darling spouse, and while he
loaded his offspring with paternal embraces, could not forbear shedding
a flood of tears on beholding the dear partner of his heart (for whose
ease he would have sacrificed the treasures of the east) stretched upon
a flock bed, in a miserable apartment, unable to protect her from the
inclemencies of the weather. It is not to be supposed that the old
gentleman was ignorant of what passed, though he affected to know
nothing of the matter, and pretended to be very much surprised, when
one of his grandchildren, by his eldest son deceased, who lived with
him as his heir apparent, acquainted him with the affair; he determined
therefore to observe no medium, but immediately (on the third day after
her delivery) sent her a peremptory order to be gone, and turned off
the servant who had preserved her life. This behaviour so exasperated
my father that he had recourse to the most dreadful imprecations; and
on his bare knees implored that Heaven would renounce him if ever he
should forget or forgive the barbarity of his sire.

The injuries which this unhappy mother received from her removal in
such circumstances, and the want of necessaries where she lodged,
together with her grief and anxiety of mind, soon threw her into a
languishing disorder, which put an end to her life. My father, who
loved her tenderly, was so affected with her death that he remained six
weeks deprived of his senses; during which time, the people where he
lodged carried the infant to the old man who relented so far, on
hearing the melancholy story of his daughter-in-law’s death, and the
deplorable condition of his son, as to send the child to nurse, and he
ordered my father to be carried home to his house, where he soon
recovered the use of his reason.

Whether this hardhearted judge felt any remorse for his cruel treatment
of his son and daughter, or (which is more probable) was afraid his
character would suffer in the neighbourhood, he professed great sorrow
for his conduct to my father, whose delirium was succeeded by a
profound melancholy and reserve. At length he disappeared, and,
notwithstanding all imaginable inquiry, could not be heard of; a
circumstance which confirmed most people in the opinion of his having
made away with himself in a fit of despair. How I understood the
particulars of my birth will appear in the course of these memoirs.




CHAPTER II


I grow up—am hated by my Relations—sent to School—neglected by my
Grandfather—maltreated by my Master—seasoned to Adversity—I form Cabals
against the Pedant—am debarred Access to my Grandfather—hunted by his
Heir—I demolish the Teeth of his Tutor


There were not wanting some who suspected my uncles of being concerned
in my father’s fate, on the supposition that they would all share in
the patrimony destined for him; and this conjecture was strengthened by
reflecting that in all his calamities they never discovered the least
inclination to serve him; but, on the contrary, by all the artifices in
their power, fed his resentment and supported his resolution of leaving
him to misery and want. But people of judgment treated this insinuation
as an idle chimera; because, had my relations been so wicked as to
consult their interest by committing such an atrocious crime, the fate
of my father would have extended to me too whose life was another
obstacle to their expectation. Meanwhile, I grew apace, and as I
strongly resembled my father, who was the darling of the tenants, I
wanted nothing which their indigent circumstances could afford: but
their favour was a weak resource against the jealous enmity of my
cousins; who the more my infancy promised, conceived the more
implacable hatred against me: and before I was six years of age, had so
effectually blockaded my grandfather that I never saw him but by
stealth, when I sometimes made up to his chair as he sat to view his
labourers in the field: on which occasion he would stroke my head, bid
me be a good boy, and promise to take care of me.

I was soon after sent to school at a village hard by, of which he had
been dictator time out of mind; but as he never paid for my board, nor
supplied me with clothes, books, and other necessaries I required, my
condition was very ragged and contemptible, and the schoolmaster, who,
through fear of my grandfather, taught me gratis, gave himself no
concern about the progress I made under his instruction. In spite of
all these difficulties and disgraces, I became a good proficient in the
Latin tongue; and, as soon as I could write tolerably, pestered my
grandfather with letters to such a degree that he sent for my master,
and chid him severely for bestowing such pains on my education, telling
him that, if ever I should be brought to the gallows for forgery, which
he had taught me to commit, my blood would lie on his head.

The pedant, who dreaded nothing more than the displeasure of his
patron, assured his honour that the boy’s ability was more owing to his
own genius and application than to any instruction or encouragement he
received; that, although he could not divest him of the knowledge he
had already imbibed, unless he would empower him to disable his
fingers, he should endeavour, with God’s help, to prevent his future
improvement. And, indeed, he punctually performed what he had
undertaken; for, on pretence that I had written impertinent letters to
my grandfather, he caused a board to be made with five holes in it,
through which he thrust the fingers and thumb of my right hand, and
fastened it by whipcord to my wrist, in such a manner as effectually
debarred me the use of my pen. But this restraint I was freed from in a
few days, by an accident which happened in a quarrel between me and
another boy; who, taking upon him to insult my poverty, I was so
incensed at his ungenerous reproach that with one stroke with my
machine I cut him to the skull, to the great terror of myself and
schoolfellows, who left him bleeding on the ground, and ran to inform
the master of what had happened. I was so severely punished for this
trespass that, were I to live to the age of Methusalem, the impression
it made on me would not be effaced; the more than the antipathy and
horror I conceived for the merciless tyrant who inflicted it. The
contempt which my appearance naturally produced in all who saw me, the
continual wants to which I was exposed, and my own haughty disposition,
impatient of affronts, involved me in a thousand troublesome
adventures, by which I was at length inured in adversity, and
emboldened to undertakings far above my years. I was often inhumanly
scourged for crimes I did not commit, because, having the character of
a vagabond in the village, every piece of mischief, whose author lay
unknown, was charged upon me. I have been found guilty of robbing
orchards I never entered, of killing cats I never hunted, of stealing
gingerbread I never touched, and of abusing old women I never saw. Nay,
a stammering carpenter had eloquence enough to persuade my master that
I fired a pistol loaded with small shot into his window; though my
landlady and the whole family bore witness that I was abed fast asleep
at the time when this outrage was committed. I was once flogged for
having narrowly escaped drowning, by the sinking of a ferry boat in
which I was passenger. Another time, for having recovered of a bruise
occasioned by a horse and cart running over me. A third time, for being
bitten by a baker’s dog. In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate,
the correction and sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue were the same.

Far from being subdued by this informal usage, my indignation triumphed
over that slavish awe which had hitherto enforced my obedience; and the
more my years and knowledge increased, the more I perceived the
injustice and barbarity of his behaviour. By the help of an uncommon
genius, and the advice and direction of our usher, who had served my
father in his travels, I made a surprising progress in the classics,
writing, and arithmetic; so that, before I was twelve years old, I was
allowed by everybody to be the best scholar in the school. This
qualification, together with the boldness of temper and strength of
make which had subjected almost all my contemporaries, gave me such
influence over them that I began to form cabals against my persecutor;
and was in hope of, being able to bid him defiance in a very short
time. Being at the head of a faction, consisting of thirty boys, most
of them of my own age, I was determined to put their mettle to trial,
that I might know how far they were to be depended upon, before I put
my grand scheme in execution: with this view, we attacked a body of
stout apprentices, who had taken possession of a part of the ground
allotted to us for the scheme of our diversions, and who were then
playing at ninepins on the spot; but I had the mortification to see my
adherents routed in an instant, and a leg of one of them broke in his
flight by the bowl, which one of our adversaries had detached in
pursuit of us. This discomfiture did not hinder us from engaging them
afterwards in frequent skirmishes, which we maintained by throwing
stones at a distance, wherein I received many wounds, the scars of
which still remain. Our enemies were so harassed and interrupted by
these alarms that they at last abandoned their conquest, and left us to
the peaceable enjoyment of our own territories.

It would be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed in the
course of this confederacy, which became the terror of the whole
village; insomuch that, when different interests divided it, one of the
parties commonly courted the assistance of Roderick Random (by which
name I was known) to cast the balance, and keep the opposite faction in
awe. Meanwhile, I took the advantage of every play-day to present
myself before my grandfather, to whom I seldom found access, by reason
of his being closely besieged by a numerous family of his female
grandchildren, who, though they perpetually quarrelled among
themselves, never failed to join against me, as the common enemy of
all. His heir, who was about the age of eighteen, minded nothing but
fox-hunting, and indeed was qualified for nothing else, notwithstanding
his grandfather’s indulgence in entertaining a tutor for him at home;
who at the same time performed the office of parish clerk. This young
Actaeon, who inherited his grandfather’s antipathy to everything in
distress, never sat eyes on me without uncoupling his beagles, and
hunting me into some cottage or other, whither I generally fled for
shelter. In this Christian amusement he was encouraged by his
preceptor, who, no doubt, took such opportunities to ingratiate himself
with the rising sun, observing, that the old gentleman, according to
the course of nature, had not long to live, for he was already on the
verge of fourscore.

The behaviour of this rascally sycophant incensed me so much, that one
day, when I was beleaguered by him and his hounds in a farmer’s house,
where I had found protection, I took aim at him (being an excellent
marksman) with a large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth,
and effectually incapacitated him from doing the office of a clerk.




CHAPTER III


My Mother’s Brother arrives—relieves me—a Description of him—he goes
along with me to the House of my Grandfather—is encountered by his
Dogs—defeats them, after a bloody Engagement—is admitted to the old
Gentleman—a Dialogue between them


About this time my mother’s only brother, who had been long abroad,
lieutenant of a man-of-war, arrived in his own country; where being
informed of my condition, he came to see me, and out of his slender
finances not only supplied me with what necessaries I wanted for the
present, but resolved not to leave the country until he had prevailed
on my grandfather to settle something handsome for the future. This was
a task to which he was by no means equal, being entirely ignorant, not
only of the judge’s disposition, but also of the ways of men in
general, to which his education on board had kept him an utter
stranger.

He was a strong built man, somewhat bandy legged, with a neck like that
of a bull, and a face which (you might easily perceive) had withstood
the most obstinate assaults of the weather. His dress consisted of a
soldier’s coat altered for him by the ship’s tailor, a striped flannel
jacket, a pair of red breeches spanned with pitch, clean gray worsted
stockings, large silver buckles that covered three-fourths of his
shoes, a silver-laced hat, whose crown overlooked the brims about an
inch and a half, black bobwig in buckle, a check shirt, a silk
handkerchief, a hanger, with a brass handle, girded to his thigh by a
furnished lace belt, and a good oak plant under his arm. Thus equipped,
he set out with me (who by his bounty made a very decent appearance)
for my grandfather’s house, where we were saluted by Jowler and Caesar,
whom my cousin, young master, had let loose at our approach. Being well
acquainted with the inveteracy of these curs, I was about to betake
myself to my heels, when my uncle seized me with one hand, brandished
his cudgel with the other, and at one blow laid Caesar sprawling on the
ground; but, finding himself attacked at the same time in the rear by
Jowler, and fearing Caesar might recover, he drew his hanger, wheeled
about, and by a lucky stroke severed Jowler’s head from his body. By
this time, the young foxhunter and three servants, armed with
pitchforks and flails, were come to the assistance of the dogs, whom
they found breathless upon the field; and my cousin was so provoked at
the death of his favourites, that he ordered his attendants to advance,
and take vengeance on their executioner, whom he loaded with all the
curses and reproaches his anger could suggest. Upon which my uncle
stepped forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of whose bloody
weapons his antagonists fell back with precipitation, when he accosted
their leader thus:

“Lookee, brother, your dogs having boarded me without provocation, what
I did was in my own defence. So you had best be civil, and let us shoot
a head, clear of you.”

Whether the young squire misinterpreted my uncle’s desire of peace, or
was enraged at the fate of his hounds beyond his usual pitch of
resolution, I know not; but he snatched a flail from one of his
followers, and came up with a show of assaulting the lieutenant, who,
putting himself in a posture of defence, proceeded thus: “Lookee, you
lubberly son of a w—e, if you come athwart me, ’ware your gingerbread
work. I’ll be foul of your quarter, d—n me.”

This declaration, followed by a flourish of his hanger, seemed to check
the progress of the young gentleman’s choler, who, looking behind him,
perceived his attendants had slunk into the house, shut the gate, and
left him to decide the contention by himself.

Here a parley ensued, which was introduced by my cousin’s asking, “Who
the devil are you? What do you want? Some scoundrel of a seaman, I
suppose, who has deserted and turned thief. But don’t think you shall
escape, sirrah—I’ll have you hang’d, you dog, I will. Your blood shall
pay for that of my two hounds, you ragamuffin. I would not have parted
with them to save your whole generation from the gallows, you ruffian,
you!” “None of your jaw, you swab—none of your jaw,” replied my uncle,
“else I shall trim your laced jacket for you. I shall rub you down with
an oaken towel, my boy, I shall.” So saying, he sheathed his hanger,
and grasped his cudgel. Meanwhile the people of the house being
alarmed, one of my female cousins opened a window, and asked what was
the matter. “The matter!” answered the lieutenant; “no great matter,
young woman; I have business with the old gentleman, and this spark,
belike, won’t allow me to come alongside of him,” that’s all. After a
few minutes pause we were admitted, and conducted to my grandfather’s
chamber through a lane of my relations, who honoured me with very
significant looks as I passed along. When we came into the judge’s
presence my uncle, after two or three sea-bows, expressed himself in
this manner; “Your servant, your servant. What cheer, father? what
cheer? I suppose you don’t know me—mayhap you don’t. My name is Tom
Bowling, and this here boy, you look as if you did not know him
neither; ’tis like you mayn’t. He’s new rigged, i’faith; his cloth
don’t shake in the wind so much as it wont to do. ’Tis my nephew, d’y
see, Roderick Random—your own flesh and blood, old gentleman. Don’t lay
a-stern, you dog,” pulling me forward. My grandfather (who was laid up
with the gout) received this relation, after his long absence, with
that coldness of civility which was peculiar to him; told him he was
glad to see him, and desired him to sit down. “Thank ye, thank ye, sir,
I had as lief stand,” said my uncle; “for my own part, I desire nothing
of you; but, if you have any conscience at all, do something for this
poor boy, who has been used at a very unchristian rate. Unchristian do
I call it? I am sure the Moors in Barbary have more humanity than to
leave their little ones to want. I would fain know why my sister’s son
is more neglected than that there fair-weather Jack” (pointing to the
young squire, who with the rest of my cousins had followed us into the
room). “Is not he as near akin to you as the other? Is he not much
handsomer and better built than that great chucklehead? Come, come,
consider, old gentleman, you are going in a short time to give an
account of your evil actions. Remember the wrongs you did his father,
and make all the satisfaction in your power before it be too late. The
least thing you can do is to settle his father’s portion on him.”

The young ladies, who thought themselves too much concerned to contain
themselves any longer, set up their throats all together against my
protector—“Scurvy companion—saucy tarpaulin—rude, impertinent fellow,
did he think to prescribe to grandpapa? His sister’s brat had been too
well taken care of. Grandpapa was too just not make a difference
between an unnatural, rebellious son and his dutiful, loving children,
who took his advice in all things;” and such expressions were vented
against him with great violence; until the judge at length commanded
silence. He calmly rebuked my uncle for his unmannerly behaviour, which
he said he would excuse on account of his education: he told him he had
been very kind to the boy, whom he had kept at school seven or eight
years, although he was informed he made no progress in his learning but
was addicted to all manner of vice, which he rather believed, because
he himself was witness to a barbarous piece of mischief he had
committed on the jaws of his chaplain. But, however, he would see what
the lad was fit for, and bind him apprentice to some honest tradesman
or other, provided he would mend his manners, and behave for the future
as became him.

The honest tar (whose pride and indignation boiled within him) answered
my grandfather, that it was true he had sent him to school, but it had
cost him nothing, for he had never been at one shilling expense to
furnish him with food, raiment, books, or other necessaries; so that it
was not much to be wondered at, if the boy made small progress; and yet
whoever told him so was a lying, lubberly rascal, and deserved to be
keel-haul’d; for though he (the lieutenant) did not understand those
matters himself, he was well informed as how Rory was the best scholar
of his age in all the country; the truth of which he would maintain, by
laying a wager of his whole half-year’s pay on the boy’s head—with
these words he pulled out his purse, and challenged the company:
“Neither is he predicted to vice, as you affirm, but rather, left like
a wreck, d’ye see, at the mercy of the wind and weather, by your
neglect, old gentleman. As for what happened to your chaplain, I am
only sorry that he did not knock out the scoundrel’s brains instead of
his teeth. By the Lord, if ever I come up with him, he had better be in
Greenland, that’s all. Thank you for your courteous offer of binding
the lad apprentice to a tradesman. I suppose you would make a tailor of
him—would you? I had rather see him hang’d, d’ye see. Come along, Rory,
I perceive how the land lies, my boy—let’s tack about, i’faith—while I
have a shilling you shan’t want a tester. B’we, old gentleman; you’re
bound for the other world, but I believe damnably ill-provided for the
voyage.” Thus ended our visit; and we returned to the village, my uncle
muttering curses all the way against the old shark and the young fry
that surrounded him.




CHAPTER IV


My Grandfather makes his Will—our second Visit—he Dies—his Will is read
in Presence of all his living Descendants—the Disappointment of my
female Cousins—my Uncle’s Behaviour


A few weeks after our first visit, we were informed that the old judge,
at the end of a fit of thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had
sent for a notary and made his will; that the distemper had mounted
from his legs to his stomach, and, being conscious of his approaching
end, he had desired to see all his descendants without exception. In
obedience to this summons, my uncle set out with me a second time, to
receive the last benediction of my grandfather: often repeating by the
road, “Ey, ey, we have brought up the old hulk at last. You shall
see—you shall see the effect of my admonition,” When we entered his
chamber, which was crowded with his relations, we advanced to the
bedside, where we found him in his last agonies, supported by two of
his granddaughters, who sat on each side of him, sobbing most
piteously, and wiping away the froth and slaver as it gathered on his
lips, which they frequently kissed with a show of great anguish and
affection. My uncle approached him with these words, “What! he’s not
a-weigh. How fare ye? how fare ye, old gentleman? Lord have mercy upon
your poor sinful soul!” Upon which, the dying man turned his languid
eyes towards us, and Mr. Bowling went on—“Here’s poor Roy come to see
you before you die, and to receive your blessing. What, man! don’t
despair, you have been a great sinner, ’tis true,—what then? There’s a
righteous judge above, an’t there? He minds me no more than a porpoise.
Yes, yes, he’s a-going; the land crabs will have him, I see that! his
anchor’s a-peak, i’faith.” This homely consolation scandalised the
company so much, and especially the parson, who probably thought his
province invaded, that we were obliged to retire into another room,
where, in a few minutes, we were convinced of my grandfather’s decease,
by a dismal yell uttered by the young ladies in his apartment; whither
we immediately hastened, and found his heir, who had retired a little
before into a closet, under pretence of giving vent to his sorrow,
asking, with a countenance beslubbered with tears, if his grandpapa was
certainly dead? “Dead!” (says my uncle, looking, at the body) “ay, ay,
I’ll warrant him as dead as a herring. Odd’s fish! now my dream is out
for all the world. I thought I stood upon the forecastle, and saw a
parcel of carrion crows foul of a dead shark: that floated alongside,
and the devil perching upon our spritsail yard, in the likeness of a
blue bear—who, d’ye see jumped overboard upon the carcass and carried
it to the bottom in his claws.” “Out upon thee, reprobate” cries the
parson “out upon thee, blasphemous wretch! Dost thou think his honour’s
soul is in the possession of Satan?” The clamour immediately arose, and
my poor uncle, being, shouldered from one corner of the room to the
other, was obliged to lug out in his own defence, and swear he would
turn out for no man, till such time as he knew who had the title to
send him adrift. “None of your tricks upon travellers,” said he;
“mayhap old Bluff has left my kinsman here his heir: if he has, it will
be the better for his miserable soul. Odds bob! I’d desire no better
news. I’d soon make him a clear shin, I warrant you.” To avoid any
further disturbance, one of my grandfather’s executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew should have all manner of
justice; that a day should be appointed after the funeral for examining
the papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; till
which time every desk and cabinet in the house should remain close
sealed; and that he was very welcome to be witness to this ceremony,
which was immediately performed to his satisfaction. In the meantime,
orders were given to provide mourning for all the relations, in which
number I was included; but my uncle would not suffer me to accept of
it, until I should be assured whether or no I had reason to honour his
memory so far. During this interval, the conjectures of people, with
regard to the old gentleman’s will, were various: as it was well known,
he had, besides his landed estate, which was worth £700 per annum, six
or seven thousand pounds at interest, some imagined that the whole real
estate (which he had greatly improved) would go to the young man whom
he always entertained as his heir; and that the money would be equally
divided between my female cousins (five in number) and me. Others were
of opinion, that, as the rest of the children had been already provided
for, he would only bequeath two or three hundred pounds to each of his
granddaughters, and leave the bulk of the sum to me, to atone for his
unnatural usage of my father. At length the important hour arrived, and
the will was produced in the midst of the expectants, whose looks and
gestures formed a group that would have been very entertaining to an
unconcerned spectator. But, the reader can scarce conceive the
astonishment and mortification that appeared, when an attorney
pronounced aloud, the young squire sole heir of all his grandfather’s
estate, personal and real. My uncle, who had listened with great
attention, sucking the head of his cudgel all the while, accompanied
these words of the attorney with a stare, and whew, that alarmed the
whole assembly. The eldest and pertest of my female competitors, who
had been always very officious about my grandfather’s person, inquired,
with a faltering accent and visage as yellow as an orange, “if there
were no legacies?” and was answered, “None at all.” Upon which she
fainted away. The rest, whose expectations, perhaps, were not so
sanguine, supported their disappointment with more resolution, though
not without giving evident marks of indignation, and grief at least as
genuine as that which appeared in them at the old gentleman’s death. My
conductor, after having kicked with his heel for some time against the
wainscot, began: “So there’s no legacy, friend, ha!—here’s an old
succubus; but somebody’s soul howls for it, d—n me!” The parson of the
parish, who was one of the executors, and had acted as ghostly director
to the old man, no sooner heard this exclamation than he cried out,
“Avaunt, unchristian reviler! avaunt! wilt thou not allow the soul of
his honour to rest in peace?” But this zealous pastor did not find
himself so warmly seconded, as formerly, by the young ladies, who now
joined my uncle against him, and accused him of having acted the part
of a busybody with their grandpapa whose ears he had certainly abused
by false stories to their prejudice, or else he would not have
neglected them in such an unnatural manner. The young squire was much
diverted with this scene, and whispered to my uncle, that if he had not
murdered his dogs, he would have shown him glorious fun, by hunting a
black badger (so he termed the clergyman). The surly lieutenant, who
was not in a humour to relish this amusement, replied, “You and your
dogs may be damn’d. I suppose you’ll find them with your old dad, in
the latitude of hell. Come, Rory,—about ship, my lad, we must steer
another course, I think.” And away we went.




CHAPTER V


The Schoolmaster uses me barbarously—I form a Project of Revenge, in
which I am assisted by my Uncle—I leave the Village—am settled at a
University by his Generosity


On our way back to the village, my uncle spoke not a word during the
space of a whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence the tune of
“Why should we quarrel for riches,” etc. his visage being contracted
all the while into a most formidable frown. At length his pace
increased to such a degree that I was left behind a considerable way:
then he waited for me; and when I was almost up with him, called out in
a surly tone, “Bear a hand, damme! must I bring to every minute for
you, you lazy dog.” Then, laying hold of me by the arm, hauled me
along, until his good nature (of which he had a great share) and
reflection getting the better of his he said, “Come, my boy, don’t be
cast down,—the old rascal is in hell, that’s some satisfaction; you
shall go to sea with me, my lad. A light heart and a thin pair of
breeches goes through the world, brave boys, as the song goes—eh!”
Though this proposal did not at all suit my inclination, I was afraid
of discovering my aversion to it, lest I should disoblige the only
friend I had in the world; and he was so much a seaman that he never
dreamt I could have had any objection to his design; consequently gave
himself no trouble in consulting my approbation. But this resolution
was soon dropped, by the device of our usher, who assured Mr. Bowling,
it would be a thousand pities to balk my genius, which would certainly
one day make my fortune on shore, provided it received due cultivation.
Upon which, this generous tar determined (though he could ill afford
it) to give me university education; and accordingly settled my board
and other expenses, at a town not many miles distant, famous for its
colleges, whither we repaired in a short time. But, before the day of
our departure, the schoolmaster, who no longer had the fear of my
grandfather before his eyes, laid aside all decency and restraint, and
not only abused me in the grossest language his rancour could suggest,
as a wicked, profligate, dull, beggarly miscreant, whom he had taught
out of charity; but also inveighed in the most bitter manner against
the memory of the judge (who by the by had procured that settlement for
him), hinting, in pretty plain terms, that the old gentleman’s soul was
damned to all eternity for his injustice in neglecting to pay for my
learning.

This brutal behaviour, added to the sufferings I had formerly undergone
made me think it high time to be revenged on this insolent pedagogue.
Having consulted my adherents, I found them all staunch in their
promises to stand by me; and our scheme was this:—In the afternoon
preceding to the day of our departure for the University, I resolved to
take the advantage of the usher’s going out to make water (which he
regularly did at four o’clock), and shut the great door, that he might
not come to the assistance of his superior. This being done, the
assault was to be begun by my advancing to my master and spitting in
his face. I was to be seconded by two of the strongest boys in the
school, who were devoted to me; their business was to join me in
dragging the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be laid, and his
bare posteriors heartily flogged, with his own birch, which we proposed
to wrest from him in his struggle; but if we should find him too many
for us all three, we were to demand the assistance of our competitors,
who should be ready to enforce us, or oppose anything that might be
undertaken for the master’s relief. One of my principal assistants was
called Jeremy Gawky, son and heir of a wealthy gentleman in the
neighbourhood; and the name of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet of a
family which had given shoemakers to the village time out of mind. I
had once saved Gawky’s life, by plunging into a river and dragging him
on shore, when he was on the point of being drowned. I had often
rescued him from the clutches of those whom his insufferable arrogance
had provoked to a resentment he was not able to sustain; and many times
saved his reputation and posteriors, by performing his exercises at
school; so that it is not to be wondered at, if he had a particular
regard for me and my interests. The attachment of Strap flowed from a
voluntary, disinterested inclination, which had manifested itself on
many occasions in my behalf, he having once rendered me the same
service that I had rendered Gawky, by saving my life at the risk of his
own; and often fathered offences that I had committed, for which he
suffered severely, rather than I should feel the weight of the
punishment. These two champions were the more willing to engage in this
enterprise, because they intended to leave the school next day, as well
as I; the first being ordered by his father to return into the country,
and the other being bound apprentice to his barber, at a market town
not far off.

In the meantime, my uncle, being informed of my master’s behaviour to
me, was enraged at his insolence, and vowed revenge so heartily that I
could not refrain from telling him the scheme I had concerted, while he
heard with great satisfaction, at every sentence squirting out a
mouthful of spittle, tinctured with tobacco, of which he constantly
chewed a large quid. At last, pulling up his breeches, he cried, “No,
no, z—ds! that won’t do neither; howsoever, ’tis a bold undertaking, my
lad, that I must say, i’faith; but lookee, lookee, how do you propose
to get clear off—won’t the enemy give chase, my boy?—ay, ay, that he
will, I warrant, and alarm the whole coast; ah! God help thee, more
sail than ballast, Rory. Let me alone for that—leave the whole to me.
I’ll show him the foretopsail, I will. If so be your shipmates are
jolly boys, and won’t flinch, you shall see, you shall see; egad, I’ll
play him such a salt-water trick I’ll bring him to the gangway and
anoint him with a cat-and-nine-tails; he shall have a round dozen
doubled, my lad, he shall—and be left lashed to his meditations.” We
were very proud of our associate, who immediately went to work, and
prepared the instrument of his revenge with great skill and expedition;
after which, he ordered our baggage to be packed up and sent off, a day
before our attempt, and got horses ready to be mounted, as soon as the
affair should be over. At length the hour arrived, when our auxiliary,
seizing the opportunity of the usher’s absence, bolted in, secured the
door, and immediately laid hold of the pedant by his collar who bawled
out, “Murder, Thieves,” with the voice of a Stentor. Though I trembled
all over like an aspen leaf, I knew there was no time to be lost, and
accordingly got up, and summoned our associates to our assistance.
Strap, without any hesitation, obeyed the signal, and seeing me leap
upon the master’s back, ran immediately to one of his legs, which
pulling with all his force, this dreadful adversary was humbled to the
ground; upon which Gawky, who had hitherto remained in his place, under
the influence of a universal trepidation, hastened to the scene of
action, and insulted the fallen tyrant with a loud huzza, in which the
whole school joined. The noise alarmed the usher, who, finding himself
shut out, endeavoured, partly by threats and partly by entreaties, to
procure admission. My uncle bade him have a little patience, and he
would let him in presently; but if he pretended to stir from that
place, it should fare the worse with the son of a bitch his superior,
on whom he intended only to bestow a little wholesome chastisement, for
his barbarous usage of Rory, “to which,” said he, “you are no
stranger.” By this time we had dragged the criminal to a post, to which
Bowling tied him with a rope he had provided on purpose; after having
secured his hands and stripped his back. In this ludicrous posture he
stood (to the no small entertainment of the boys, who crowded about
him, and shouted with great exultation at the novelty of the sight),
venting bitter imprecations against the lieutenant, and reproaching his
scholars with treachery and rebellion; when the usher was admitted,
whom my uncle accosted in this manner: “Harkee, Mr. Syntax, I believe
you are an honest man, d’ye see—and I have a respect for you—but for
all that, we must, for our own security, d’ye see, belay you for a
short time.” With these words, he pulled out some fathoms of cord,
which the honest man no sooner saw than he protested with great
earnestness he would allow no violence to be offered to him, at the
same time accusing me of perfidy and ingratitude. But Bowling
representing that it was in vain to resist, and that he did not mean to
use him with violence and indecency, but only to hinder him from
raising the hue and cry against us before we should be out of their
power, he allowed himself to be bound to his own desk, where he sat a
spectator of the punishment inflicted on his principal. My uncle,
having upbraided this arbitrary wretch with his inhumanity to me, told
him, that he proposed to give him a little discipline for the good of
his soul, which he immediately put in practice, with great vigour and
dexterity. This smart application to the pedant’s withered posteriors
gave him such exquisite pain that he roared like a mad bull, danced,
cursed, and blasphemed, like a frantic bedlamite. When the lieutenant
thought himself sufficiently revenged, he took his leave of him in
these words: “Now, friend, you’ll remember me the longest day you have
to live; I have given you a lesson that will let you know what flogging
is, and teach you to have more sympathy for the future. Shout, boys,
shout!”

This ceremony was no sooner over than my uncle proposed they should
quit the school, and convey their old comrade Rory to the public-house,
about a mile from the village, where he would treat them all. His offer
being joyfully embraced, he addressed himself to Mr. Syntax, and begged
him to accompany us; but this invitation he refused with great disdain,
telling my benefactor he was not the man he took him to be. “Well,
well, old surly,” replied my uncle, shaking his hand, “thou art an
honest fellow notwithstanding; and if ever I have the command of a
ship, thou shalt be our schoolmaster, i’faith.” So saying he dismissed
the boys, and locking the door, left the two preceptors to console one
another; while we moved forwards on our journey, attended by a numerous
retinue, whom he treated according to his promise.

We parted with many tears, and lay that night at an inn on the road,
about ten miles short of the town where I was to remain, at which we
arrived next day, and I found I had no cause to complain of the
accommodations provided for me, in being boarded at the house of an
apothecary, who had married a distant relation of my mother. In a few
days after, my uncle set out for his ship, having settled the necessary
funds for my maintenance and education.




CHAPTER VI


I make great progress in my Studies—am caressed by Everybody—my female
Cousins take notice of me—I reject their Invitation—they are incensed,
and conspire against me—am left destitute by a Misfortune that befalls
my Uncle—Gawky’s Treachery—my Revenge


As I was now capable of reflection, I began to consider my precarious
situation; that I was utterly abandoned by those whose duty it was to
protect me: and that my sole dependence was on the generosity of one
man, who was not only exposed by his profession to continual dangers,
which might one day deprive me of him for ever; but also (no doubt)
subject to those vicissitudes of disposition which a change of fortune
usually creates, or which a better acquaintance with the world might
produce; for I always ascribed his benevolence to the dictates of a
heart as yet undebauched by a commerce with mankind. Alarmed at these
considerations, I resolved to apply myself with great care to my
studies, and enjoy the opportunity in my power: this I did with such
success that, in the space of three years, I understood Greek very
well, was pretty far advanced in the mathematics, and no stranger to
moral and natural philosophy: logic I made no account of; but, above
all things, I valued myself on my taste in the belles lettres, and a
talent for poetry, which had already produced some pieces that had met
with a favourable reception. These qualifications, added to a good face
and shape, acquired the esteem and acquaintance of the most
considerable people in town, and I had the satisfaction to find myself
in some degree of favour with the ladies; an intoxicating piece of good
fortune to one of my amorous complexion! which I obtained, or at least
preserved, by gratifying their propensity to scandal, in lampooning
their rivals.

Two of my female cousins lived in this place, with their mother, since
the death of their father, who left his whole fortune equally divided
between them; so that, if they were not the most beautiful, they were
at least the richest toasts in town; and received daily the addresses
of all the beaux and cavaliers of the country. Although I had hitherto
been looked upon by them with the most supercilious contempt, my
character now attracted their notice so much that I was given to
understand I might be honoured with their acquaintance, if I pleased.

The reader will easily perceive that this condescension either flowed
from the hope of making my poetical capacity subservient to their
malice, or at least of screening themselves from the lash of my
resentment, which they had effectually provoked. I enjoyed this triumph
with great satisfaction, and not only rejected their offer with
disdain, but in all my performances, whether satire or panegyric,
industriously avoided mentioning their names, even while I celebrated
those of their intimates: this neglect mortified their pride
exceedingly and incensed them to such a degree that they were resolved
to make me repent of my indifference. The first stroke of their revenge
consisted in their hiring a poor collegian to write verses against me,
the subject of which was my own poverty, and the catastrophe of my
unhappy parents; but, besides the badness of the composition (of which
they themselves were ashamed), they did not find their account in
endeavouring to reproach me with those misfortunes which they and their
relations had brought upon me; and which consequently reflected much
more dishonour on themselves than on me, who was the innocent victim of
their barbarity and avarice.

Finding this plan miscarry, they found means to irritate a young
gentleman against me, by telling him I had lampooned his mistress; and
so effectually succeeded in the quality of incendiaries that this
enraged lover determined to seize me next night as I returned to my
lodgings from a friend’s house that I frequented: with this view, he
waited in the street, attended by two of his companions, to whom he had
imparted his design of carrying me down to the river, in which proposed
to have me heartily ducked, notwithstanding the severity of the
weather, it being then about the middle of December. But this stratagem
did not succeed; for, being apprised of their ambush, I got home
another way, and by the help of my landlord’s apprentice, discharged a
volley from the garret window, which did great execution upon them, and
next day occasioned so much mirth at their expense that they found
themselves under a necessity of leaving the town, until the adventure
should be entirely forgotten.

My cousins (though twice baffled in their expectation) did not,
however, desist from persecuting me, who had now enraged them beyond a
possibility of forgiveness by detecting their malice and preventing its
effects: neither should I have found them more humane, had I patiently
submitted to their rancour, and borne without murmuring the rigour of
their unreasonable hate; for I have found by experience, that though
small favours may be acknowledged and slight injuries atoned, there is
no wretch so ungrateful as he whom you have most generously obliged,
and no enemy so implacable as those who have done you the greatest
wrong. These good-natured creatures, therefore, had recourse to a
scheme which conspired with a piece of bad news I soon after received,
to give them all the satisfaction they desired: this plan was to
debauch the faith of my companion and confidant, who betrayed the trust
I reposed in him, by imparting to them the particulars of my small
amours, which they published with such exaggerations that I suffered
very much in the opinion of everybody, and was utterly discarded by the
dear creatures whose names had been called in question.

While I was busy in tracing out the author of this treachery, that I
might not only be revenged on him, but also vindicate my character to
my friends, I one day perceived the looks of my landlady much altered,
when I went home to my dinner, and inquiring into the cause, she
screwed up her mouth, and fixed her eyes on the ground, told me her
husband had received a letter from Mr. Bowling, with one inclosed for
me. She was very sorry for what had happened, both for my sake and his
own—people should be more cautious of their conduct—she was always
afraid his brutal behaviour would bring him into some misfortune or
other. As for her part, she should be very ready to befriend me; but
she had a small family of her own to maintain. The world would do
nothing for her if she should come to want—charity begins at home: she
wished I had been bound to some substantial handicraft, such as a
weaver or a shoemaker, rather than loiter away my time in learning
foolish nonsense, that would never bring me in a penny but some folks
are wise, and some are otherwise.

I was listening to this mysterious discourse with great amazement, when
her husband entered, and, without speaking a syllable, put both the
letters into my hand. I received them trembling, and read what follows:

‘To Mr. Roger Potion
    ‘Sir,
    ‘This is to let you know that I have quitted the Thunder man of
    war, being obliged to sheer off for killing my captain, which I did
    fairly on the beach, at Cape Tiberoon, in the Island of Hispaniola;
    having received his fire and returned it, which went through his
    body: and I would serve the best man so that ever stepped between
    stem and stern, if so be that he struck me, as Captain Oakum did. I
    am (thank God) safe among the French, who are very civil, though I
    don’t understand their lingo; and I hope to be restored in a little
    time, for all the great friends and parliamentary interest of the
    captain, for I have sent over to my landlord in Deal an account of
    the whole affair, with our bearings and distances while we were
    engaged, whereby I have desired him to lay it before his majesty,
    who (God bless him) will not suffer an honest tar to be wronged. My
    love to your spouse, and am


‘Your loving friend and servant to command, while
‘Thomas Bowling,’


‘To Roderick Random
    ‘Dear Rory,
    ‘Don’t be grieved at my misfortune, but mind your book, my lad. I
    have got no money to send you, but what of that? Mr. Potion will
    take care of you for the love he bears to me, and let you want for
    nothing; and it shall go hard but I will see him one day repaid. No
    more at present, but rests


‘Your dutiful uncle and servant, till death,
‘Thomas Bowling.’


This letter (which, with the other, was dated from Port Louis, in
Hispaniola) I had no sooner read than the apothecary, shaking his head,
began: “I have a very great regard for Mr. Bowling that’s certain; and
could be well content—but times are very hard. There’s no such thing as
money to be got; I believe ’tis all vanished under ground, for my part.
Besides, I have been out of pocket already, having entertained you
since the beginning of this month, without receiving a sixpence, and
God knows if ever I shall; for I believe it will go hard with your
uncle. And more than that, I was thinking of giving you warning, for I
want your apartment for a new prentice, whom I expect from the country
every hour. So I desire you will this week provide yourself with
another lodging.”

The indignation which this harangue inspired gave me spirits to support
my reverse of fortune, and to tell him I despised his mean selfish
disposition so much that I would rather starve than be beholden to him
for one single meal. Upon which, out of my pocket money, I paid him to
the last farthing of what I owed, and assured him, I would not sleep
another night under his roof.

This said, I sallied out in a transport of rage and sorrow, without
knowing whither to fly for shelter, having not one friend in the world
capable of relieving me, and only three shillings in my purse. After
giving way for a few minutes to the dictates of my rage, I went and
hired a small bedroom, at the rate of one shilling and sixpence per
week, which I was obliged to pay per advance, before the landlord would
receive me: thither I removed my luggage; and next morning got up, with
a view of craving the advice and assistance of a person who had on all
occasions loaded me with caresses and made frequent offers of
friendship, while I was under no necessity of accepting them. He
received me with his wonted affability, and insisted on my breakfasting
with him, a favour which I did not think fit to refuse. But when I
communicated the occasion of my visit, he appeared so disconcerted that
I concluded him wonderfully affected with the misery of my condition
and looked upon him as a man of the most extensive sympathy and
benevolence. He did not leave me long under this mistake; for,
recovering himself from his confusion, he told me he was grieved at my
misfortune, and desired to know what had passed between my landlord,
Mr. Potion, and me. Whereupon I recounted the conversation; and, when I
repeated the answer I made to his ungenerous remonstrance with regard
to my leaving his house, this pretended friend affected a stare, and
exclaimed, “Is it possible you could behave so ill to the man who had
treated you so kindly all along?”

My surprise at hearing this was not at all affected, whatever his might
be; and I gave to understand with some warmth, that I did not imagine
he would so unreasonably espouse the cause of a scoundrel who ought to
be expelled from every social community. This heat of mine gave him all
the advantage he desired over me, and our discourse, after much
altercation, concluded in his desiring never to see me again in that
place; to which desire I yielded my consent, assuring him, that, had I
been as well acquainted with his principles formerly as I was now, he
never should have had an opportunity of making that request. And thus
we parted.

On my return, I met my comrade, Squire Gawky, whom his father had sent,
some time ago, to town, for his improvement in writing, dancing,
fencing, and other modish qualifications. As I had lived with him since
his arrival on the footing of our old intimacy, I made no scruple of
informing him of the lowness of my circumstances, and asking a small
supply of money, to answer my present expense; upon which he pulled out
a handful of halfpence with a shilling or two among them, and swore
that was all he had to keep his pocket till next quarter-day he having
lost the greatest part of his allowance the night before at billiards.
Though this assertion might very well be true, I was extremely
mortified at his indifference: for he neither expressed any sympathy
for my mishap nor desire of alleviating my distress; and accordingly I
left him without uttering one word: but, when I afterwards understood
that he was the person who had formerly betrayed me to the malice of my
cousins, to whom likewise he had carried the tidings of my forlorn
situation, which afforded them great matter of triumph and exultation,
I determined with myself to call him to a severe account for which
purpose I borrowed a sword, and wrote a challenge, desiring him to meet
me at a certain time and place, that I might have an opportunity of
punishing his perfidy, at the expense of his blood. He accepted the
invitation, and I betook myself to the field, though not without
feeling considerable repugnance to the combat, which frequently
attacked me in cold sweats by the way; but the desire of revenge, the
shame of retracting, and hope of conquest, conspired to repel these
unmanly symptoms of fear; and I appeared on the plain with a good
grace: there I waited an hour beyond the time appointed, and was not
ill pleased to find he had no mind to meet me, because I should have an
opportunity of exposing his cowardice, displaying my own courage, and
of beating him soundly wheresoever I should find, without any dread of
the consequence.

Elevated with these suggestions, which entirely banished all thoughts
of my deplorable condition, I went directly to Gawky’s lodgings, where
I was informed of his precipitate retreat, he having set out for the
country in less than an hour after he had received my billet; and I was
vain enough to have the whole story inserted in the news, although I
was fain to sell a gold laced hat to my landlord for less than
half-price, to defray the expenses and contribute to my subsistence.




CHAPTER VII


I am entertained by Mr. Crab—a description of him—I acquire the Art of
Surgery—consult Crab’s Disposition—become necessary to him—an Accident
happens—he advises me to launch out into the world—assists me with
Money—I set out for London


The fumes of my resentment being dissipated, as well as the vanity of
my success, I found myself deserted to all the horrors of extreme want,
and avoided by mankind as a creature of a different species, or rather
as a solitary being, noways comprehended within the scheme or
protection of Providence. My despair had rendered me almost quite
stupified, when I was one day told, that a gentleman desired to see me
at a certain public-house, whither immediately I repaired; and was
introduced to one Mr. Launcelot Crab, a surgeon in town, who was
engaged with two more in drinking a liquor called pop-in, composed by
mixing a quartern of brandy with a quart of small beer. Before I relate
the occasion of this message, I believe it will not be disagreeable to
the reader, if I describe the gentleman who sent for me, and mention
some circumstances of his character and conduct which may illustrate
what follows, and account for his behaviour to me.

This member of the faculty was aged fifty, about five feet high, and
ten round the belly; his face was as capacious as a full moon, and much
of the complexion of a mulberry: his nose, resembling a powder-horn,
was swelled to an enormous size, and studded all over with carbuncles;
and his little gray eyes reflected the rays in such an oblique manner
that, while he looked a person full in the face, one would have
imagined he was admiring the buckle of his shoe. He had long
entertained an implacable resentment against Potion, who, though a
younger practitioner, was better employed than he, and once had the
assurance to perform a cure, whereby he disappointed and disgraced the
prognostic of the said Crab. This quarrel which was at one time upon
the point of being made up, by the interposition and mediation of
friends, had been lately inflamed beyond a possibility of
reconciliation by the respective wives of the opponents, who, chancing
to meet at a christening, disagreed about precedence, proceeded from
invectives to blows, and were with great difficulty, by the gossips,
prevented from converting the occasion of joy into a scene of
lamentation.

The difference between these rivals was in the height of rancour, when
I received the message of Crab, who received me as civilly as I could
have expected from one of his disposition; and, after desiring me to
sit, inquired into the particulars of my leaving the house of Potion;
which when I had related, he said, with a malicious grin, “There’s a
sneaking dog! I always thought him a fellow without a soul, d—n me, a
canting scoundrel, who has crept into business by his hypocrisy, and
kissing the a—e of every body.”—“Ay, ay,” says another, “one might see
with half an eye that the rascal has no honesty in him, by his going so
regularly to church.”

This sentence was confirmed by a third, who assured his companions that
Potion was never known to be disguised in liquor but once, at a meeting
of the godly, where he had distinguished himself by an extempore prayer
an hour long. After this preamble, Crab addressed himself to me in
these words: “Well, my lad, I have heard a good character of you, and
I’ll do for you. You may send your things to my house when you please.
I have given orders for your reception. Zounds! What does the booby
stare at? If you have no mind to embrace my courteous offer, you may
let it alone, and be d—d.” I answered with a submissive bow, that I was
far from rejecting his friendly offer, which I would immediately
accept, as soon as he should inform me on what footing I was to be
entertained. “What footing! D—n my blood,” cried he, “d’ye expect to
have a footman and a couple of horses kept for you?” “No, sir,” I
replied, “my expectations are not quite so sanguine. That I may be as
little burthensome as possible, I would willingly serve in your shop,
by which means I may save you the expense of a journeyman, or porter at
least, for I understand a little pharmacy, having employed some of my
leisure hours in the practice of that art, while I lived with Mr.
Potion; neither am I altogether ignorant of surgery, which I have
studied with great pleasure and application.”—“Oho! you did,” says
Crab. “Gentlemen, here is a complete artist! Studied surgery! What? in
books, I suppose. I shall have you disputing with me one of these days
on points of my profession. You can already account for muscular
motion, I warrant, and explain the mystery of the brain and nerves—ha!
You are too learned for me, d—n me. But let’s have no more of this
stuff. Can you blood and give a clyster, spread a plaster, and prepare
a potion?” Upon my answering in the affirmative, he shock his head,
telling me, he believed he should have little good of me, for all my
promises; but, however, he would take me in for the sake of charity. I
was accordingly that very night admitted to his house, and had an
apartment assigned to me in the garret, which I was fain to put up
with, notwithstanding the mortification my pride suffered in this
change of circumstances.

I was soon convinced of the real motives which induced Crab to receive
me in this manner; for, besides the gratification of his revenge, by
exposing the selfishness of his antagonist, in opposition to his own
generosity, which was all affectation, he had occasion for a young man
who understood something of the profession, to fill up the place of his
eldest apprentice, lately dead, not without violent suspicion of foul
play from his master’s brutality. The knowledge of this circumstance,
together with his daily behaviour to his wife and the young apprentice,
did not at all contribute to my enjoying my new situation with ease;
however, as I did not perceive how I could bestow myself to better
advantage, I resolved to study Crab’s temper with all the application,
and manage it with all the address in my power. And it was not long
before I found out a strange peculiarity of humour which governed his
behaviour towards all his dependents. I observed, when he was pleased,
he was such a niggard of his satisfaction that, if his wife or servants
betrayed the least symptom of participation, he was offended to an
insupportable degree of choler and fury, the effects of which they
seldom failed to feel. And when his indignation was roused, submission
and soothing always exasperated it beyond the bounds of reason and
humanity. I therefore pursued a contrary plan; and one day, when he
honoured me with the names of ignorant whelp and lazy ragamuffin, I
boldly replied, I was neither ignorant nor lazy, since I both
understood and performed my business as well as he could do for his
soul; neither was it just to call me ragamuffin, for I had a whole coat
on my back, and was descended from a better family than any he could
boast an alliance with.

He gave tokens of great amazement at this assurance of mine, and shook
his cane over my head, regarding me all the time with a countenance
truly diabolical. Although I was terribly startled at his menacing
looks and posture, I yet had reflection enough left to convince me I
had gone too far to retract, and that this was the critical minute
which must decide my future lot in his service; I therefore snatched up
the pestle of a mortar, and swore, if he offered to strike me without a
cause, I should see whether his skull or my weapon was hardest.

He continued silent for some time, and at last broke forth into these
ejaculations: “This is fine usage from a servant to his master—very
fine! damnation! but no matter, you shall pay for this, you dog, you
shall; I’ll do your business—yes, yes, I’ll teach you to lift your hand
against me.” So saying, he retired, and left me under dreadful
apprehensions, which vanished entirely at our next meeting, when he
behaved with unusual complacency, and treated me with a glass of punch
after dinner.

By this conduct I got the ascendancy over him in a short time, and
became so necessary to him, in managing his business while he was
engaged at the bottle, that fortune began to wear a kinder aspect; and
I consoled myself for the disregard of my former acquaintance, with the
knowledge I daily imbibed by a close application to the duties of my
employment, in which I succeeded beyond my own expectation. I was on
very good terms with my master’s wife, whose esteem I acquired and
cultivated, by representing Mrs. Potion in the most ridiculous lights
my satirical talents could invent, as well as by rendering her some
Christian offices, when she had been too familiar with the dram bottle,
to which she had oftentimes recourse for consolation, under the
affliction she suffered from a barbarous husband.

In this manner I lived, without hearing the least tidings of my uncle
for the space of two years, during which time I kept little or no
company, being neither in a humour to relish nor in a capacity to
maintain much acquaintance; for the Nabal my master allowed me no
wages, and the small perquisites of my station scarcely supplied me
with the common necessaries of life. I was no longer a pert unthinking
coxcomb, giddy with popular applause, and elevated with the
extravagance of hope: my misfortunes had taught me how little the
caresses of the world, during a man’s prosperity, are to be valued by
him; and how seriously and expeditiously he ought to set about making
himself independent of them. My present appearance, therefore, was the
least of my care, which was wholly engrossed in laying up a stock of
instruction that might secure me against the caprice of fortune for the
future. I became such a sloven, and contracted such an air of
austerity, that everybody pronounced me crestfallen; and Gawky returned
to town without running any risk from my resentment, which was by this
time pretty much cooled, and restrained by prudential reasons so
effectually that I never so much as thought of obtaining satisfaction
for the injuries he had done me.

When I deemed myself sufficiently master of my business I began to cast
about for an opportunity of launching into the world, in hope of
finding some provision that might make amends for the difficulties I
had undergone; but, as this could not be effected without a small sum
of money to equip me for the field, I was in the utmost perplexity how
to raise it, well knowing that Crab, for his own sake, would never put
me in a condition to leave him, when his interest was so much concerned
in my stay. But a small accident, which happened about this time,
determined him in my favour. This was no other than the pregnancy of
his maidservant, who declared her situation to me, assuring me at the
same time that I was the occasion of it.

Although I had no reason to question the truth of this imputation, I
was not ignorant of the familiarities which had passed between her
master and her, taking the advantage of which I represented to her the
folly of laying the burden at my door, when she might dispose of it to
much better purpose with Mr. Crab. She listened to my advice, and next
day acquainted him with the pretended success of their mutual
endeavours. He was far from being overjoyed at this proof of his
vigour, which he foresaw might have very troublesome consequences; not
that he dreaded any domestic grumblings and reproaches from his wife,
whom he kept in perfect subjection; but because he knew it would
furnish his rival Potion with a handle for insulting and undermining
his reputation, there being no scandal equal to that of uncleanness, in
the opinion of those who inhabit the part of the island where he lived.
He therefore took a resolution worthy of himself, which was, to
persuade the girl that she was not with child, but only afflicted with
a disorder incidental to young women, which he could easily remove:
with this view (as he pretended) he prescribed for her such medicines
as he thought would infallibly procure abortion; but in this scheme he
was disappointed, for the maid, being advertised by me of his design,
and at the same time well acquainted with her own condition, absolutely
refused to follow his directions; and threatened to publish her
situation to the world if he would not immediately take some method of
providing for the important occasion, which she expected in a few
months. It was not long before I guessed the result of his
deliberation, by his addressing himself to me one day in this manner:
“I am surprised that a young fellow like you discovers no inclination
to push his fortune in the world. Before I was of your age I was
broiling on the coast of Guinea. D—e! what’s to hinder you from
profiting by the war which will certainly be declared in a short time
against Spain? You may easily get on board of a king’s ship in quality
of surgeon’s mate, where you will certainly see a great deal of
practice, and stand a good chance of getting prize-money.”

I laid hold of this declaration, which I had long wished for, and
assured him I would follow his advice with pleasure, if it were in my
power; but that it was impossible for me to embrace an opportunity of
that kind, as I had no friend to advance a little money to supply me
with what necessaries I should want, and defray the expenses of my
journey to London. He told me that few necessaries were required; and,
as for the expense of my journey, he would lend me money, sufficient
not only for that purpose, but also to maintain me comfortably in
London until I should procure a warrant for my provision on board of
some ship.

I gave him a thousand thanks for his obliging offer (although I was
very well apprised of his motive, which was no other than a design to
lay the bastard to my charge after my departure), and accordingly set
out in a few weeks for London; my whole fortune consisting of one suit
of clothes, half a dozen ruffled shirts, as many plain, two pair of
worsted and a like number of threaded stockings; a case of pocket
instruments, a small edition of Horace, Wiseman’s Surgery, and ten
guineas in cash; for which Crab took my bond, bearing five per cent
interest; at the same time giving me a letter to a member of parliament
for our town, which he said would do my business effectually.




CHAPTER VIII


I arrive at Newcastle—meet with my old Schoolfellow Strap—we determine
to walk together to London—set out on our Journey—put up at a solitary
Alehouse—are disturbed by a strange Adventure in the Night


There is no such convenience as a waggon in this country, and my
finances were too weak to support the expense of hiring a horse: I
determined therefore to set out with the carriers, who transport goods
from one place to another on horseback; and this scheme I accordingly
put in execution on the 1st day of September, 1739, sitting upon a
pack-saddle between two baskets, one of which contained my goods in a
knapsack. But by the time we arrived at Newcastle-upon-Tyne I was so
fatigued with the tediousness of the carriage, and benumbed with the
coldness of the weather, that I resolved to travel the rest of my
journey on foot, rather than proceed in such a disagreeable manner.

The ostler of the inn at which we put up, understanding I was bound for
London, advised me to take my passage in a collier which would be both
cheap and expeditious and withal much easier than to walk upwards of
three hundred miles through deep roads in the winter time, a journey
which he believed I had not strength enough to perform. I was almost
persuaded to take his advice, when one day, stepping into a barber’s
shop to be shaved, the young man, while he lathered my face, accosted
me thus: “Sir, I presume you are a Scotchman.” I answered in the
affirmative. “Pray,” continued he, “from what part of Scotland?” I no
sooner told him, than he discovered great emotion, and not confining
his operation to my chin and upper lip, besmeared my whole face with
great agitation. I was so offended at this profusion that starting up,
I asked him what the d—l he meant by using me so? He begged pardon,
telling me his joy at meeting with a countryman had occasioned some
confusion in him, and craved my name. But, when I declared my name was
Random, he exclaimed in rapture, “How! Rory Random?” “The same,” I
replied, looking at him with astonishment. “What!” cried he, “don’t you
know your old schoolfellow, Hugh Strap?”

At that instant recollecting his face, I flew into his arms, and in the
transport of my joy, gave him back one-half of the suds he had so
lavishly bestowed on my countenance; so that we made a very ludicrous
appearance, and furnished a great deal of mirth for his master and
shopmates, who were witnesses of this scene. When our mutual caresses
were over I sat down again to be shaved, but the poor fellow’s nerves
were so discomposed by this unexpected meeting that his hand could
scarcely hold the razor, with which, nevertheless, he found means to
cut me in three places in as many strokes. His master, perceiving his
disorder, bade another supply his place, and after the operation was
performed, gave Strap leave to pass the rest of the day with me.

We retired immediately to my lodgings, where, calling for some beer, I
desired to be informed of his adventures, which contained nothing more
than that his master dying before his time was out, he had come to
Newcastle about a year ago, in expectation of journeywork, along with
three young fellows of his acquaintance who worked in the keels; that
he had the good fortune of being employed by a very civil master, with
whom he intended to stay till the spring, at which time he proposed to
go to London, where he did not doubt of finding encouragement. When I
communicated to him my situation and design, he did not approve of my
taking a passage by sea, by reason of the danger of a winter voyage,
which is very hazardous along that coast, as well as the precariousness
of the wind, which might possibly detain me a great while, to the no
small detriment of my fortune; whereas, if I would venture by land, he
would bear me company, carry my baggage all the way, and if we should
be fatigued before we could perform the journey it would be no hard
matter for us to find on the road either return horses or waggons, of
which we might take the advantage for a very trifling expense.

I was so ravished at this proposal that I embraced him affectionately,
and assured him he might command my purse to the last farthing; but he
gave me to understand he had saved money sufficient to answer his own
occasions; and that he had a friend in London who would soon introduce
him into business in that capital, and possibly have it in his power to
serve me also.

Having concerted the plan and settled our affairs that night, we
departed next morning by daybreak, armed with a good cudgel each (my
companion being charged with the furniture of us both crammed into one
knapsack), and our money sewed between the linings and waistbands of
our breeches, except some loose silver for our immediate expenses on
the road, We travelled all day at a round pace, but, being ignorant of
the proper stages, were benighted at a good distance from any inn, so
that we were compelled to take up our lodging at a small hedge
alehouse, that stood on a byroad, about half-a-mile from the highway:
there we found a pedlar of our own country, in whose company we regaled
ourselves with bacon and eggs, and a glass of good ale, before a
comfortable fire, conversing all the while very sociably with the
landlord and his daughter, a hale buxom lass, who entertained us with
great good humour, and in whose affection I was vain enough to believe
I had made some progress. About eight o’clock we were all three, at our
own desire, shown into an apartment furnished with two beds, in one of
which Strap and I betook ourselves to rest, and the pedlar occupied the
other, though not before he had prayed a considerable time extempore,
searched into every corner of the room, and fastened the door on the
inside with a strong iron screw, which he carried about with him for
that use.

I slept very sound till midnight when I was disturbed by a violent
motion of the bed, which shook under me with a continual tremor.
Alarmed at this phenomenon, I jogged my companion, whom, to my no small
amazement, I found drenched in sweat, and quaking through every limb;
he told me, with a low faltering voice, that we were undone; for there
was a bloody highwayman, loaded with pistols, in the next room; then,
bidding me make as little noise as possible, he directed me to a small
chink in the board partition through which I could see a thick-set
brawny fellow, with a fierce countenance, sitting at a table with our
young landlady, having a bottle of ale and a brace of pistols before
him.

I listened with great attention, and heard him say, in a terrible tone,
“D—n that son of a b—h, Smack the coachman; he has served me a fine
trick, indeed! but d—ion seize me, if I don’t make him repent it! I’ll
teach the scoundrel to give intelligence to others while he is under
articles with me.”

Our landlady endeavoured to appease this exasperated robber, by saying
he might be mistaken in Smack, who perhaps kept no correspondence with
the other gentleman that robbed his coach; and that, if an accident had
disappointed him to-day, he might soon find opportunities enough to
atone for his lost trouble. “I’ll tell thee what, my dear Bet,” replied
he, “I never had, nor ever shall, while my name is Rifle, have such a
glorious booty as I missed to-day. Z—s! there was £400 in cash to
recruit men for the king’s service, besides the jewels, watches,
swords, and money belonging to the passengers. Had it been my fortune
to have got clear off with so much treasure, I would have purchased a
commission in the army, and made you an officer’s lady, you jade, I
would.” “Well, well,” cries Betty, “we must trust to Providence for
that. But did you find nothing worth taking which escaped the other
gentlemen of the road?” “Not much, faith,” said the lover; “I gleaned a
few things, such as a pair of pops, silver mounted (here they are): I
took them loaded from the captain who had the charge of the money,
together with a gold watch which he had concealed in his breeches. I
likewise found ten Portugal pieces in the shoes of a quaker, whom the
spirit moved to revile me with great bitterness and devotion; but what
I value myself mostly for is, this here purchase, a gold snuffbox, my
girl, with a picture on the inside of the lid; which I untied out of
the tail of a pretty lady’s smock.”

Here, as the devil would have it, the pedlar snored so loud, that the
highwayman, snatching his pistols, started up, crying, “Hell and d-n-n!
I am betrayed! Who’s that in the next room?” Mrs. Betty told him he
need not be uneasy: there were only three poor travellers, who, missing
the road, had taken up their lodgings in the house, and were asleep
long ago. “Travellers,” says he, “spies, you b—ch! But no matter; I’ll
send them all to hell in an instant!” He accordingly ran towards our
door; when his sweetheart interposing, assured him, there was only a
couple of poor young Scotchmen, who were too raw and ignorant to give
him the least cause of suspicion; and the third was a presbyterian
pedlar of the same nation, who had often lodged in the house before.

This declaration satisfied the thief, who swore he was glad there was a
pedlar, for he wanted some linen. Then, in a jovial manner, he put
about the glass, mingling his discourse to Betty with caresses and
familiarities, that spoke him very happy in his amours. During that
part of the conversation which regarded this, Strap had crept under the
bed, where he lay in the agonies of fear; so that it was with great
difficulty I persuaded him our danger was over, and prevailed on him to
awake the pedlar, and inform him of what he had seen and heard.

The itinerant merchant no sooner felt somebody shaking him by the
shoulder, than he started up, called, as loud as he could, “Thieves,
thieves! Lord have mercy upon us!” And Rifle, alarmed at this
exclamation, jumped up, cocked one of his pistols, and turned towards
the door to kill the first man that should enter; for he verily
believed himself beset: when his Dulcinea, after an immoderate fit of
laughter, persuaded him that the poor pedlar, dreaming of thieves, had
only cried out in his sleep.

Meanwhile, my comrade had undeceived our fellow-lodger, and informed
him of his reason for disturbing him; upon which, getting up softly, he
peeped through the hole, and was so terrified with what he saw, that,
falling down on his bare knees, he put up a long petition to Heaven to
deliver him from the hands of that ruffian, and promised never to
defraud a customer for the future of the value of a pin’s point,
provided he might be rescued from the present danger. Whether or not
his disburthening his conscience afforded him any ease I knew not, but
he slipped into bed again, and lay very quiet until the robber and his
mistress were asleep, and snored in concert; then, rising softly, he
untied a rope that was round his pack, which making fast to one end of
it, he opened the window with as little noise as possible, and lowered
his goods into the yard with great dexterity: then he moved gently to
our bedside and bade us farewell, telling us that, as we ran no risk we
might take our rest with great confidence, and in the morning assure
the landlord that we knew nothing of his escape, and, lastly, shaking
us by the hands, and wishing us all manner of success, he let himself
drop from the window without any danger, for the ground was not above a
yard from his feet as he hung on the outside.

Although I did not think proper to accompany him in his flight, I was
not at all free from apprehension when I reflected on what might be the
effect of the highwayman’s disappointment; as he certainly intended to
make free with the pedlar’s ware. Neither was my companion at more ease
in his mind, but on the contrary, so possessed with the dreadful idea
of Rifle, that he solicited me strongly to follow our countryman’s
example, and so elude the fatal resentment of that terrible adventurer,
who would certainly wreak his vengeance on us as accomplices of the
pedlar’s elopement. But I represented to him the danger of giving Rifle
cause to think we know his profession, and suggested that, if ever he
should meet us again on the road, he would look upon us as dangerous
acquaintance, and find it his interest to put us out of the way. I told
him, withal, my confidence in Betty’s good nature, in which he
acquiesced; and during the remaining part of the night we concerted a
proper method of behaviour, to render us unsuspected in the morning.

It was no sooner day than Betty, entering our chamber, and perceiving
our window open, cried out, “Odds-bobs! sure you Scotchmen must have
hot constitutions to lie all night with the window open in such cold
weather.” I feigned to start out of sleep, and, withdrawing the
curtain, called, “What’s the matter?” When she showed me, I affected
surprise, and said, “Bless me! the window was shut when we went to
bed.” “I’ll be hanged,” said she, “if Sawney Waddle, the pedlar, has
not got up in a dream and done it, for I heard him very obstropulous in
his sleep.—Sure I put a chamberpot under his bed!”

With these words she advanced to the bed, in which he lay, and, finding
the sheets cold, exclaimed, “Good lackadaisy! The rogue is fled.”
“Fled,” cried I, with feigned amazement, “God forbid! Sure he has not
robbed us!” Then, springing up, I laid hold of my breeches, and emptied
all my loose money into my hand; which having reckoned, I said, “Heaven
be praised, our money is all safe! Strap, look to the knapsack.” He did
so, and found all was right. Upon which we asked, with seeming concern,
if he had stolen nothing belonging to the house. “No, no,” replied she,
“he has stole nothing but his reckoning;” which, it seems, this pious
pedlar had forgot to discharge in the midst of his devotion.

Betty, after a moment’s pause withdrew, and immediately we could hear
her waken Rifle, who no sooner heard of Waddle’s flight than he jumped
out of bed and dressed, venting a thousand execrations, and vowing to
murder the pedlar if ever he should set eyes on him again: “For,” said
he “the scoundrel has by this time raised the hue and cry against me.”

Having dressed himself in a hurry, he mounted his horse, and for that
time rid us of his company and a thousand fears that were the
consequence of it.

While we were at breakfast, Betty endeavoured, by all the cunning she
was mistress of, to learn whether or no we suspected our fellow-lodger,
whom we saw take horse; but, as we were on our guard, we answered her
sly questions with a simplicity she could not distrust; when, all of a
sudden, we heard the trampling of a horse’s feet at the door. This
noise alarmed Strap so much, whose imagination was wholly engrossed by
the image of Rifle, that, with a countenance as pale as milk, he cried,
“O Lord! there is the highwayman returned!”

Our landlady, staring at these words, said, “What highwayman, young
man? Do you think any highwaymen harbour here?”

Though I was very much disconcerted at this piece of indiscretion in
Strap, I had presence of mind enough to tell her we had met a horseman
the day before, whom Strap had foolishly supposed to be a highwayman,
because he rode with pistols; and that he had been terrified at the
sound of a horse’s feet ever since.

She forced a smile at the ignorance and timidity of my comrade; but I
could perceive, not without great concern, that this account was not at
all satisfactory to her.




CHAPTER IX


We proceed on our Journey—are overtaken by a Highwayman who fires at
Strap—is prevented from shooting me by a Company of Horsemen, who ride
in pursuit of him—Strap is put to Bed at an Inn—Adventures at that Inn


After having paid our score and taken leave of our hostess, who
embraced me tenderly at parting, we proceeded on our journey, blessing
ourselves that we had come off so well. We had not walked above five
miles, when we observed a man on horseback galloping after us, whom we
in a short time recognised to be no other than this formidable hero who
had already given us so much vexation. He stopped hard by me, and asked
if I knew who he was? My astonishment had disconcerted me so much that
I did not hear his question, which he repeated with a volley of oaths
and threats; but I remained as mute as before.

Strap, seeing my discomposure, fell upon his knees in the mud,
uttering, with a lamentable voice, these words: “For Christ’s sake,
have mercy upon us, Mr. Rifle! we know you very well.” “Oho!” cried the
thief, “you do! But you never shall be evidence against me in this
world, you dog!” So saying, he drew a pistol, and fired it at the
unfortunate shaver, who fell flat upon the ground without speaking one
word.

My comrade’s fate and my own situation riveted me to the place where I
stood, deprived of all sense and reflection; so that I did not make the
least attempt either to run away or deprecate the wrath of this
barbarian, who snapped a second pistol at me; but, before he had time
to prime again, perceiving a company of horsemen coming up, he rode
off, and left me standing motionless as a statue, in which posture I
was found by those whose appearance had saved my life. This company
consisted of three men in livery, well armed, with an officer, who (as
I afterwards learned,) was the person from whom Rifle had taken the
pocket pistols the day before; and who, making known his misfortune to
a nobleman he met on the road, and assuring him his non-resistance was
altogether owing to his consideration for the ladies in the coach,
procured the assistance of his lordship’s servants to go in quest of
the plunderer. This holiday captain scampered up to me with great
address, and asked who fired the pistol which he had heard.

As I had not yet recovered my reason, he, before I could answer,
observed a body lying on the ground, at which sight his colour changed,
and he pronounced, with a faltering tongue, “Gentlemen, here’s murder
committed! Let us alight.” “No, no,” said one of his followers, “let us
rather pursue the murderer. Which way went he, young man?”

By this time I had recollected myself so far as to tell them that he
could not be a quarter of a mile before; and to beg one of them to
assist me in conveying the corpse of my friend to the next house, in
order to it being interred. The captain, foreseeing that, in case he
should pursue, he must soon come to action, began to curb his horse,
and gave him the spur at the same time, which treatment making the
creature rear up and snort, he called out, his horse was frightened,
and would not proceed; at the same time wheeling him round and round,
stroking his neck, whistling and wheedling him with “Sirrah,
sirrah—gently, gently.” etc. “Z—ds!”, cried one of the servants, “sure
my lord’s Sorrel is not resty!”

With these words he bestowed a lash on his buttocks, and Sorrel,
disdaining the rein sprang forward with the captain at a pace that
would have soon brought him up with the robber, had not the girtle
(happily for him) given way, by which means he landed in the dirt; and
two of his attendants continued their pursuit, without minding his
situation. Meanwhile one of the three who remained at my desire,
turning the body of Strap, in order to see the wound which had killed
him, found him still warm and breathing: upon which, I immediately let
him blood, and saw him, with inexpressible joy, recover; he having
received no other wound than what his fear had inflicted. Having raised
him upon his legs, we walked together to an inn, about half a mile from
the place, where Strap, who was not quite recovered, went to bed; and
in a little time the third servant returned with the captain’s horse
and furniture, leaving him to crawl after as well as he could.

This gentleman of the sword, upon his arrival, complained grievously of
the bruise occasioned by his fall; and, on the recommendation of the
servant, who warranted my ability, I was employed to bleed him, for
which service he rewarded me with half-a-crown.

The time between this event and dinner I passed in observing a game at
cards between two farmers, an exciseman, and a young fellow in a rusty
gown and cassock, who, as I afterwards understood, was curate of a
neighbouring parish. It was easy to perceive that the match was not
equal; and that the two farmers, who were partners, had to do with a
couple of sharpers, who stripped them of all their cash in a very short
time. But what surprised me very much, was to hear this clergyman reply
to one of the countrymen, who seemed to suspect foul play, in these
words: “D—n me, friend, d’ye question my honour?”

I did not at all wonder to find a cheat in canonicals, this being a
character frequent in my own country; but I was scandalised at the
indecency of his behaviour, which appeared in the oaths he swore, and
the bawdy songs which he sung. At last, to make amends in some sort,
for the damage he had done to the unwary boors, he pulled out a fiddle
from the lining of his gown, and, promising to treat them at dinner,
began to play most melodiously, singing in concert all the while. This
good humour of this parson inspired the company with so much glee that
the farmers soon forgot their losses, and all present went to dancing
in the yard.

While we were agreeably amused in this manner, our musician, spying a
horseman a riding towards the inn, stopped all of a sudden, crying out,
“Gad so! gentlemen, I beg your pardon, there’s our dog of a doctor
coming into the inn.” He immediately commended his instrument, and ran
towards the gate, where he took hold of the vicar’s bridle, and helped
him off, inquiring very cordially into the state of his health.

This rosy son of the church, who might be about the age of fifty,
having alighted and entrusted the curate with his horse, stalked with
great solemnity, into the kitchen, where sitting down by the fire, he
called for a bottle of ale and a pipe; scarce deigning an answer to the
submissive questions of those who inquired about the welfare of his
family. While he indulged himself in this state, amidst a profound
silence, the curate, approaching him with great reverence, asked him if
he would not be pleased to honour him with his company at dinner? To
which interrogation he answered in the negative, saying, he had been to
visit Squire Bumpkin, who had drank himself into a high fever at the
last assizes; and that he had, on leaving his own house, told Betty he
should dine at home. Accordingly when he had made an end of his bottle
and pipe, he rose, and moved with prelatical dignity to the door, where
his journeyman stood ready with his nag. He had no sooner mounted than
the facetious curate, coming into the kitchen, held forth in this
manner: “There the old rascal goes, and the d—l go with him. You see
how the world wags, gentlemen. By gad, this rogue of a vicar does not
deserve to live; and yet he has two livings worth four hundred pounds
per annum, while poor I am fain to do all his drudgery, and ride twenty
miles every Sunday to preach—for what? why, truly, for twenty pounds a
year. I scorn to boast of my own qualifications but—comparisons are
odious. I should be glad to know how this wag-bellied doctor deserves
to be more at ease than me. He can loll in his elbow chair at home,
indulge himself in the best of victuals and wine and enjoy the
conversation of Betty, his housekeeper. You understand me, gentlemen.
Betty is the doctor’s poor kinswoman, and a pretty girl she is; but no
matter for that; ay, and dutiful girl to her parents, whom she visits
regularly every year, though I must own I could never learn in what
county they live, My service t’ye, gentlemen.”

By this time dinner being ready, I waked my companion, and we ate
altogether with great cheerfulness. When our meal was ended, and every
man’s share of the reckoning adjusted, the curate went out on pretence
of some necessary occasion, and, mounting his house, left the two
farmers to satisfy the host in the best manner they could. We were no
sooner informed of this piece of finesse, than the exciseman, who had
been silent hitherto, began to open with a malicious grin: “Ay, ay this
is an old trick of Shuffle; I could not help smiling when he talked of
treating. You must know this is a very curious fellow. He picked up
some scraps of learning while he served young Lord Trifte at the
university. But what he most excels in is pimping. No one knows his
talents better than I, for I was valet-de-chambre to Squire Tattle an
intimate companion of Shuffle’s lord. He got him self into a scrape by
pawning some of his lordship’s clothes on which account he was turned
away; but, as he was acquainted with some particular circumstances of
my lord’s conduct, he did not care to exasperate him too much, and so
made interest for his receiving orders, and afterwards recommended him
to the curacy which he now enjoys. However, the fellow cannot be too
much admired for his dexterity in making a comfortable livelihood, in
spite of such a small allowance. You hear he plays a good stick, and is
really diverting company; these qualifications make him agreeable
wherever he goes; and, as for playing at cards there is not a man
within three counties for him. The truth is, he is a d—able cheat, and
can shift a card with such address that it is impossible to discover
him.”

Here he was interrupted by one of the farmers, who asked, why he had
not justice enough to acquaint them with these particulars before they
engaged in play. The exciseman replied, without any hesitation, that it
was none of his business to intermeddle between man and man; besides,
he did not know they were ignorant of Shuffle’s character, which was
notorious to the whole country. This did not satisfy the other, who
taxed him with abetting and assisting the curate’s knavery, and
insisted on having his share of the winnings returned; this demand the
exciseman as positively refused affirming that, whatever sleights
Shuffle might practise on other occasions, he was very certain that he
had played on the square with them, and would answer it before any
bench in Christendom; so saying, he got up and, having paid his
reckoning, sneaked off.

The Landlord, thrusting his neck into the passage to see if he was
gone, shook his head, saying, “Ah! Lord help us! if every sinner was to
have his deserts. Well, we victuallers must not disoblige the
excisemen. But I know what; if parson Shuffle and he were weighed
together, a straw thrown into either scale would make the balance kick
the beam. But, masters, this is under the rose,” continued Boniface
with a whisper.




CHAPTER X


The Highwayman is taken—we are detained as Evidence against him—proceed
to the next village—he escapes—we arrive at another inn, where we go to
Bed—in the Night we are awaked by a dreadful Adventure—next night we
lodge at the house of a Schoolmaster—our Treatment there


Strap and I were about to depart on our journey, when we perceived a
crowd on the road coming towards us, shouting and hallooing all the
way. As it approached, we could discern a man on horseback in the
middle, with his hands tied behind him, whom we soon knew to be Rifle.
The highwayman, not being so well mounted as the two servants who went
in pursuit of him, was soon overtaken, and, after having discharged his
pistols, made prisoner without any further opposition. They were
carrying him in triumph, amidst the acclamations of the country people,
to a justice of peace in a neighbouring village, but stopped at our inn
to join their companions and take refreshment.

When Rifle was dismounted and placed in the yard, within a circle of
peasants, armed with pitchforks, I was amazed to see what a pitiful
dejected fellow he now appeared, who had but a few hours before filled
me with such terror and confusion. My companion was so much encouraged
by this alteration in his appearance that, going up to the thief, he
presented his clenched fists to his nose, and declared he would either
cudgel or box with the prisoner for a guinea, which he immediately
produced, and began to strip, but was dissuaded from this adventure by
me, who represented to him the folly of the undertaking, as Rifle was
now in the hands of justice, which would, no doubt, give us all
satisfaction enough.

But what made me repent of our impertinent curiosity was our being
detained by the captors, as evidence against him, when we were just
going to set forward. However, there was no remedy; we were obliged to
comply, and accordingly joined in the cavalcade, which luckily took the
same road that we had proposed to follow. About the twilight we arrived
at the place of our destination, but as the justice was gone to visit a
gentleman in the country, with whom (we understood) he would probably
stay all night, the robber was confined in an empty garret, three
stories high, from which it seemed impossible for him to escape; this,
nevertheless, was the case; for next morning when they went up stairs
to bring him before the justice, the bird was flown, having got out at
the window upon the roof from whence he continued his route along the
tops of the adjoining houses, and entered another garret where he
skulked until the family were asleep; at which time he ventured down
stairs, and let himself out by the street-door, which was open.

This event was a great disappointment to those that apprehended him,
who were flushed with the hopes of the reward; but gave me great joy,
as I was permitted now to continue my journey, without any further
molestation. Resolving to make up for the small progress we had
hitherto made, we this day travelled with great vigour and before night
reached a market town twenty miles from the place from whence we set
out in the morning, without meeting any adventure worth notice. Here
having taken up our lodging at an an inn, I found myself so fatigued
that I began to despair of performing our journey on foot, and desired
Strap to inquire if there were any waggon, return horses, or any cheap
carriage in this place, to depart for London next day. He was informed
that the waggon from Newcastle to London had halted there two nights
ago, and that it would be an easy matter to overtake it, if not the
next day, at farthest, the day after the next. This piece of news gave
us some satisfaction; and, after having made a hearty supper on hashed
mutton, we were shown to our room, which contained two beds, the one
allotted for us, and the other for a very honest gentleman, who, we
were told, was then drinking below. Though we could have very well
dispensed with his company, we were glad to submit to this disposition,
as there was not another bed empty in the house; and accordingly went
to rest, after having secured our baggage under the bolster. About two
or three o’clock in the morning I was awaked out of a very profound
sleep by a dreadful noise in the chamber, which did not fail to throw
me into an agony of consternation, when I heard these words pronounced
with a terrible voice: “Blood and wounds! run the halbert into the guts
of him that’s next you, and I’ll blow the other’s brains out
presently.”

This dreadful salutation had no sooner reached the ears of Strap than,
starting out of bed, he ran against somebody in the dark, and
overturned him in an instant; at the same time bawling out, “Fire!
murder! fire!” a cry which in a moment alarmed the whole house, and
filled our chamber with a crowd of naked people. When lights were
brought, the occasion of all this disturbance soon appeared; which was
no other than a fellow lodger, whom we found lying on the floor,
scratching his head, with a look testifying the utmost astonishment at
the concourse of apparitions that surrounded him.

This honest gentleman was, it seems, a recruiting sergeant, who, having
listed two country fellows over night, dreaded they had mutinied, and
threatened to murder him and the drummer who was along with him. This
made such an impression on his imagination, that he got up in his sleep
and expressed himself as above. When our apprehension of danger
vanished, the company beheld one another with great surprise and mirth;
but what attracted the notice of everyone was our landlady, with
nothing on her but her shift and a large pair of buckskin breeches,
with the backside before, which she had slipped on in the hurry, and
her husband with her petticoat about his shoulders; one had wrapped
himself in a blanket, another was covered with a sheet, and the
drummer, who had given his only shirt to be washed, appeared in cuerpo
with a bolster rolled about his middle.

When this affair was discussed, everybody retired to his own apartment,
the sergeant slipped into bed, and my companion and I slept without any
further disturbance till morning, when we got up, went to breakfast,
paid our reckoning, and set forward in expectation of overtaking the
waggon; in which hope, however, we were disappointed for that day. As
we exerted ourselves more than usual, I found myself quite spent with
fatigue, when we entered a small village in the twilight. We inquired
for a public-house, and were directed to one of a very sorry
appearance. At our entrance the landlord, who seemed to be a venerable
old man, with long gray hair, rose from a table placed by a large fire
in a very neat paved kitchen, and with a cheerful countenance accosted
us in these words: “Salvete, pueri. Ingredimini.” I was not a little
pleased to hear our host speak Latin, because I was in hope of
recommending myself to him by my knowledge in that language; I
therefore answered, without hesitation, “Dissolve frigus, ligna super
foco—large reponens.” I had no sooner pronounced these words, than the
old gentleman, running towards me, shook me by the hand, crying, “Fili
mi dilectissime! unde venis?—a superis, ni fallor?” In short, finding
we were both read in the classics, he did not know how to testify his
regard enough; but ordered his daughter, a jolly rosy-cheeked damsel
who was his sole domestic, to bring us a bottle of his quadrimum,
repeating from Horace at the same time, “Deprome quadrimum sabina, O
Tholiarche, merum diota.” This was excellent ale of his own brewing, of
which he told us he had always an amphora four years old, for the use
of himself and friends.

In the course of our conversation, which was interlarded with scraps of
Latin, we understood that this facetious person was a schoolmaster,
whose income being small, he was fain to keep a glass of good liquor
for the entertainment of passengers by which he made shift to make the
two ends of the year meet. “I am this day,” said he, “the happiest old
fellow in his majesty’s dominions. My wife, rest her soul, is in
heaven. My daughter is to be married next week; but the two chief
pleasures of my life are these (pointing to the bottle and a large
edition of Horace that lay on the table). I am old, ’tis true—what
then? the more reason I should enjoy the small share of life that
remains, as my friend Flaccus advises: ‘Tu ne quaesieris (scire nefas)
quem mihi, quem tibi finem dii dederint. Carpe diem, quam minimum
credula postero.’”

As he was very inquisitive about our affairs, we made no scruple of
acquainting him with our situation, which when he had learned, he
enriched us with advices how to behave in the world, telling us that he
was no stranger to the deceits of mankind. In the meantime he ordered
his daughter to lay a fowl to the fire for supper, for he was resolved
this night to regale his friends—permittens divis caetera. While our
entertainment was preparing, our host recounted the adventures of his
own life, which, as they contained nothing remarkable, I forbear to
rehearse. When we had fared sumptuously, and drunk several bottles of
his I expressed a desire of going to rest, which was with some
difficulty complied with, after he had informed us that we should
overtake the waggon by noon next day; and that there was room enough in
it for half-a-dozen, for there were only four passengers as yet in that
convenience.

Before my comrade and I fell asleep, we had some conversation about the
good humour of our landlord, which gave Strap such an idea of his
benevolence, that he positively believed we should pay nothing for our
lodging and entertainment. “Don’t you observe,” said he, “that he has
conceived a particular affection for us—nay, even treated us at supper
with extraordinary fare, which, to be sure, we should not of ourselves
have called for?”

I was partly of Strap’s opinion; but the experience I had of the world
made me suspend my belief till the morning, when, getting up betimes,
we breakfasted with our host and his daughter on hasty-pudding and ale,
and desired to know what we had to pay. “Biddy will let you know,
gentlemen,” said he; “for I never mind these matters. Money matters are
beneath the concern of one who lives upon the Horatian plan—Crescentum
sequitur cura pecuniam.” Meanwhile, Biddy, having consulted a slate
that hung in the corner, told us our reckoning came to 8s. 7d. “Eight
shillings and seven pence!” cried Strap, “’tis impossible! you must be
mistaken, young woman.” “Reckon again, child,” says her father, very
deliberately; “perhaps you have miscounted.” “No, indeed,” replied she,
“I know my business better.” I could contain my indignation no longer,
but said it was an unconscionable bill, and demanded to know the
particulars; upon which the old man got up, muttering, “Ay, ay, let us
see the particulars—that’s but reasonable.” And, taking pen, ink, and
paper, wrote the following items:

To bread and beer	0 6 To a fowl and sausages	2 6 To four bottles
of _quadrim_	2 0 To fire and tobacco	0 7 To lodging	2 0 To
breakfast	1 0 —— 8 7

As he had not the appearance of a common publican, and had raised a
sort of veneration in me by his demeanour the preceding night, it was
not in my power to upbraid him as he deserved; therefore, I contented
myself with saying I was sure he did not learn to be an extortioner
from Horace. He answered, I was but a young man and did not know the
world, or I would not tax him with extortion, whose only aim was to
live contentus parvo, and keep off importuna pauperies. My fellow
traveller could not so easily put up with this imposition; but swore he
should either take one-third of the money or go without. While we were
engaged in this dispute, I perceived the daughter go out, and,
conjecturing the occasion, immediately paid the exorbitant demand,
which was no sooner done than Biddy returned with two stout fellows,
who came in on pretence of taking their morning draught, but in reality
to frighten us into compliance. Just as we departed, Strap, who was
half-distracted on account of this piece of expense, went up to the
schoolmaster, and, grinning in his face, pronounced with great
emphasis—“Semper avarus eget.” To which the pedant replied, with a
malicious smile—“Animum rege, qui, nisi paret, imperat.”




CHAPTER XI


We descry the Waggon—get into it—arrive at an inn—our Fellow Travellers
described—a Mistake is committed by Strap, which produces strange
things


We travelled half-a-mile without exchanging one word; my thoughts being
engrossed by the knavery of the world, to which I must be daily
exposed, and the contemplation of my finances, which began sensibly to
diminish. At length, Strap, who could hold no longer, addressed me
thus: “Well, fools and their money are soon parted. If my advice had
been taken, that old skin-flint should have been d—n’d before he had
got more than the third of his demand. ’Tis a sure sign you came easily
by your money, when you squander it away in this manner. Ah! God help
you, how many bristly beards must I have mowed before I earned four
shillings and threepence-halfpenny, which is all thrown to the dogs!
How many days have I sat weaving hair till my toes were numbed by the
cold, my fingers cramped, and my nose as blue as the sign of the
periwig that hung over the door! What the devil was you afraid of? I
would have engaged to box with any one of those fellows who came in for
a guinea—I’m sure—I have beat stouter men than either of them.” And,
indeed, my companion would have fought anybody when his life was in no
danger; but he had a mortal aversion to fire-arms and all instruments
of death. In order to appease him, I assured him no part of this
extraordinary expense should fall upon his shoulders; at which
declaration he was affronted, and told me he would have me to know
that, although he was a poor barber’s boy, yet he had a soul to spend
big money with the best squire of the land.

Having walked all day at a great pace, without halting for a
refreshment, we descried, toward the evening, to our inexpressible joy,
the waggon about a quarter of a mile before us; and, by that time we
reached it, were both of us so weary that I verily believe it would
have been impracticable for us to have walked one mile farther. We,
therefore, bargained with the driver, whose name was Joey, to give us a
cast to the next stage for a shilling; at which place we should meet
the master of the waggon, with whom we might agree for the rest of the
journey.

Accordingly the convenience stopped, and Joey having placed the ladder,
Strap (being loaded with our baggage) mounted first; but, just as he
was getting in, a tremendous voice assailed his ears in these words:
“God’s fury! there shall no passengers come here.” The poor shaver was
so disconcerted at this exclamation, which both he and I imagined
proceeded from the mouth of a giant, that he descended with great
velocity and a countenance as white as paper. Joey, perceiving our
astonishment, called, with an arch sneer, “Waunds, coptain, whay woant
yau sooffer the poor waggoneer to meake a penny? Coom, coom, young man,
get oop, get oop, never moind the coptain; I’se not afeard of the
coptain.”

This was not encouragement sufficient to Strap, who could not be
prevailed upon to venture up again; upon which I attempted, though not
without a quaking heart, when I heard the same voice muttering, like
distant thunder—“Hell and the devil confound me, if I don’t make you
smart for this!” However, I crept in, and by accident got an empty
place in the straw, which I immediately took possession of, without
being able to discern the faces of my fellow-travellers in the dark.
Strap following, with the knapsack on his back, chanced to take the
other side, and, by a jolt of the carriage, pitched directly upon the
stomach of the captain, who bellowed out, in a most dreadful manner,
“Blood and thunder! where’s my sword?” At these words my frighted
comrade started up, and, at one spring, bounced against me with such
force that I thought he was the supposed son of Anak, who intended to
press me to death. In the meantime a female voice cried, “Bless me!
what is the matter, my dear?” “The matter,” replied the captain, “d—n
my blood! my guts are squeezed into a pancake by that Scotchman’s
hump.” Strap, trembling all the while at my back, asked him pardon, and
laid the blame of what had happened upon the jolting of the waggon; and
the woman who spoke before went on: “Ay, ay, my dear, it is our own
fault; we may thank ourselves for all the inconveniences we meet with.
I thank God I never travelled so before. I am sure if my lady or Sir
John were to know where we are they would not sleep this night for
vexation. I wish to God we had writ for the chariot; I know we shall
never be forgiven.” “Come, come, my dear,” replied the captain, “it
don’t signify fretting now; we shall laugh it over as a frolic; I hope
you will not suffer in your health. I shall make my lord very merry
with our adventures in this diligence.”

The discourse gave me such a high notion of the captain and his lady
that I durst not venture to join in the conversation; but immediately
after another female voice began: “Some people give themselves a great
many needless airs; better folks than any here have travelled in
waggons before now. Some of us have rode in coaches and chariots, with
three footmen behind them, without making so much fuss about it. What
then? We are now all upon a footing; therefore let us be sociable and
merry. What do you say, Isaac? Is not this a good motion, you doting
rogue? Speak, you old cent per cent fornicator? What desperate debt are
you thinking of? What mortgage are you planning? Well, Isaac,
positively you shall never gain my favour till you turn over a new
leaf, grow honest, and live like a gentleman. In the meantime give me a
kiss, you old fumbler.” These words, accompanied with a hearty smack,
enlivened the person to whom they were addressed to such a degree that
he cried, in transport, though with a faltering voice, “Ah! you wanton
baggage—upon my credit, you are a waggish girl—he, he, he!” This laugh
introduced a fit of coughing, which almost suffocated the poor usurer
(such we afterwards found was the profession of this our
fellow-traveller).

About this time I fell asleep, and enjoyed a comfortable nap till such
time as we arrived at the inn where we put up. Here, having alighted
from the waggon, I had an opportunity of viewing the passengers in
order as they entered. The first who appeared was a brisk, airy girl,
about twenty years old, with a silver-laced hat on her head instead of
a cap, a blue stuff riding-suit, trimmed with silver very much
tarnished, and a whip in her hand. After her came, limping, an old man,
with a worsted nightcap buttoned under his chin, and a broad-brimmed
hat slouched over it, an old rusty blue cloak tied about his neck,
under which appeared a brown surtout, that covered a threadbare coat
and waistcoat, and, as he afterwards discerned, a dirty flannel jacket.
His eyes were hollow, bleared, and gummy; his face was shrivelled into
a thousand wrinkles, his gums were destitute of teeth, his nose sharp
and drooping, his chin peaked and prominent, so that, when he mumped or
spoke, they approached one another like a pair of nutcrackers: he
supported himself on an ivory-headed cane and his whole figure was a
just emblem of winter, famine, and avarice. But how was I surprised,
when I beheld the formidable captain in the shape of a little thin
creature, about the age of forty, with a long withered visage, very
much resembling that of a baboon, through the upper part of which two
little gray eyes peeped: he wore his own hair in a queue that reached
to his rump, which immoderate length, I suppose, was the occasion of a
baldness that appeared on the crown of his head when he deigned to take
off his hat, which was very much of the size and cock of Pistol’s.

Having laid aside his great-coat, I could not help admiring the
extraordinary make of this man of war: he was about five feet and three
inches high, sixteen inches of which went to his face and long scraggy
neck: his thighs were about six inches in length, his legs resembling
spindles or drumsticks, five feet and a half, and his body, which put
me in mind of extension without substance, engrossed the remainder: so
that on the whole, he appeared like a spider or grasshopper erect, and
was almost a vox et praeterea nihil. His dress consisted of a frock of
what is called bearskin, the skirts of which were about half a foot
long, an hussar waistcoat, scarlet breeches reaching half way down his
thighs, worsted stockings rolled up almost to his groin, and shoes with
wooden heels at least two inches high; he carried a sword very near as
long as himself in one hand, and with the other conducted his lady, who
seemed to be a woman of his own age, and still retained some remains of
an agreeable person, but so ridiculously affected, that, had I not been
a novice in the world, I might have easily perceived in her the
deplorable vanity and second-hand airs of a lady’s woman.

We were all assembled in the kitchen, when Captain Weazel (for that was
his name) desired a room with a fire for himself and spouse, and told
the landlord they would up by themselves. The innkeeper replied that he
could not afford them a room by themselves; and as for supping, he had
prepared victuals for the passengers in the waggon, without respect of
persons, but if he could prevail on the rest to let him have his choice
in a separate manner, he should be very well pleased. This was no
sooner said than all of us declared against the proposal, and Miss
Jenny (our other female passenger), observed that, if Captain Weazel
and his lady had a mind to sup by themselves, they might wait until we
should have done. At this hint the captain put on a martial frown, and
looked very big, without speaking; while his yokefellow, with a
disdainful toss of her nose, muttered something about “Creature!” which
Miss Jenny overhearing, stepped up to her, saying, “None of your names,
good Mrs. Abigail. Creature, quotha—I’ll assure you no such creature as
you neither—no ten-pound sneaker—no quality-coupler.” Here the captain
interposed, with a “D—e, madam, what do you mean by that?” “D—n you
sir, who are you?” replied Miss Jenny, “who made you a captain, you
pitiful, trencher-scraping, pimping curler? ’Sdeath! the army is come
to a fine pass, when such fellows as you get commissions. What, I
suppose you think I don’t know you? Egad, you and your helpmate are
well met—a cast-off mistress and a bald valet-de-chambre are well yoked
together.” “Blood and wounds!” cried Weazel, “d’ye question the honour
of my wife, madam? Hell and d-ion! No man in England durst say so
much—I would flay him, carbonado him! Fury and destruction! I would
have his liver for my supper.” So saying, he drew his sword and
flourished with it, to the great terror of Strap; while Miss Jenny,
snapping her fingers, told him she did not value his resentment a
louse.

In the midst of this quarrel the master of the waggon alighted, who,
understanding the cause of the disturbance, and fearing the captain and
his lady would take umbrage and leave his carriage, was at great pains
to have everything made up, which he at last accomplished, and we sat
down to supper altogether. At bedtime we were shown to our apartments;
the old usurer, Strap, and I, to one room; the captain, his wife, and
Miss Jenny, to another. About midnight, my companion’s bowels being
disordered, he got up, in order to go backward, but in his return,
mistaking one door for another, entered Weazel’s chamber, and without
any hesitation went to bed to his wife, who was fast asleep, the
captain being at another end of the room groping for some empty vessel,
in lieu of his own chamberpot, which was leaky: as he did not perceive
Strap coming in, he went towards his own bed, after having found a
convenience; but no sooner did he feel a rough head, covered with a
cotton nightcap, than it came into his mind that he had mistaken Miss
Jenny’s bed instead of his own, and that the head he felt was that of
some gallant, with whom she had made an assignation. Full of his
conjecture, and scandalised at the prostitution of his apartment, he
snatched up the vessel he had just before filled, and emptied it at
once on the astonished barber and his own wife, who waking at that
instant, broke forth into lamentable cries, which not only alarmed the
husband beyond measure, but frighted poor Strap almost out of his
senses; for he verily believed himself bewitched, especially when the
incensed captain seized him by the throat, with a volley of oaths,
asking him how he durst have the presumption to attempt the chastity of
his wife. Poor Strap was so amazed and confounded, that he could say
nothing but—“I take God to witness she’s a virgin for me.”

Mrs. Weazel, enraged to find herself in such a pickle through the
precipitation of her husband, arose in her shift, and with the heel of
her shoe which she found by the bedside, belaboured the captain’s bald
pate till he roared “Murder.” “I’ll teach you to empty your stinkpots
on me,” cried she, “you pitiful hop-o’-my-thumb coxcomb. What, I
warrant you’re jealous, you man of lath. Was it for this I condescended
to take you to my bed, you poor, withered, sapless twig?”

The noise occasioned by this adventure had brought the master of the
waggon and me to the door, where we overheard all that passed with
great satisfaction. In the meantime we were alarmed with the cry of
“Rape! Murder! Rape!” which Jenny pronounced with great vociferation.
“Oh! You vile abominable old villain,” said she, “would you rob me of
my virtue? But I’ll be revenged of you, you old goat! I will! Help! for
heaven’s sake! help! I shall be ravished! ruined! help!” Some servants
of the inn, hearing this cry, came running upstairs with lights, and
such weapons as chance afforded; when we beheld a very diverting scene.
In one corner stood the poor captain shivering in his shirt, which was
all torn to rags: with a woeful visage, scratched all over by his wife,
who had by this time wrapped the counterpane about her, and sat sobbing
on the side of her bed. At the other end lay the old usurer, sprawling
on Miss Jenny’s bed, with his flannel jacket over his shirt, and his
tawny meagre limbs exposed to the air; while she held him fast by the
two ears, and loaded him with execrations. When he asked what was the
matter, she affected to weep, told us she was afraid that wicked rogue
had ruined her in her sleep, and bade us take notice of what we saw,
for she intended to make use of our evidence against him. The poor
wretch looked like one more dead than alive, and begged to be released;
a favour which he had no sooner obtained than he protested she was no
woman, but a devil incarnate—that she had first seduced his flesh to
rebel, and then betrayed him. “Yes, cockatrice,” continued he, “you
know you laid this snare for me—but you shan’t succeed—for I will hang
myself before you shall get a farthing of me.” So saying, he crawled to
his own bed, groaning all the way. We then advanced to the Captain, who
told us, “Gentlemen, here has been a d—d mistake; but I’ll be revenged
on him who was the cause of it. That Scotchman who carries the knapsack
shall not breathe this vital air another day, if my name be Weazel. My
dear, I ask you ten thousand pardons; you are sensible, I could mean no
harm to you.” “I know not what you meant,” replied she, sighing, “but I
know I have got enough to send me to my grave.” At length they were
reconciled. The wife was complimented with a share of Miss Jenny’s bed
(her own being overflowed), and the master of the waggon invited Weazel
to sleep the remaining part of the night with him. I retired to mine,
where I found Strap mortally afraid, he having stolen away in the dark
while the captain and his lady were at loggerheads.




CHAPTER XII


Captain Weazel challenges Strap, who declines the Combat—an Affair
between the Captain and me—the Usurer is fain to give Miss Jenny five
Guineas for a Release—we are in Danger of losing a Meal—the Behaviour
of Weazel, Jenny, and Joey, on that Occasion—an Account of Captain
Weazel and his Lady—the Captain’s Courage tried—Isaac’s mirth at the
Captain’s Expense


Next morning I agreed to give the master of the waggon ten shillings
for my passage to London, provided Strap should be allowed to take my
place when I should be disposed to walk. At the same time I desired him
to appease the incensed captain, who had entered the kitchen with a
drawn sword in his hand, and threatened with many oaths to sacrifice
the villain who attempted to violate his bed; but it was to no purpose
for the master to explain the mistake, and assure him of the poor lad’s
innocence, who stood trembling behind me all the while: the more
submission that appeared in Strap, the more implacable seemed the
resentment of Weazel, who swore he must either fight him or he would
instantly put him to death. I was extremely provoked at this insolence,
and told him, it could not be supposed that a poor barber lad would
engage a man of the sword at his own weapon; but I was persuaded he
would wrestle or box with him. To which proposal Strap immediately gave
assent, by saying, “he would box with him for a guinea.” Weazel replied
with a look of disdain, that it was beneath any gentleman of his
character to fight like a porter, or even to put himself on a footing,
in any respect, with such a fellow as Strap. “Odds bodikins!” cries
Joey, “sure, coptain, yaw would not commit moorder! Here’s a poor lad
that is willing to make atonement for his offence; and an that woan’t
satisfie yaw, offers to fight yaw fairly. And yaw woan’t box, I dare
say, he will coodgel with yaw. Woan’t yaw, my lad?” Strap, after some
hesitation, answered, “Yes, yes, I’ll cudgel with him.” But this
expedient being also rejected by the captain, I began to smell his
character, and, tipping Strap the wink, told the captain that I had
always heard it said, the person who receives a challenge should have
the choice of the weapons; this therefore being the rule in point of
honour, I would venture to promise on the head of my companion, that he
would even fight Captain Weazel at sharps; but it should be with such
sharps as Strap was best acquainted with, namely, razors. At my
mentioning razors: I could perceive the captain’s colour change while
Strap, pulling me by the sleeve, whispered with great eagerness: “No,
no, no; for the love of God, don’t make any such bargain.” At length,
Weazel, recovering himself, turned towards me, and with a ferocious
countenance asked, “Who the devil are you? Will you fight me?” With
these words, putting himself in a posture, I was grievously alarmed at
seeing the point of a sword within half a foot of my breast; and,
springing to one side, snatched up a spit that stood in the
chimney-corner, with which I kept my formidable adversary at bay, who
made a great many half-longes, skipping backward at every push, till at
last I pinned him up in a corner, to the no small diversion of the
company. While he was in this situation his wife entered, and, seeing
her husband in these dangerous circumstances, uttered a dreadful
scream: in this emergency, Weazel demanded a cessation, which was
immediately granted; and at last was contented with the submission of
Strap, who, falling on his knees before him, protested the innocence of
his intention, and asked pardon for the mistake he had committed. This
affair being ended without bloodshed, we went to breakfast, but missed
two of our company, namely, Miss Jenny and the usurer. As for the
first, Mrs. Weazel informed us, that she had kept her awake all night
with her groans; and that when she rose in the morning, Miss Jenny was
so much indisposed that she could not proceed on her journey. At that
instant, a message came from her to the master of the waggon, who
immediately went into her chamber, followed by us all. She told him in
a lamentable tone, that she was afraid of a miscarriage, owing to the
fright she received last night from the brutality of Isaac; and, as the
event was uncertain, desired the usurer might be detained to answer for
the consequence. Accordingly, this ancient Tarquin was found in the
waggon, whither he had retired to avoid the shame of last night’s
disgrace, and brought by force into her presence. He no sooner appeared
than she began to weep and sigh most piteously, and told us, if she
died, she would leave her blood upon the head of that ravisher. Poor
Isaac turned up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed that God would
deliver him from the machinations of that Jezebel; and assured us, with
tears in his eyes, that his being found in bed with her was the result
of her own invitation. The waggoner, understanding the case, advised
Isaac to make it up, by giving her a sum of money: to which advice he
replied with great vehemence, “A sum of money!—a halter for the
cockatrice!” “Oh! ’tis very well,” said Miss Jenny; “I see it is in
vain to attempt that flinty heart of his by fair means. Joey, be so
good as to go to the justice, and tell him there is a sick person here,
who wants to see him on an affair of consequence.” At the name of
justice Isaac trembled, and bidding Joey stay, asked with a quavering
voice, “What she would have? She told him that, as he had not
perpetrated his wicked purpose, she would be satisfied with a small
matter. And though the damage she might sustain in her health might be
irreparable, she would give him a release for a hundred guineas.” “A
hundred guineas!” cried he in an ecstacy, “a hundred furies! Where
should a poor old wretch like me have a hundred guineas? If I had so
much money, d’ya think I should be found travelling in a waggon, at
this season of the year?” “Come, come,” replied Jenny, “none of your
miserly artifice here. You think I don’t know Isaac Rapine, the
money-broker, in the Minories. Ah! you old rogue! many a pawn have you
had of me and my acquaintance, which was never redeemed.” Isaac,
finding it was in vain to disguise himself, offered twenty shillings
for a discharge, which she absolutely refused under fifty pounds: at
last, however, she was brought down to five, which he paid with great
reluctancy, rather than be prosecuted for a rape. After which
accommodation, the sick person made a shift to get into the waggon, and
we set forward in great tranquillity; Strap being accommodated with
Joey’s horse, the driver himself choosing to walk. The morning and
forenoon we were entertained with an account of the valour of Captain
Weazel, who told us he had once knocked down a soldier that made game
of him; tweaked a drawer by the nose, who found fault with his picking
his teeth with a fork, at another time; and that he had moreover
challenged a cheesemonger, who had the presumption to be his rival: for
the truth of which exploits he appealed to his wife. She confirmed
whatever he said, and observed, “The last affair happened that very day
on which I received a love-letter from Squire Gobble, and don’t you
remember, my dear, I was prodigiously sick that very night with eating
ortolans, when my Lord Diddle took notice of my complexion’s being
altered, and my lady was so alarmed that she had well nigh fainted?”
“Yes, my dear,” replied the captain, “you know my lord said to me, with
a sneer, ‘Billy, Mrs. Weazel is certainly breeding.’ And I answered
cavalierly, ‘My lord, I wish I could return the compliment.’ Upon which
the whole company broke out into an immoderate fit of laughter; and my
lord, who loves a repartee dearly, came round and bussed me.” We
travelled in this manner five days, without interruption or meeting
anything worth notice: Miss Jenny, who soon recovered her spirits,
entertaining us every day with diverting songs, of which she could sing
a great number; and rallying her own gallant, who, notwithstanding,
would never be reconciled to her. On the sixth day, while we were about
to sit down to dinner, the innkeeper came and told us, that three
gentlemen, just arrived, had ordered the victuals to be carried to
their apartment, although he had informed them that they were bespoke
by the passengers in the waggon. To which information they had replied,
“the passengers in the waggon might be d—d, their betters must be
served before them; they supposed it would be no hardship on such
travellers to dine upon bread and cheese for one day.” This was a
terrible disappointment to us all; and we laid our heads together how
to remedy it; when Miss Jenny observed that Captain Weazel, being by
profession a soldier, ought in this case to protect and prevent us from
being insulted. But the Captain excused himself, saying, he would not
for all the world be known to have travelled in a waggon! swearing at
the same time, that could he appear with honour, they should eat his
sword sooner than his provision. Upon this declaration, Miss Jenny,
snatching his weapon, drew it, and ran immediately into the kitchen,
where she threatened to put the cook to death if he did not send the
victuals into our chamber immediately. The noise she made brought the
three strangers down, one of whom no sooner perceived her than he
cried, “Ha! Jenny Ramper! what the devil brought thee hither?” “My dear
Jack Rattle!” replied she, running into his arms, “is it you? Then
Weazel may go to hell for a dinner—I shall dine with you.”

They consented to this proposal with a great deal of joy; and we were
on the point of being reduced to a very uncomfortable meal, when Joey,
understanding the whole affair, entered the kitchen with a pitchfork in
his hand, and swore he would be the death of any man who should pretend
to seize the victuals prepared for the waggon. The menace had like to
have produced fatal consequences; the three strangers drawing their
swords, and being joined by their servants, and we ranging ourselves on
the side of Joey; when the landlord, interposing, offered to part with
his own dinner to keep the peace, which was accepted by the strangers;
and we sat down at table without any further molestation. In the
afternoon, I chose to walk along with Joey, and Strap took my place.
Having entered into a conversation with this driver, I soon found him
to be a merry, facetious, good-natured fellow, and withal very arch; he
informed me, that Miss Jenny was a common girl upon the town, who,
falling into company with a recruiting officer, he carried her down in
the stage coach from London to Newcastle, where he had been arrested
for debt, and was now in prison; upon which she was fain to return to
her former way of life, by this conveyance. He told me likewise, that
one of the gentleman’s servants, who were left at the inn, having
accidentally seen Weazel, immediately knew him, and acquainted Joey
with some particulars of his character. That he had served my Lord
Frizzle in quality of valet-de-chambre many years, while he lived
separate from his lady; but, upon their reconciliation, she expressly
insisted upon Weazel’s being turned off, as well as the woman he kept:
when his lordship, to get rid of them both with a good grace, proposed
that he should marry his Mistress, and he would procure a commission
for him in the army: this expedient was agreed to, and Weazel is now,
by his lordship’s interest, ensigned in —’s regiment. I found he and I
had the same sentiments with regard to Weazel’s courage, which he
resolved to put to the trial, by alarming the passengers with the cry
of a ‘highwayman!’ as soon as a horseman should appear.

This scheme we put in practice, towards the dusk, when we descried a
man on horseback approaching us. Joey had no sooner intimated to the
people in the waggon, that he was afraid we should be all robbed than a
general consternation arose: Strap jumped out of the waggon, and hid
himself behind a hedge. The usurer put forth ejaculations, and made a
rustling among the straw, which made us conjecture he had hid something
under it. Mrs. Weazel, wringing her hands uttered lamentable cries: and
the captain, to our great amazement, began to snore; but this artifice
did not succeed; for Miss Jenny, shaking him by the shoulder, bawled
out, “Sdeath! captain, is this a time to snore, when we are going to be
robbed? Get up for shame, and behave like a soldier and man of honour!”
Weazel pretended to be in a great passion for being disturbed, and
swore he would have his nap out if all the highwaymen in England
surrounded him. “D—n my blood! what are you afraid of?” continued he;
at the same time trembling with such agitation that the whole carriage
shook. This singular piece of behaviour incensed Miss Ramper so much
that she cried, “D—n your pitiful soul, you are as arrant a poltroon,
as ever was drummed out of a regiment. Stop the waggon, Joey—let me
out, and by G—d, if I have rhetoric enough, the thief shall not only
take your purse, but your skin also.” So saying she leaped out with
great agility. By this time the horseman came up and happened to be a
gentleman’s servant well known to Joey, who communicated the scheme,
and desired him to carry it on a little further, by going into the
waggon, and questioning those within. The stranger, consenting for the
sake of diversion, approached it, and in a terrible tone demanded, “Who
have we got here?” Isaac replied, with a lamentable voice, “Here’s a
poor miserable sinner, who has got a small family to maintain, and
nothing in the world wherewithal, but these fifteen shillings which if
you rob me of we must all starve together.” “Who’s that sobbing in the
other corner?” said the supposed highwayman. “A poor unfortunate
woman,” answered Mrs. Weazle, “upon whom I beg you, for Christ’s sake,
to have compassion.” “Are you maid or wife,” said he. “Wife, to my
sorrow,” said she. “Who, or where is your husband?” continued he. “My
husband,” replied Mrs. Weazel, “is an officer in the army and was left
sick at the last inn where we dined.” “You must be mistaken, madam,”
said he, “for I myself saw him get into the waggon this afternoon. But
pray what smell is that? Sure your lapdog has befouled himself; let me
catch hold of the nasty cur, I’ll teach him better manners.” Here he
laid hold of one of Weazel’s legs, and pulled him out from under his
wife’s petticoat, where he had concealed himself. The poor trembling
captain, being detected in his inglorious situation, rubbed his eyes,
and affecting to wake out of sleep, cried, “What’s the matter? What’s
the matter?” “The matter is not much,” answered the horseman; “I only
called in to inquire after your health, and so adieu, most noble
captain.” He clapped spurs to his horse, and was out of sight in a
moment.

It was some time before Weazel could recollect himself, but at length
reassuming the big look, he said, “D—n the fellow! why did he ride away
before I had time to ask him how his lord and lady do? Don’t you
remember Tom, my dear?” addressing himself to his wife. “Yes,” replied
she, “I think I do remember something of the fellow, but you know I
seldom converse with people of his station.” “Hey-day!” cried Joey, “do
yaw knaw the young mon, coptain?” “Know him,” said Weazel, “many a time
has he filled a glass of Burgundy for me, at my Lord Trippett’s table.”
“And what may his name be, coptain?” said Joey. “His name!—his name,”
replied Weazel, “is Tom Rinser.” “Waunds,” cried Joey, “a has changed
his own neame then! for I’se lay a wager he was christened John
Trotter.” This observation raised a laugh against the captain, who
seemed very much disconcerted; when Isaac broke silence, and said, “It
is no matter who or what he was, since he has not proved the robber we
suspected, and we ought to bless God for our narrow escape.” “Bless
God,” said Weazel, “bless the devil! for what? Had he been a
highwayman, I should have eaten his blood, body, and guts, before he
had robbed me, or any one in this diligence.” “Ha, ha, ha,” cried Miss
Jenny, “I believe you will eat all you kill, indeed, captain.” The
usurer was so well pleased at the event of this adventure, that he
could not refrain from being severe, and took notice that Captain
Weazel seemed to be a good Christian, for he had armed himself with
patience and resignation, instead of carnal weapons; and worked out his
salvation with fear and trembling. This piece of satire occasioned a
great deal of mirth at Weazel’s expense, who muttered a great many
oaths, and threatened to cut Isaac’s throat. The usurer, taking hold of
this menace, said, “Gentlemen and ladies, I take you all to witness,
that my life is in danger from this bloody-minded officer; I’ll have
him bound over to the peace.” This second sneer produced another laugh
against him, and he remained crestfallen during the remaining part of
our journey.




CHAPTER XIII


Strap and I are terrified by an Apparition—Strap’s Conjecture—the
Mystery explained by Joey—we arrive in London—our Dress and Appearance
described—we are insulted in the Street—an Adventure in an Alehouse—we
are imposed upon by a waggish Footman—set to rights by a
Tobacconist—take Lodgings—dive for a Dinner—an Accident at our Ordinary


We arrived at our inn, supped, and went to bed; but Strap’s distemper
continuing, he was obliged to rise in the middle of the night, and
taking the candle in his hand, which he had left burning for the
purpose, he went down to the house of office, whence in a short time he
returned in a great hurry, with his hair standing on end, and a look
betokening horror and astonishment. Without speaking a word, he set
down the light and jumped into bed behind me, where he lay and trembled
with great violence. When I asked him what was the matter, he replied,
with a broken accent, “God have mercy on us! I have seen the devil!”
Though my prejudice was not quite so strong as his, I was not a little
alarmed at this exclamation, and much more so when I heard the sound of
bells approaching our chamber, and felt my bedfellow cling close to me,
uttering these words, “Christ have mercy upon us; there he comes!” At
that instance a monstrous overgrown raven entered our chamber, with
bells at his feet, and made directly towards our bed. As this creature
is reckoned in our country a common vehicle for the devil and witches
to play their pranks in, I verily believed we were haunted; and, in a
violent fright, shrank under the bedclothes. This terrible apparition
leaped upon the bed, and after giving us several severe dabs with its
beak through the blankets, hopped away, and vanished. Strap and I
recommended ourselves to the protection of heaven with great devotion,
and, when we no longer heard the noise, ventured to peep up and take
breath. But we had not been long freed from this phantom, when another
appeared, that had well nigh deprived us both of our senses. We
perceived an old man enter the room, with a long white beard that
reached to his middle; there was a certain wild peculiarity in his eyes
and countenance that did not savour of this world; and his dress
consisted of a brown stuff coat, buttoned behind and at the wrists,
with an odd-fashioned cap of the same stuff upon his head. I was so
amazed that I had not power to move my eyes from such a ghastly object,
but lay motionless and saw him come straight up to me: when he reached
the bed, he wrung his hands, and cried, with a voice that did not seem
to belong to a human creature, “Where is Ralph?” I made no reply: upon
which he repeated, in an accent still more preternatural, “Where is
Ralpho?” He had no sooner pronounced these words than I heard the sound
of the bells at a distance; which the apparition, having listened to,
tripped away, and left me almost petrified with fear. It was a good
while before I could recover myself so far as to speak; and, when at
length I turned to Strap, I found him in a fit, which, however, did not
last long. When he came to himself, I asked his opinion of what had
happened; and he assured me that the first must certainly be the soul
of some person damned, which appeared by the chain about his legs (for
his fears had magnified the creature to the bigness of a horse, and the
sound of small morice-bells to the clanking of massy chains). As for
the old man, he took it to be the spirit of somebody murdered long ago
in this place, which had power granted to forment the assassin in the
shape of a raven, and that Ralpho was the name of the said murderer.
Although I had not much faith in this interpretation, I was too much
troubled to enjoy any sleep: and in all my future adventures never
passed a night so ill.

In the morning Strap imparted the whole affair to Joey, who, after an
immoderate fit of laughter, explained the matter, by telling him that
the old man was the landlord’s father, who had been an idiot some
years, and diverted himself with a tame raven, which, it seems, had
hopped away from his apartment in the night, and induced him to follow
it to our chamber, where he had inquired after it under the name of
Ralpho.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey,
which continued six or seven days longer: at length we entered the
great city, and lodged all night at the inn where the waggon put up.
Next morning all the passengers parted different ways, while my
companion and I sallied out to inquire for the member of parliament, to
whom I had a letter of recommendation from Mr. Crab. As we had
discharged our lodging at the inn, Strap took up our baggage and,
marched behind me in the street with the knapsack on his back, as
usual, so that we made a very whimsical appearance. I had dressed
myself to the greatest advantage; that is, put on a clean ruffled
shirt, and my best thread stockings: my hair (which was of the deepest
red) hung down upon my shoulders, as lank and straight as a pound of
candles; and the skirts of my coat reached to the middle of my leg; my
waistcoat and breeches were of the same piece, and cut in the same
taste; and my hat very much resembled a barber’s basin, in the
shallowness of the crown and narrowness of the brim. Strap was habited
in a much less awkward manner: but a short crop-eared wig, that very
much resembled Scrub’s in the play, and the knapsack on his back, added
to what is called a queer phiz, occasioned by a long chin, a hook nose,
and high cheek bones, rendered him, on the whole, a very fit subject of
mirth and pleasantry. As he walked along, Strap, at my desire, inquired
of a carman, whom we met, whereabouts Mr. Cringer lived: and was
answered by a stare, accompanied with the word “Anan!” Upon which I
came up, in order to explain the question, but had the misfortune to be
unintelligible likewise, the carman damning us for a lousy Scotch
guard, whipping his horses with a “Gee ho!” which nettled me to the
quick, and roused the indignation of Strap so far that, after the
fellow was gone a good way, he told me he would fight him for a
farthing.

While we were deliberating upon what was to be done, a hackney
coachman, driving softly along, and perceiving us standing by the
kennel, came up close to us, and calling, “A coach, master!” by a
dexterous management of the reins made his horses stumble in the wet,
and bedaub us all over with mud. After which exploit he drove on,
applauding himself with a hearty laugh, in which several people joined,
to my great mortification; but one, more compassionate than the rest,
seeing us strangers, advised me to go into an alehouse, and dry myself.
I thanked him for his advice, which I immediately complied with; and,
going into the house he pointed out, called for a pot of beer, and sat
down by a fire in the public room where we cleaned ourselves as well as
we could. In the meantime, a wag, who sat in a box, smoking his pipe,
understanding, by our dialect, that we were from Scotland, came up to
me and, with a grave countenance asked how long I had been caught. As I
did not know the meaning of this question, I made no answer; and he
went on, saying it could not be a great while, for my tail was not yet
cut; at the same time taking hold of my hair, and tipping the wink to
the rest of the company, who seemed highly entertained with his wit. I
was incensed at this usage, but afraid of resenting it, because I
happened to be in a strange place, and perceived the person who spoke
to me was a brawny fellow, for whom I thought myself by no means a
match. However, Strap, having either more courage or less caution,
could not put up with the insults I suffered, but told him in a
peremptory tone, “He was an uncivil fellow for making so free with his
betters.” Then the wit going toward him, asked him what he had got in
his knapsack? “Is it oatmeal or brimstone, Sawney?” said he, seizing
him by the chin, which he shook, to the inexpressible diversion of all
present. My companion, feeling himself assaulted in such an opprobrious
manner, disengaged himself in a trice, and lent his antagonist such a
box on the ear as made him stagger to the other side of the room; and,
in a moment, a ring was formed for the combatants. Seeing Strap
beginning to strip, and my blood being heated with indignation, which
banished all other thoughts, I undressed myself to the skin in an
instant, and declared, that as the affront that occasioned the quarrel
was offered to me, I would fight it out myself; upon which one or two
cried out, “That’s a brave Scotch boy; you shall have fair play.” His
assurance gave me fresh spirits, and, going up to my adversary, who by
his pale countenance did not seem much inclined to the battle, I struck
him so hard on the stomach, that he reeled over a bench, and fell to
the ground. Then I attempted to keep him down, in order to improve my
success, according to the manner of my own country, but was restrained
by the spectators, one of whom endeavoured to raise up my opponent, but
in vain; for he protested he would not fight, for he was not quite
recovered of a late illness. I was very well pleased with this excuse,
and immediately dressed myself, having acquired the good opinion of the
company for my bravery, as well as of my comrade Strap, who shook me by
the hand, and wished me joy of the victory.

After having drunk our pot, and dried our clothes, we inquired of the
landlord if he knew Mr. Cringer, the member of parliament, and were
amazed at his replying in the negative; for we imagined he must be
altogether as conspicuous here as in the borough he represented; but he
told us we might possibly hear of him as we passed along. We betook
ourselves therefore to the street, where seeing a footman standing at
the door, we made up to him, and asked if he knew where our patron
lived? This member of the particoloured fraternity, surveying us both
very minutely, said he knew Mr. Cringer very well, and bade us turn
down the first street on our left, then turn to the right, and then to
the left again, after which perambulation we would observe a lane,
through which we must pass, and at the other end we should find an
alley that leads to another street, where we should see the sign of the
Thistle and Three Pedlars, and there he lodged. We thanked him for his
information, and went forwards, Strap telling me, that he knew this
person to be an honest friendly man by his countenance, before he
opened his mouth; in which opinion I acquiesced, ascribing his good
manners to the company he daily saw in the house where he served.

We followed his directions punctually, in turning to the left, and to
the right, and to the left again; but instead of seeing a lane before
us, found ourselves at the side of the river, a circumstance that
perplexed us not a little; and my fellow-traveller ventured to
pronounce, that we had certainly missed our way. By this time we were
pretty much fatigued with our walk, and not knowing how to proceed, I
went into a small snuff-shop hard by, encouraged by the sign of the
Highlander, where I found, to my inexpressible satisfaction, the
shopkeeper was my countryman. He was no sooner informed of our
peregrination, and the directions we had received from the footman,
than he informed us we had been imposed upon, telling us, Mr. Cringer
lived in the other end of the town and that it would be to no purpose
for us to go thither to-day, for by that time he was gone to the House.
I then asked, if he could recommend us a lodging. He really gave us a
line to one of his acquaintance who kept a chandler’s shop not far from
St. Martin’s Lane; there we hired a bed-room, up two pair of stairs, at
the rate of two shillings per week, so very small, that when the bed
was let down, we were obliged to carry out every other piece of
furniture that belonged to the apartment, and use the bedstead by way
of chairs. About dinner-time, our landlord asked how we proposed to
live? to which interrogation we answered, that we would be directed by
him. “Well, then,” says he, “there are two ways of eating in this town
for people of your condition—the one more creditable and expensive than
the other: the first is to dine at an eating-house frequented by
well-dressed people only; and the other is called diving, practised by
those who are either obliged or inclined to live frugally.” I gave him
to understand that, provided the last was not infamous, it would suit
much better with our circumstances than the other. “Infamous!” cried
he, “not at all; there are many creditable people, rich people, ay, and
fine people, that dive every day. I have seen many a pretty gentleman
with a laced waistcoat dine in that manner very comfortably for three
pence halfpenny, and go afterwards to the coffee-house, where he made a
figure with the best lord in the land; but your own eyes shall bear
witness—I will go along with you to-day and introduce you.”

He accordingly conducted us to a certain lane, where stopping, he bade
us observe him, and do as he did, and, walking a few paces, dived into
a cellar and disappeared in an instant. I followed his example, and
descending very successfully, found myself in the middle of a cook’s
shop, almost suffocated with the steams of boiled beef, and surrounded
by a company of hackney coachmen, chairmen, draymen, and a few footmen
out of place or on board-wages; who sat eating shin of beef, tripe,
cow-heel, or sausages, at separate boards, covered with cloths which
turned my stomach. While I stood in amaze, undetermined whether to sit
down or walk upwards again, Strap, in his descent, missing one of the
stops, tumbled headlong into this infernal ordinary, and overturned the
cook as she carried a porringer of soup to one of the guests. In her
fall, she dashed the whole mess against the legs of a drummer belonging
to the foot-guards, who happened to be in her way, and scalded him so
miserably, that he started up, and danced up and down, uttering a
volley of execrations that made my hair stand on end.

While he entertained the company in this manner, with an eloquence
peculiar to himself, the cook got up, and after a hearty curse on the
poor author of this mischance, who lay under the table with a woful
countenance, emptied a salt-cellar in her hand, and, stripping down the
patient’s stocking, which brought the skin along with it, applied the
contents to the sore. This poultice was scarce laid on, when the
drummer, who had begun to abate of his exclamations, broke forth into
such a hideous yell as made the whole company tremble, then, seizing a
pewter pint pot that stood by him, squeezed the sides of it together,
as if it had been made of pliant leather, grinding his teeth at the
same time with a most horrible grin. Guessing the cause of this violent
transport, I bade the woman wash off the salt, and bathe the part with
oil, which she did, and procured him immediate ease. But here another
difficulty occurred, which was no other than the landlady’s insisting
on his paying for the pot he had rendered useless. He said, he would
pay for nothing but what he had eaten, and bade her be thankful for his
moderation, or else he would prosecute her for damages. Strap,
foreseeing the whole affair would lie at his door, promised to satisfy
the cook, and called for a dram of gin to treat the drummer, which
entirely appeased him, and composed all animosities. After this
accommodation, our landlord and we sat down at a board, and dined upon
shin of beef most deliciously; our reckoning amounting to twopence
halfpenny each, bread and small beer included.




CHAPTER XIV


We visit Strap’s friend—a description of him—his advice—we go to Mr.
Cringer’s house—are denied admittance—an Accident befalls Strap—his
behaviour thereupon—an extraordinary adventure occurs, in the course of
which I lose all my money


In the afternoon my companion proposed to call at his friend’s house,
which, we were informed, was in the neighbourhood, whither we
accordingly went, and were so lucky as to find him at home. This
gentleman, who had come from Scotland three or four years before, kept
a school in town, where he taught the Latin, French, and Italian
languages; but what he chiefly professed was the pronunciation of the
English tongue, after a method more speedy and uncommon than any
practised heretofore, and, indeed, if his scholars spoke like their
master, the latter part of his undertaking was certainly performed to a
tittle: for although I could easily understand every word of what I had
heard hitherto since I entered England, three parts in four of his
dialect were as unintelligible to me as if he had spoken in Arabic or
Irish. He was a middle-sized man, and stooped very much, though not
above the age of forty; his face was frightfully pitted with the
small-pox, and his mouth extended from ear to ear. He was dressed in a
night-gown of plaid, fastened about his middle with a sergeant’s old
sash, and a tie-periwig with a foretop three inches high, in the
fashion of King Charles the Second’s reign.

After he had received Strap, who was related to him, very courteously,
he inquired of him who I was; and being informed, he took me by the
hand, telling me he was at school with my father. When he understood my
situation, he assured me that he would do me all the service in his
power, both by his advice and otherwise, and while he spoke these words
eyed me with great attention, walking round me several times, and
muttering, “Oh, dear! Oh, dear! fat a saight is here!” I soon guessed
the reason of his ejaculation, and said, “I suppose, sir, you are not
pleased with my dress.” “Dress,” answered he, “you may caal it fat you
please in your country, but I vow to Gad ’tis a masquerade here. No
Christian will admit such a figure into his house. Upon my conscience,
I wonder the dogs did not hunt you. Did you pass through St. James’s
market? Bless my eyesaight! you are like a cousin-german of an
ourangoutang.” I began to be a little serious at this discourse, and
asked him, if he thought I should obtain entrance to-morrow at the
house of Mr. Cringer, on whom I chiefly depended for an introduction
into business? “Mr. Cringer, Mr. Cringer,” replied he, scratching his
cheek, “may be a very honest gentleman—I know nothing to the contrary;
but is your sole dependence upon him? Who recommended you to him?” I
pulled out Mr. Crab’s letter, and told him the foundation of my hopes,
at which he stared at me, and repeated “Oh dear! Oh dear!” I began to
conceive bad omens from this behaviour of his, and begged he would
assist me with his advice, which he promised to give very frankly; and
as a specimen, directed us to a periwig warehouse in the neighbourhood,
in order to be accommodated; laying strong injunctions on me not to
appear before Mr. Cringer till I had parted with my carroty locks,
which, he said, were sufficient to beget an antipathy against me in all
mankind. And as we were going to pursue this advice, he called me back
and bade me be sure to deliver my letter into Mr. Cringer’s own hand.

As we walked along, Strap triumphed greatly in our reception with his
friend, who, it seems, had assured him he would in a day or two provide
for him with some good master; “I and now,” says he, “I you will see
how I will fit you with a wig. There’s ne’er a barber in London (and
that’s a bold word) can palm a rotten caul, or a pennyweight of dead
hair, upon me.” And, indeed, this zealous adherent did wrangle so long
with the merchant, that he was desired twenty times to leave the shop,
and see if he could get one cheaper elsewhere. At length I made choice
(if a good handsome bob), for which I paid ten shillings, and returned
to our lodging, where Strap in a moment rid me of that hair which had
given the schoolmaster so much offence.

We got up next day betimes, having been informed that Mr. Cringer gave
audience by candle-light to all his dependents, he himself being
obliged to attend the levee of my Lord Terrier at break of day, because
his lordship made one at the minister’s between eight and nine o’clock.
When we came to Mr. Cringer’s door, Strap, to give me all instance of
his politeness, ran to the knocker, which he employed so loud and so
long, that he alarmed the whole street; and a window opening in the
second story of the next house, a vessel was discharged upon him so
successfully, that the poor barber was wet to the skin, while I, being
luckily at some distance, escaped the unsavoury deluge. In the
meantime, a footman opening the door, and seeing nobody in the street
but us, asked, with a stern countenance, if it was I who made such a
noise, and what I wanted. I told him I had business with his master,
whom I desired to see. Upon which he slapped the door in my face,
telling me I must learn better manners before I could have access to
his master. Vexed at this disappointment, I turned my resentment
against Strap, whom I sharply reprimanded for his presumption; but he,
not in the least regarding what I said, wrung the wet out of his
periwig, and lifting up a large stone, flung it with such force against
the street door of that house from whence he had been bedewed, that the
lock giving way, it flew wide open, and he took to his heels, leaving
me to follow him as I could. Indeed, there was no time for
deliberation; I therefore pursued him with all the speed I could exert,
until we found ourselves about the dawn in a street we did not know.
Here, as we wandered along gaping about, a very decent sort of a man,
passing by me, stopped of a sudden and took up something, which having
examined, he turned and presented to me with these words: “Sir, you
have dropped half-a-crown.” I was not a little surprised at this
instance of honesty, and told him it did not belong to me; but he bade
me recollect, and see if all my money was safe; upon which I pulled out
my purse, for I had bought one since I came to town, and, reckoning my
money in my hand, which was now reduced to five guineas seven shillings
and twopence, assured him I had lost nothing. “Well, then, says he, so
much the better; this is a godsend, and as you two were present when I
picked it up, you are entitled to equal shares with me.” I was
astonished at these words, and looked upon this person to be a prodigy
of integrity, but absolutely refused to take any part of the sum.
“Come, gentlemen,” said he, “you are too modest—I see you are
strangers, but you shall give me leave to treat you with a whet this
cold raw morning.” I would have declined the invitation, but Strap
whispered to me that the gentleman would be affronted, and I complied.
“Where shall we go?” said the stranger; “I am quite ignorant of this
part of the town.” I informed him that we were in the same situation;
upon which he proposed to go into the first public-house we should find
open; and as we walked together, he began in this manner: “I find by
your tongues you are from Scotland, gentlemen; my grandmother by the
father’s side was of your country, and I am so prepossessed in its
favour, that I never meet a Scotchman but my heart warms. The Scots are
very brave people. There is scarce a great family in the kingdom that
cannot boast of some exploits performed by its ancestors many hundred
years ago. There’s your Douglasses, Gordons, Campbells, Hamiltons. We
have no such ancient families here in England. Then you are all very
well educated. I have known a pedlar talk in Greek and Hebrew as well
as if they had been his mother-tongue. And for honesty—I once had a
servant, his name was Gregor Macgregor, I would have trusted him with
untold gold.”

This eulogium of my native country gained my affections so strongly,
that I believe I could have gone to death to serve the author; and
Strap’s eyes swam in tears. At length, as we passed through a dark
narrow lane, we perceived a public-house, which we entered, and found a
man sitting by the fire, smoking a pipe, with a pint of purl before
him. Our new acquaintance asked us if ever we had drunk egg-flip? To
which question we answering in the negative, he assured us of a regale,
and ordered a quart to be prepared, calling for pipes and tobacco at
the same time. We found this composition very palateable, and drank
heartily; the conversation, which was introduced by the gentleman,
turning upon the snares that young inexperienced people are exposed to
in this metropolis. He described a thousand cheats that are daily
practised upon the ignorant and unwary, and warned us of them with so
much good nature and concern, that we blessed the opportunity which
threw us in his way. After we had put the can about for some time, our
new friend began to yawn, telling us he had been up all night with a
sick person; and proposed we should have recourse to some diversion to
keep him awake. “Suppose,” said he, “we should take a hand at whist for
pastime. But let me see: that won’t do, there’s only three of us; and I
cannot play at any other game. The truth is, I seldom or never play,
but out of complaisance, or at such a time as this, when I am in danger
of falling asleep.”

Although I was not much inclined to gaming, I felt no aversion to pass
an hour or two at cards with a friend; and knowing that Strap
understood as much of the matter as I, made no scruple of saying, “I
wish we could find a fourth hand.” While we were in this perplexity the
person whom we found in the house at our entrance, overhearing our
discourse, took the pipe from his mouth very gravely, and accosted us
thus: “Gentlemen, my pipe is out, you see,” shaking the ashes into the
fire, “and rather than you should be balked, I don’t care if I take a
hand with you for a trifle—but remember I won’t play for anything of
consequence.” We accepted his proffer with pleasure. Having cut for
partners, it fell to my lot to play with him against our friend and
Strap, for threepence a game. We were so successful, that in a short
time I was half-a-crown gainer; when the gentleman whom we had met in
the street observing he had no luck to-day, proposed to leave off, or
change partners. By this time I was inflamed with my good fortune and
the expectation of improving it, as I perceived the two strangers
played but indifferently; therefore I voted for giving him his revenge:
and cutting again, Strap and I, to our mutual satisfaction, happened to
be partners. My good fortune attended me still, and in less than an
hour we had got thirty shillings of their money, for as they lost they
grew the keener, and doubled stakes every time. At last the inconstant
goddess began to veer about, and we were very soon stripped of all our
gains, and about forty shillings of our own money. This loss mortified
me extremely, and had a visible effect on the muscles of Strap’s face,
which lengthened apace; but our antagonists perceiving our condition,
kindly permitted us to retrieve our loss, and console ourselves with a
new acquisition. Then my companion wisely suggested it was time to be
gone; upon which the person who had joined us in the house began to
curse the cards, and muttered that we were indebted to fortune only for
what we had got, no part of our success being owing to our good play.
This insinuation nettled me so much that I challenged him to a game at
piquet for a crown: and he was with difficulty persuaded to accept the
invitation. This contest ended in less than an hour to my inexpressible
affliction, who lost every shilling of my own money, Strap absolutely
refusing to supply me with a sixpence.

The gentleman at whose request we had come in, perceiving by my
disconsolate looks the situation of my heart, which well nigh burst
with grief and resentment, when the other stranger got up, and went
away with my money, began in this manner:—“I am truly afflicted at your
bad luck, and would willingly repair it, were it in my power. But what
in the name of goodness could provoke you to tempt your fate so long?
It is always a maxim with gamesters to pursue success as far us it will
go, and to stop whenever fortune shifts about. You are a young man, and
your passions are too impetuous; you must learn to govern them better.
However, there is no experience like that which is bought; you will be
the better for this the longest day you have to live. As for the fellow
who has got your money, I don’t half like him. Did not you see me tip
you the wink to leave off in time?” I answered, “No.” “No,” continued
he; “you was too eager to mind anything but the game. But, harkee,”
said he in a whisper, “are you satisfied of that young man’s honesty?
His looks are a little suspicious—but I may be mistaken; he made a
great many grimaces while he stood behind you, this is a very wicked
town.” I told him I was very well convinced of my comrade’s integrity
and, that the grimaces he mentioned were doubtless owing to his anxiety
of my loss. “Oh ho! if that be the case, I ask his pardon. Landlord,
see what’s to pay.” The reckoning amounted to eighteenpence, which,
having discharged, the gentleman shook us both by the hand, and, saying
he should be very glad to see us again, departed.




CHAPTER XV


Strap moralises—presents his purse to me—we inform our landlord of our
misfortune—he unravels the mystery—I present myself to Cringer—he
recommends and turns me over to Mr. Staytape—I become acquainted with a
fellow dependent, who explains the character of Cringer and
Staytape—and informs me of the method to be pursued at the Navy Office
and Surgeons’ Hall—Strap is employed


In our way to our lodging, after a profound silence on both sides,
Strap, with a hideous groan, observed that we had brought our pigs to a
fine market. To this observation I made no reply, and he went on: “God
send us well out of this place; we have not been in London eight and
forty hours, and I believe we have met with eight and forty thousand
misfortunes. We have been jeered, reproached, buffeted, and at last
stript of our money; and I suppose by and bye we shall be stript of our
skins. Indeed as to the money part of it, that was owing to our own
folly.—Solomon says, ‘Bray a fool in a mortar, and he will never be
wise.’ Ah! God help us, an ounce of prudence is worth a pound of gold.”
This was no time for him to tamper with my disposition, already mad
with my loss, and inflamed with resentment against him for having
refused me a little money to attempt to retrieve it. I therefore turned
towards him with a stern countenance, and asked, who he called fool?
Being altogether unaccustomed to such looks from me, he stood still,
and stared in my face for some time; then, with some confusion,
uttered, “Fool! I called nobody fool but myself; I am sure I am the
greatest fool of the two, for being so much concerned at other people’s
misfortunes; but ‘Nemo omnibus horis sapit’—that’s all, that’s all.”
Upon which a silence ensued, which brought us to our lodging, where I
threw myself upon the bed in an agony of despair, resolved to perish
rather than apply to my companion, or any other body, for relief; but
Strap, who knew my temper, and whose heart bled within him for my
distress, after some pause came to the bedside, and, putting a leathern
purse into my hand, burst into tears, crying, “I know what you think,
but I scorn your thought. There’s all I have in the world, take it, and
I’ll perhaps get more for you before that be done. If not, I’ll beg for
you, steal for you, go through the wide world with you, and stay with
you; for though I be a poor cobbler’s son, I am no scout.” I was so
much touched with the generous passion of this poor creature, that I
could not refrain from weeping also, and we mingled our tears together
for some time. Upon examining the purse, I found in it two half-guineas
and half-a-crown, which I would have returned to him, saying, he knew
better than I how to manage it, but he, absolutely refused my proposal
and told me it was more reasonable and decent that he should depend
upon me, who was a gentleman, than that I should be controlled by him.

After this friendly contest was over, and our minds more at ease, we
informed our landlord of what had happened to us, taking care to
conceal the extremity to which we were reduced. He no sooner heard the
story, than he assured us we had been grievously imposed upon by a
couple of sharpers, who were associates; and that this polite, honest,
friendly, humane person, who had treated us so civilly, was no other
than a rascally money-dropper, who made it his business to decoy
strangers in that manner to one of his own haunts, where an accomplice
or two were always waiting to assist in pillaging the prey he had run
down. Here the good man recounted a great many stories of people who
has been seduced, cheated, pilfered, beat—nay, even murdered by such
villains. I was confounded at the artifice and wickedness of mankind;
and Strap, lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed that God
would deliver him from such scenes of iniquity, for surely the devil
had set up his throne in London. Our landlord being curious to know
what reception we had met with at Mr. Cringer’s, we acquainted him with
the particulars, at which he shook his head, and told us we had not
gone the right way to work; that there was nothing to be done with a
member of parliament without a bribe; that the servant was commonly
infected with the master’s disease, and expected to be paid for his
work, as well as his betters. He therefore advised me to give the
footman a shilling the next time I should desire admittance to my
patron, or else I should scarce find an opportunity to deliver my
letter. Accordingly, next morning, when the door was opened, I slipped
a shilling into his hand, and told him I had a letter for his master. I
found the good effect of my liberality; for the fellow let me in
immediately, and, taking the letter out of my hand, desired me to wait
in a kind of passage for an answer. In this place I continued standing
for three-quarters-of-an-hour, during which time I saw a great many
young fellows whom I formerly knew in Scotland pass and repass, with an
air of familiarity, in their way to and from the audience-chamber;
while I was fain to stand shivering in the cold, and turn my back to
them that they might not perceive the lowness of my condition. At
length, Mr. Cringer came out to see a young gentleman to the door, who
was no other than Squire Gawky, dressed in a very gay suit of clothes;
at parting Mr. Cringer shook him by the hand and told him he hoped to
have the pleasure of his company at dinner. Then turning about towards
me, asked what were my commands? When he understood I was the person
who had brought the letter from Mr. Crab, he affected to recollect my
name, which, however, he pretended he could not do till he had
consulted the letter again; to save him the trouble, I told him my name
was Random. Upon which he went on, “Ay, ay, Random, Random, Random—I
think I remember the name:” and very well he might, for this very
individual, Mr. Cringer, had many a time rode before my grandfather’s
cloak-bag, in quality of a footman. “Well,” says he, “you propose to go
on board a man-of-war as surgeon’s mate.” I replied by a low bow. “I
believe it will be a difficult matter,” continued he, “to procure a
warrant, there being already such a swarm of Scotch surgeons at the
Navy Office, in expectation of the next vacancy, that the commissioners
are afraid of being torn to pieces, and have actually applied for a
guard to protect them. However, some ships will soon be put in
commission, and then we shall see what’s to be done.” So saying, he
left me, exceedingly mortified at the different reception Mr. Gawky and
I had met with from this upstart, proud, mean member, who, I imagined,
would have been glad of an opportunity to be grateful for the
obligations he owed to my family.

At my return, I was surprised with the agreeable news of Strap’s being
employed, on the recommendation of his friend, the schoolmaster, by a
periwig-maker in the neighbourhood, who allowed him five shillings per
week besides bed and board. I continued to dance attendance every other
morning at the levee of Mr. Cringer, during a fortnight; in which time
I became acquainted with a young fellow of my own country and
profession, who also depended on the member’s interest, but was treated
with much more respect than I, both by the servants and master, and
often admitted into a parlour, where there was a fire for the
convenience of the better sort of those who waited for him. Thither I
was never permitted to penetrate, on account of my appearance, which
was not at all fashionable; but was obliged to stand blowing my fingers
in a cold lobby, and take the first opportunity of Mr. Cringer’s going
to the door to speak with him.

One day, while I enjoyed this occasion a person was introduced, whom
Mr. Cringer no sooner saw, than, running towards him, he saluted him
with a low bow to the very ground, and afterwards shaking him by the
hand with great heartiness and familiarity, called him his good friend,
and asked very kindly after Mrs. Staytape and the young ladies; then,
after a whisper, which continued some minutes, wherein I overheard the
word ‘honour’ repeated several times with great emphasis, Mr. Cringer
introduced me to this gentleman, as to a person whose advice and
assistance I might depend upon; and having given me his direction,
followed me to the door, where he told me I need not give myself the
trouble to call at his house any more, for Mr. Staytape would do my
business. At that instant my fellow-dependent, coming out after me,
overheard the discourse of Mr. Cringer, and, making up to me in the
street, accosted me very civilly: this address I looked upon as no
small honour, considering the figure he made, for he was dressed in a
blue frock with a button, a green silk waistcoat, trimmed with gold,
black velvet breeches, white silk stockings, silver buckles, a
gold-laced hat, a spencer-wig, and a silver-hilted hanger, with a fine
clouded can in his hand. “I perceive,” says he, “you are but lately
come from Scotland; pray what may your business with Mr. Cringer be? I
suppose it is no secret and I may possibly give you some advice that
will be serviceable, for I have been surgeon’s second mate on board of
a seventy-gun ship, and consequently know a good deal of the world.”

I made no scruple to disclose my situation, which, when he had learned,
he shook his head, and told me he had been pretty much, in the same
circumstances about a year ago: that he had relied on Cringer’s
promises, until his money (which was considerable) as well as his
credit, was quite exhausted; and when he wrote to his relations for a
fresh supply, instead of money he received nothing but reproaches, and
the epithets of idle, debauched fellow. That after he had waited at the
Navy Office many months for a warrant to no purpose, he was fain to
pawn some of his clothes, which raised a small sum wherewith he bribed
the secretary, who soon procured a warrant for him, notwithstanding he
had affirmed the same day, that there was not one vacancy. That he had
gone on board, where he remained nine months, at the end of which the
ship was put out of commission, and he said the company were to be paid
off in Broad Street the very next day. That relations being reconciled
to him, had charged him to pay his devoirs regularly to Mr. Cringer,
who had informed them by letter that his interest alone had procured
the warrant; in obedience to which command he came to his levee every
morning; as I saw, though he looked upon him to be a very pitiful
scoundrel. In conclusion, he asked me if I had yet passed at Surgeons’
Hall? To which question I answered, I did not so much as know it was
necessary. “Necessary:” cried he, “Oh then I find I must instruct you:
come along with me, and I’ll give you information about that matter.”
So Saying, he carried me into an ale-house, where I called for some
beer, and bread and cheese, on which we breakfasted. While we sat in
this place, he told me I must first go to the Navy Office, and write to
the Board, desiring them to order a letter for me to Surgeon’s Hall,
that I might be examined, touching my skill in surgery. That the
surgeons, after having examined me, would give me my qualification
sealed up in form of a letter directed to the commissioners, which
qualification I must deliver to the secretary of the Board, who would
open it in my presence, and read the contents; after which I must
employ my interest to be provided for as soon as possible. That the
expense of his qualification for second mate of a third-rate, amounted
to thirteen shillings, exclusive of the warrant, which cost him
half-a-guinea and half-a-crown, besides a present to the secretary,
which consisted of a three-pound twelve piece. This calculation was
like a thunderbolt to me, whose whole fortune did not amount to twelve
shillings. I accordingly made him acquainted with this part of my
distress, after having thanked him for his information and advice. He
condoled me on this occasion; but bade me be of good cheer, for he had
conceived a friendship for me, and would make all things easy. He was
ran out at present, but to-morrow or next day, he was certain of
receiving a considerable sum; of which he would lend me what would be
sufficient to answer my exigencies. This frank declaration pleased me
so much, that I pulled out my purse, and emptied it before him, begging
him to take what he pleased for pocket-expense, until he should receive
his own money. With a good deal of pressing, he was prevailed upon to
take five shillings telling me that he might have what money he wanted
at any time for the trouble of going into the city; but as he had met
with me, he would defer his going thither till tomorrow, when I should
go along with him, and he would put me in the way of acting for myself,
without a servile dependence on that rascal Cringer, much less on the
tailor to whom he heard him turn me over. “How!” cried I, “is Mr.
Staytape a tailor.” “No less, I assure you,” answered he, “and, I
confess, more likely to serve you than the member; for, provided you
can entertain him with politics and conundrums, you may have credit
with him for as many and as rich clothes as you please.” I told him, I
was utterly ignorant of both, and so incensed at Cringer’s usage, that
I would never set foot within his door again.

After a good deal more conversation, my new acquaintance and I parted,
having made an appointment to meet next day at the same place; in order
to set out for the city. I went immediately to Strap and related
everything which had happened, but he did not at all approve of my
being so forward to lend money to a stranger, especially as we had
already been so much imposed upon by appearances. “However,” said he,
“if you are sure he is a Scotchman, I believe you are safe.”




CHAPTER XVI


My new acquaintance breaks an appointment—I proceed, by myself, to the
Navy Office—address me to a person there, who assists me with
advice—write to the Board, they grant me a letter to the Surgeons at
the Hall—am informed of the beau’s name and character—find him—he makes
me his confidant in an amour—desires me to pawn my linen for his
occasions—recover what I lent him—some curious observations on Strap on
that occasion—his vanity.


In the morning I rose and went to the place of rendezvous, where I
waited two hours in vain, and was so exasperated against him for
breaking his appointment, that I set out for the city by myself, in
hope of finding the villain, and being revenged on him for his breach
of promise. At length I found myself at the Navy Office, which I
entered, and saw crowds of young fellows walking below, many of whom
made no better appearance than myself. I consulted the physiognomy of
each, and at last made up to one whose countenance I liked, and asked,
if he could instruct me in the form of the letter which was to be sent
to the Board to obtain an order for examination? He answered me in
broad Scotch, that he would show me the copy of what he had writ for
himself, by direction of another who know the form, and accordingly
pulled it out of his pocket for my perusal; and told me that, if I was
expeditious, I might send it into the Board before dinner, for they did
no business in the afternoon. He then went with me to coffee-house hard
by, where I wrote the letter, which was immediately delivered to the
messenger, who told me I might expect an order to-morrow about the same
time.

Having transacted this piece of business, my mind was a good deal
composed; and as I had met with so much civility from the stranger, I
desired further acquaintance with him, fully resolved, however, not to
be deceived by him so much to my prejudice as I had been by the beau.
He agreed to dine with me at the cook’s shop which I frequented; and on
our way thither carried me to ’Change, where I was in hopes of finding
Mr. Jackson (for that was the name of the person who had broke his
appointment), I sought him there to no purpose, and on our way towards
the other end of the town imparted to my companion his behaviour
towards me; upon which he gave me to understand, that he was no
stranger to the name of Bean Jackson (so he was called at the Navy
Office), although he did not know him personally; that he had the
character of a good-natured careless fellow, who made no scruple of
borrowing from any that would lend; that most people who knew him
believed he had a good principle at bottom, but his extravagance was
such, he would probably never have it in his power to manifest the
honesty of his intention. This made me sweat for my five shillings,
which I nevertheless did not altogether despair of recovering, provided
I could find out the debtor.

This young man likewise added another circumstance of Squire Jackson’s
history, which was, that being destitute of all means to equip himself
for sea, when he received his last warrant, he had been recommended to
a person who lent him a little money, after he had signed a will
entitling that person to lift his wages when they should become due, as
also to inherit his effects in case of his death. That he was still
under the tutorage and direction of that gentleman, who advanced him
small sums from time to time upon this security, at the rate of fifty
per cent. But at present his credit was very low, because his funds
would do little more than pay what he had already received, this
moderate interest included. After the stranger (whose name was
Thompson) had entertained me with this account of Jackson, he informed
me that he himself had passed for third mate of a third-rate, about
four months ago; since which time he had constantly attended at the
Navy Office, in hope of a warrant, having been assured from the
beginning, both by a Scotch member, and one of the commissioners to
whom the member recommended him, that he should be put into the first
vacancy; notwithstanding which promise, he had the mortification to see
six or seven appointed in the same station almost every week—that now
being utterly impoverished, his sole hope consisted in the promise of a
friend lately come to town, to lend him a small matter, for a present
to the secretary; without which he was persuaded he might wait a
thousand years to no purpose. I conceived a mighty liking for this
young fellow, which (I believe) proceeded from the similitude of our
fortunes. We spent the whole day together; and as he lived at Wapping I
desired him to take a share of my bed.

Next day we returned to the Navy Office, where, after being called
before the Board, and questioned about the place of my nativity and
education, they ordered a letter to be made out for me, which, upon
paying half-a-crown to the clerk, I received, and delivered into the
hands of the clerk at Surgeons’ Hall, together with a shilling for his
trouble in registering my name. By this time my whole stock was
diminished to two shillings, and I saw not the least prospect of
relief, even for present subsistence, much less to enable me to pay the
fees at Surgeons’ Hall for my examination, which would come on in a
fortnight. In this state of perplexity, I consulted Strap, who assured
me he would pawn everything he had in the world, even to his razors,
before I should want: but this expedient I absolutely rejected, telling
him, I would a thousand times rather list for a soldier, of which I had
some thoughts, than be any longer a burden to him. At the word soldier,
he grew pale as death, and begged on his knees I would think no more of
that scheme. “God preserve us all in our right wits!” cried he, “would
you turn soldier, and perhaps be sent abroad against the Spaniards,
where you must stand and be shot at like a woodcock? Heaven keep cold
lead out of my carcase, and let me die in a bed like a Christian, as
all my forefathers have done. What signifies all earthly riches and
honour, if one enjoys not content? and, hereafter, there is no respect
of persons. Better be a poor honest barber with a good conscience, and
time to repent of my sins upon my death-bed, than be cut off (God bless
us!) by a musket-shot, as it were in the very flower of one’s age, in
the pursuit of riches and fame. What signify riches, my dear friend? do
they not make unto themselves wings and fly away? as the wise man
saith. I could also mention many other sayings in contempt of riches,
both from the Bible and other good books; but I know you are not very
fond of those things, I shall only assure you, that if you take on to
be a soldier, I will do the same; and then if we should both be slain,
you will not only have your own blood to answer for, but mine also: and
peradventure the lives of all those whom we shall kill in battle.
Therefore I pray you, consider whether you will sit down contented with
small things and share the fruits of my industry in peace, till
Providence shall send better tidings; or, by your despair, plunge both
our souls and bodies into everlasting perdition, which God of his
infinite mercy forbid!” I could not help smiling at this harangue,
which was delivered with great earnestness, the tears standing in his
eyes all the time, and promised to do nothing of that sort without his
consent and concurrence. He was much comforted with this declaration;
and told me in a few days he should receive a week’s wages, which
should be at my service, but advised me in the meantime to go in quest
of Jackson, and recover, if possible, what he had borrowed of me. I
accordingly trudged about from one end of the town to the other, for
several days, without being able to learn anything certain concerning
him: and, one day being extremely hungry, and allured by the steams
that regaled my nostrils from a boiling cellar, I went down with an
intention to gratify my appetite with a twopennyworth of beef; when to
my no small surprise found Mr. Jackson sitting at dinner with a
footman. He no sooner perceived me than he got up and shook me by the
hands saying, he was glad to see me, for he intended to have called at
my lodgings in the afternoon. I was so well pleased at this rencounter
and the apologies he made for not keeping his appointment, that I
forgot my resentment, and sat down to dinner, with the happy
expectation of not only recovering my own money before we should part,
but also of reaping the benefit of his promise to lend me wherewithal
to pass examination; and this hope my sanguine complexion suggested,
though the account Thompson gave me of him ought to have moderated my
expectation.

When we had feasted sumptuously, he took his leave of the footman, and
adjourned with me to an ale-house hard by, where, after shaking me by
the hand again, he began thus: “I suppose you think me a sad dog, Mr.
Random, and I do confess that appearances are against me. But I dare
say you will forgive me when I tell you, my not coming at the time
appointed was owing to a peremptory message I received from a certain
lady, whom, harkee! (but this is a great secret) I am to marry very
soon. You think this strange, perhaps, but it is not less true for all
that—a five thousand pounder, I’ll assure you, besides expectations.
For my own part, devil take me if I know what any woman can see
engaging about me—but a whim, you know—and then one would not balk
one’s good fortune. You saw that footman who dined with us—he’s one of
the honestest fellows that ever wore livery. You must know it was by
his means I was introduced to her, for he made me first acquainted with
her woman, who is his mistress—ay, many a crown has he and his
sweetheart had of my money—but what of that? things are now brought to
a bearing. I have—(come a little this way) I have proposed marriage,
and the day is fixed—she’s a charming creature, and writes like an
angel! She can repeat all the English tragedies as well as ever a
player in Drury Lane!-and, indeed, is so fond of plays, that to be near
the stage she has taken lodgings in a court hard by the theatre; but
you shall see—you shall see—here’s the last letter she sent me.” With
these words, he put it into my hand, and I read (to the best of my
remembrance) as follows:

‘Dear Kreeter—As you are the animable hopjack of my contemplayshins,
your aydear is infernally skimming before my keymerycal fansee, when
Murfy sends his puppies to the heys of slipping mortals; and when Febus
shines from his merry dying throne; whereupon I shall canseif old time
has lost his pinners, as also cubit his harrows, until thou enjoy sweet
propose in the loafseek harms of thy very faithfool to commend,


Clayrender


Wingar Yard, Drury Lane,
January 12th.’


While I was reading, he seemed to be in an ecstasy, rubbing his hands,
and bursting out into fits of laughter; at last he caught hold of my
hand, and squeezing it, cried, “There—a style for you! What do you
think of this billet-doux?” I answered, “It might be sblime for aught I
knew, for it was altogether above my comprehension.” “Oh, ho!” said he,
“I believe it is—both tender and sublime; she’s a divine creature! and
so doats upon me! Let me see—what shall I do with this money, when I
have once got it into my hands? In the first place, I shall do for you.
I’m a man of few words—-but say no more that’s determined; whether
would you advise me, to purchase some post, by which I may rise in the
state, or lay out my wife’s fortune in land, and retire to the country
at once?” I gave my opinion without hesitation, that he could not do
better than buy an estate and improve; especially since he had already
seen so much of the world. Then I launched out into the praises of a
country life, as described by the poets whose works I had read. He
seemed to relish my advice, but withal told me, that although he had
seen a great deal of the world both at land and sea, having cruised
three whole months in the Channel, yet he should not be satisfied until
he had visited France, which he proposed to do before he should settle;
and to carry his wife along with him. I had nothing to object to his
proposal; and asked how soon he hoped to be happy. “As to that,” he
replied, “nothing obstructs my happiness but the want of a little ready
cash; for you must know, my friend in the city has gone out of town for
a week or two, but I unfortunately missed my pay at Broad Street, by
being detained too long by the dear charmer—but there will be a recall
at Chatham next week, whither the ship’s books are sent, and I have
commissioned a friend in that place to receive the money.” “If that be
all,” said I, “there’s no great harm in deferring your marriage a few
days.” “Yes, faith, but there is,” said he; “you don’t know how many
rivals I have, who would take all advantages against me. I would not
balk the impatience of her passion for the world—the least appearance
of coldness or indifference would ruin all; and such offers don’t occur
every day.”

I acquiesced in this observation, and inquired how he intended to
proceed. At this question he rubbed his chin, and said, “Why, truly, I
must be obliged to some friend or other—do you know nobody that would
lend me a small sum for a day or two?” I assured him, I was such an
utter stranger in London, that I did not believe I could borrow a
guinea if my life depended upon it. “No!” said he, “that’s hard—that’s
hard! I wish I had anything to pawn—upon my soul, you have got
excellent linen (feeling the sleeve of my shirt); how many shirts of
that kind have you got?” I answered, “Six ruffled, and six plain.” At
which he testified great surprise, and declared that no gentleman ought
to have more than four. “How many d’ye think I have got?” continued he;
“but this and another, as I hope to be saved! and I dare say we shall
be able to raise a good sum out of your superfluity: let me see—let me
see—each of these shirts is worth sixteen shillings at a moderate
computation—now, suppose we pawn them for half-price—eight times eight
is sixty-four, that’s three pounds four; that will do—give me your
hand.” “Softly, softly, Mr. Jackson,” said I; “don’t dispose of my
linen without my consent: first pay me the crown you owe me, and then
we shall talk of other matters.” He protested that he had not above one
shilling in his pocket, but that he would pay me out of the first of
the money raised from the shirts. This piece of assurance incensed me
so much that I swore I would not part with him until I had received
satisfaction for what I had lent him; and as for the shirts, I would
not pawn one of them to save him from the gallows.

At this expression he laughed aloud, and then complained it was very
hard that I should refuse him a trifle that would infallibly enable him
not only to make his own fortune but mine also. “You talk of pawning my
shirts,” said I; “suppose you should sell this hanger, Mr. Jackson. I
believe it would fetch a good round sum.” “No, hang it!” said he, “I
can’t appear decently without my hanger, lest it should go.” However,
seeing me inflexible with regard to my linen, he at length unbuckled
his hanger, and, showing me the three blue balls, desired me to carry
it thither and pawn it for two guineas. This office I would by no means
have performed, had I seen any likelihood of having my money otherwise;
but not willing, out of a piece of false delicacy, to neglect the only
opportunity I should perhaps ever have, I ventured into a pawnbroker’s
shop, where I demanded two guineas on the pledge, in the name of Thomas
Williams. “Two guineas!” said the pawnbroker, looking at the hanger;
“this piece of goods has been here several times before for thirty
shillings: however, since I believe the gentleman to whom it belongs
will redeem it, he shall have what he wants; and accordingly he paid me
the money, which I carried to the house where I had left Jackson; and,
calling for change, counted out to him seven and thirty shillings,
reserving the other five for myself.” After looking at the money some
time, he said, “Well! it don’t signify—this won’t do my business; so
you may as well take half-a-guinea, or a whole one, as the five
shillings you have kept.” I thanked him kindly, but refused to accept
of any more than was my due, because I had no prospect of repaying it.
Upon which declaration, he stared in my face, and told me, I was
excessively raw or I would not talk in that manner. “Upon my word,”
cried he, “I have a very bad opinion of a young fellow who won’t borrow
of his friend when he is in want—’tis the sign of a sneaking spirit.
Come, come, Random, give me back the five shillings, and take this
half-guinea, and if ever you are able to pay me, I believe you will: if
not, I shall never ask it.”

When I reflected upon my present necessity, I suffered myself to be
persuaded, and after making my acknowledgments to Mr. Jackson, who
offered to treat me with a play, I returned to my lodgings with a much
better opinion of this gentleman than I had in the morning; and at
night imparted my day’s adventure to Strap, who rejoiced at my good
luck, saying, “I told you if he was a Scotchman you was safe enough—and
who knows but this marriage may make us all. You have heard, I suppose,
as how a countryman of ours, a journeyman baker, ran away with a great
lady of this town, and now keeps his coach. I say nothing; but
yesterday morning as I was shaving a gentleman at his own house, there
was a young lady in the room, and she threw so many sheep’s eyes at a
certain person whom I shall not name, that my heart went knock, knock,
knock, like a fulling mill, and my hand sh-sh-shook so much that I
sliced a piece of skin off the gentleman’s nose; whereby he uttered a
deadly oath, and was going to horsewhip me, when she prevented him, and
made my peace. Is not a journeyman barber as good as a journeyman
baker? The only difference is, the baker uses flour for the belly, and
the barber rises it for the head: and as the head is a more noble
member than the belly, so is a barber more noble than a baker—for
what’s the belly without the head? Besides, I am told, he could neither
read nor write; now you know I can do both, and moreover, speak
Latin—but I will say no more, for I despise vanity—nothing is more vain
than vanity.” With these words, he pulled out of his pocket a
wax-candle’s end, which he applied to his forehead; and upon
examination, I found had combed his own hair over the toupee of his
wig, and was, indeed, in his whole dress, become a very smart shaver. I
congratulated him on his prospect with a satirical smile, which he
understood very well; and, shaking his head, observed, I had very
little faith, but the truth would come to light in spite of my
incredulity.




CHAPTER XVII


I go to Surgeons’ Hall, when I meet Mr. Jackson—am examined—a fierce
dispute arises between two of the examiners—Jackson disguises himself
to attract respect—irises himself to attract respect—is detected—in
hazard of being sent to Bridewell—he treats us at a Tavern—carries us
to a Night-house—A troublesome adventure there—we are committed to the
Round-house—carried before a Justice—his behaviour


With the assistance of this faithful adherent, who gave me almost all
the money he earned, I preserved my half-guinea entire till the day of
examination, when I went with a quaking heart to Surgeons’ Hall, in
order to undergo that ceremony. Among a crowd of young fellows who
walked in the outward hall, I perceived Mr. Jackson, to whom I
immediately went up; and, inquiring into the state of his love affair,
understood it was still undetermined, by reason of his friend’s
absence, and the delay of the recall at Chatham, which put it out of
his power to bring it to a conclusion. I then asked what his business
was in this place; he replied, he was resolved to have two strings to
his bow, that in case the one failed, he might use the other; and, with
this view, he was to pass that night for a higher qualification. At
that instant, a young fellow came out from the place of examination,
with a pale countenance, his lip quivering, and his looks as wild as if
he had seen a ghost. He no sooner appeared, than we all flocked about
him with the utmost eagerness to know what reception he had met with;
which, after some pause, he described, recounting all the questions
they had asked, with the answers he made. In this manner we obliged no
less than twelve to recapitulate, which, now the danger was past, they
did with pleasure, before it fell to my lot: at length the beadle
called my name, with a voice that made me tremble. However, there was
no remedy. I was conducted into a large hall, where I saw about a dozen
of grim faces sitting at a long table: one of whom bade me come
forward, in such an imperious tone, that I was actually for a minute or
two bereft of my senses. The first question he put to me was, “Where
was you born?” To which I answered, “In Scotland.” “In Scotland,” said
he; “I know that very well—we have scarce any other countrymen to
examine here—you Scotchmen have overspread us of late as the locusts
did Egypt. I ask you in what part of Scotland was you born?” I named
the place of my nativity, which he had never heard of; he then
proceeded to interrogate me about my age, the town where I served my
time, with the term of my apprenticeship; and when I informed him that
I served three years only, he fell into a violent passion, swore it was
a shame and a scandal to send such raw boys into the world as surgeons;
that it was great presumption in me, and an affront upon the English,
to pretend sufficient skill in my business, having served so short a
time, when every apprentice in England was bound seven years at least:
that my friends would have done better if they had made me a weaver or
shoemaker; but their pride would have me a gentleman, he supposed, at
any rate, and their poverty could not afford the necessary education.
This exordium did not at all contribute to the recovery of my spirits;
but on the contrary, reduced me to such a situation that I was scarcely
able to stand; which being perceived by a plump gentleman who sat
opposite to me with a skull before him, he said, Mr. Snarler was too
severe upon the young man; and, turning towards me, told me I need not
be afraid, for nobody would do me any harm: then, bidding me take time
to recollect myself, he examined me, touching the operation of the
trepan, and was very well satisfied with my answers. The next person
who questioned me was a wag, who began by asking if I had ever seen
amputation performed; and I replying in the affirmative, he shook his
head and said, “What! upon a dead subject, I suppose?” “If,” continued
he, “during an engagement at sea, a man should be brought to you with
his head shot off, how would you behave?” After some hesitation, I
owned such a case had never come under my observation, neither did I
remember to have seen any method of care proposed for such an accident,
in any of the systems of surgery I had perused.

Whether it was owing to the simplicity of my answer, or the archness of
the question, I know not, but every member at the board deigned to
smile, except Mr. Snarler, who seemed to have very little of the
‘animal risible’ in his constitution. The facetious member, encouraged
by the success of his last joke, went on thus: “Suppose you was called
to a patient of a plethoric habit, who has been bruised by a fall, what
would you do?” I answered, “I would bleed him immediately.” “What!”
said he, “before you had tied up his arm?” But this stroke of wit not
answering his expectation, he desired me to advance to the gentleman
who sat next him; and who, with a pert air, asked, what method of cure
I would follow in wounds of the intestines. I repeated the method of
care as it is prescribed by the best chirurgical writers, which he
heard to an end, and then said with a supercilious smile, “So you think
with such treatment the patient might recover?” I told him I saw
nothing to make me think otherwise. “That may be,” resumed he; “I won’t
answer for your foresight, but did you ever know a case of this kind
succeed?” I acknowledged I did not, and was about to tell him I had
never seen a wounded intestine; but he stopt me, by saying, with some
precipitation, “Nor never will! I affirm that all wounds of the
intestines, whether great or small, are mortal.” “Pardon me, brother,”
says the fat gentleman, “there is very good authority—” Here he was
interrupted by the other with—“Sir, excuse me, I despise all
authority—Nullius in verbo—I stand on my own bottom.” “But sir, sir,”
replied his antagonist, “the reason of the thing shows—” “A fig for
reason,” cries this sufficient member; “I laugh at reason; give me
ocular demonstratio.” The corpulent gentleman began to wax warm, and
observed, that no man acquainted with the anatomy of the parts would
advance such an extravagant assertion. This inuendo enraged the other
so much, that he started up, and in a furious tone exclaimed: “What,
Sir! do you question my knowledge in anatomy?”

By this time, all the examiners had espoused the opinion of one or
other of the disputants, and raised their voices altogether, when the
chairman commanded silence, and ordered me to withdraw. In less than a
quarter of an hour, I was called in again, received my qualification
scaled up, and was ordered to pay five shillings. I laid down my
half-guinea upon the table, and stood some time, until one of them bade
me begone; to this I replied, “I will when I have got my change:” upon
which another threw me five shillings and sixpence, saying, I should
not be a true Scotchman if I went away without my change. I was
afterwards obliged to give three shillings and sixpence to the beadles,
and a shilling to an old woman who swept the hall: this disbursement
sank my finances to thirteen-pence halfpenny, with which I was sneaking
off, when Jackson, perceiving it, came up to me, and begged I would
tarry for him, and he would accompany me to the other end of the town,
as soon as his examination should be over. I could not refuse this to a
person that was so much my friend; but I was astonished at the change
of his dress which was varied in half-an-hour from what I have already
described to a very grotesque fashion. His head was covered with an old
smoke tie-wig that did not boast one crooked hair, and a slouched hat
over it, which would have very well become a chimney-sweeper, or a
dustman; his neck was adorned with a black crape, the ends of which he
had twisted, and fixed in the button-hole of a shabby greatcoat that
wrapped up his whole body; his white silk stockings were converted into
black worsted hose: and his countenance was rendered venerable by
wrinkles, and a beard of his own painting. When I expressed my surprise
at this metamorphosis, he laughed, and told me it was done by the
advice and assistance of a friend, who lived over the way, and would
certainly produce something very much to his advantage; for it gave him
the appearance of age, which never fails of attracting respect. I
applauded his sagacity, and waited with impatience for the effects of
it. At length he was called in; but whether the oddness of his
appearance excited a curiosity more than small in the board, or his
behaviour was not suitable to his figure, I know not, he was discovered
to be an imposter, and put into the hands of the beadle in order to be
sent to Bridewell. So that instead of seeing him come out with a
cheerful countenance, and a surgeon’s qualification in his hand, I
perceived him led through the outer hall as a prisoner; and was very
much alarmed, and anxious to know the occasion; when he called with a
lamentable voice, and a piteous aspect to me, and some others who know
him, “For God’s sake, gentlemen bear witness that I am the same
individual John Jackson who served as surgeon’s second mate on board
the Elizabeth, or else I shall go to Bridewell!”

It would have been impossible for the most austere hermit that ever
lived to have refrained from laughing at his appearance and address: we
therefore indulged ourselves a good while at his expense, and
afterwards pleaded his cause so effectually with the beadle who was
gratified with half-a-crown, that the prisoner was dismissed, and in a
few moments renewed his former gaiety—swearing, since the board had
refused his money, he would spend every shilling before he went to bed,
in treating his friends; at the same time inviting us all to favour him
with our company. It was now ten o’clock at night, and, as I had a
great way to walk through streets that were utterly unknown to me, I
was prevailed on to be of their party, in hopes he would afterwards
accompany me to my lodgings, according to his promise. He conducted me
to his friend’s house, who kept a tavern over the way where we
continued drinking punch, until the liquor mounted up to our heads, and
made us all extremely frolicsome. I, in particular, was so much
elevated, that nothing would serve me but a wench; at which demand
Jackson expressed much joy, and assured me I should have my desire.
before we parted Accordingly, when he had paid the reckoning, we
sallied out, roaring and singing; and were conducted by our leader to a
place of nocturnal entertainment, where Mr. Jackson’s dress attracted
the assiduities of two or three nymphs, who loaded him with caresses,
in return for the arrack punch with which he treated them, till at
length sleep began to exert his power over us all, and our conductor
called “To pay.” When the bill was brought, which amounted to twelve
shillings, he put his hand in his pocket, but might have saved himself
the trouble, for his purse was gone. This accident disconcerted him a
good deal at first; but after some recollection, he seized the two
ladies who sat by him, one in each hand, and swore if they did not
immediately restore his money he would charge a constable with them.
The good lady at the bar, seeing what passed, whispered something to
the drawer, who went out; and then with great composure, asked what was
the matter? Jackson told her he was robbed, and swore if she refused
him satisfaction, he would have her and her female friends committed to
Bridewell. “Robbed!” cried she, “robbed in my house! Gentlemen and
Ladies, I take you all to witness, this person has scandalised my
reputation.” At that instant, seeing the constable and watch enter, she
proceeded “What! you must not only endeavour by your false aspersions
to ruin my character, but even commit an assault upon my family! Mr.
Constable, I charge you with this uncivil person, who has been guilty
of a riot here; I shall take care and bring an action against him for
defamation.”

While I was reflecting on this melancholy event, which had made me
quite sober, one of the ladies, being piqued at some repartee that
passed between us, cried, “They are all concerned!” and desired the
constable to take us all into custody; an arrest which was performed
instantly, to the utter astonishment and despair of us all, except
Jackson, who having been often in such scrapes, was very little
concerned, and charged the constable, in his turn, with the landlady
and her whole bevy; upon which we were carried altogether prisoners to
the round-house, where Jackson after a word of comfort to us, informed
the constable of his being robbed, to which he said he would swear next
morning before the justice. In a little time the constable, calling
Jackson into another room, spoke to him thus: “I perceive that you and
your company are strangers, and am very sorry for your being involved
in such an ugly business. I have known this woman a great while; she
has kept a notorious house in the neighbourhood this many years; and
although often complained of as a nuisance, still escapes through her
interest with the justices, to whom she and all of her employment pay
contribution quarterly for protection. As she charged me with you
first, her complaint will have the preference, and she can procure
evidence to swear whatsoever she shall please to desire of them; so
that, unless you can make it up before morning, you and your companions
may think yourselves happily quit for a month’s hard labour in
Bridewell. Nay, if she should swear a robbery or an assault against
you, you will be committed to Newgate and tried at the next session at
the Old Bailey for your life.” This last piece of information had such
an effect upon Jackson, that he agreed to make it up, provided his
money might be restored. The constable told him, that, instead of
retrieving what he had lost, he was pretty certain it would cost him
some more before they could come to any composition. But, however, he
had compassion on him, and would, if he pleased, sound them about a
mutual release. The unfortunate beau thanked him for his friendship,
and returning to us, acquainted us with the substance of this dialogue;
while the constable, desiring to speak in private with our adversary,
carried her into the next room, and pleaded, our cause so effectually,
that she condescended to make him umpire: he accordingly proposed an
arbitration, to which we gave our assent; and he fined each party in
three shillings, to be laid out in a bowl of punch, wherein we drowned
all animosities, to the inexpressible joy of my two late acquaintances
and me, who had been extremely uneasy ever since Jackson mentioned
Bridewell and Newgate. By the time we had finished our bowl—to which,
by the bye, I had contributed my last shilling—it was morning, and I
proposed to move homeward, when the constable gave me to understand, he
could discharge no prisoners but by order of the justice, before whom
we must appear. This renewed my chagrin, and I cursed the hour in which
I had yielded to Jackson’s invitation.

About nine o’clock, we were escorted to the house of a certain justice
not many miles distant from Covent Garden, who no sooner saw the
constable enter with a train of prisoners at his heels, than he saluted
him as follows: “So Mr. Constable, you are a diligent man. What den of
rogues have you been scouring?” Then looking at us, who appeared very
much dejected, he continued: “Ay, ay, thieves. I see—old offenders; oh,
your humble servant, Mrs. Harridan! I suppose these fellows have been
taken robbing your house. Yes, yes, here’s an old acquaintance of mine.
You have used expedition,” said he to me, “in returning from
transportation; but we shall save you that trouble for the future—the
surgeons will fetch you from your next transportation, at their
expense.” I assured his worship he was mistaken in me, for he had never
seen me in his life before. To this declaration he replied, “How! you
impudent rascal, dare you say so to my face? Do you think I am to be
imposed upon by that northern accent, which you have assumed? But it
shan’t avail you—you shall find me too far north for you. Here, clerk,
write this fellow’s mittimus. His name is Patrick Gaghagan.” Here Mr.
Jackson interposed, and told him I was a Scotchman lately come to town,
descended of a good family, and that my name was Random. The justice
looked upon this assertion as an outrage upon his memory, on which he
valued himself exceedingly; and strutting up to Jackson, with a fierce
countenance, put his hands in his side, and said, “Who are you, sir? Do
you give me the lie? Take notice, gentlemen, here’s a fellow who
affronts me upon the bench but I’ll lay you fast, sirrah, I will—for
notwithstanding your laced jacket, I believe you are a notorious
felon.” My friend was so much abashed at this menace, which was
thundered out with great vociferation, that he changed colour, and
remained speechless. This confusion his worship took for a symptom of
guilt, and, to complete the discovery, continued his threats, “Now, I
am convinced you are a thief—your face discovers it, you tremble all
over, your conscience won’t lie still—you’ll be hanged, sirrah,”
raising his voice, “you’ll be hanged; and happy had it been for the
world, as well as for your own miserable soul, if you had been
detected, and cut off in the beginning of your career. Come hither,
clerk, and take this man’s confession.” I was in an agony of
consternation, when the constable, going into another room with his
worship, acquainted him with the truth of the story; which having
learned, he returned with a smiling countenance, and, addressing
himself to us all, said it was always his way to terrify young people
when they came before him, that his threats might make a strong
impression on their minds, and deter them from engaging in scenes of
riot and debauchery, which commonly ended before the judge. Thus,
having cloaked his own want of discernment under the disguise of
paternal care, we were dismissed, and I found myself as much lightened
as if a mountain had been lifted off my breast.




CHAPTER XVIII


I carry my qualification to the Navy Office—the nature of it—the
behaviour of the Secretary—Strap’s concern for my absence—a battle
betwixt him a blacksmith—the troublesome consequences of it—his
harangue to me—his friend the schoolmaster recommends me to a French
Apothecary, who entertains me as a journeyman


I would most willingly have gone home to sleep, but was told by my
companions, that we must deliver our letters of qualification at the
Navy office, before one o’clock. Accordingly, we went thither, and gave
them to the secretary, who opened and read them, and I was mightily
pleased to find myself qualified for second mate of a third-rate. When
he had stuck them all together on a file, one of our company asked if
there were any vacancies; to which interrogation he answered “No!” Then
I ventured to inquire if many ships were to be put in commission soon.
At which question he surveyed me with a look of ineffable contempt;
and, pushing us out of his office, locked the door without deigning us
another word. We went down stairs, and conferred together on our
expectations, when I understood that each of them had been recommended
to one or other of the commissioners, and each of them promised the
first vacancy that should fall; but that none of them relied solely
upon that interest, without a present to the secretary, with whom some
of the commissioners went snacks. For which reason, each of them had
provided a small purse; and I was asked what I proposed to give. This
was a vexatious question to me who (far from being in a capacity to
gratify a ravenous secretary) had not wherewithal to purchase a dinner.
I therefore answered, I had not yet determined what to give; and
sneaked off toward my own lodging, lamenting my fate all the way, and
inveighing with much bitterness against the barbarity of my
grandfather, and the sordid avarice of my relations, who left me a prey
to contempt and indigence.

Full of these disagreeable reflections, I arrived at the house where I
lodged, and relieved my landlord from great anxiety on my account; for
this honest man believed I had met with some dismal accident, and that
he never should see me again. Strap, who had come to visit me in the
morning, understanding I had been abroad all night, was almost
distracted, and after having obtained leave of his master, had gone in
quest of me, though he was even more ignorant of the town than I. Not
being willing to inform the landlord of my adventure, I told him I had
met an acquaintance at Surgeons’ Hall, with whom I spent the evening
and night; but being very much infested with bugs, I had not slept
much, and therefore intended to take a little repose; so saying, I went
to bed, and desired to be awakened if Strap should happen to come while
I should be asleep. I was accordingly roused by my friend himself, who
entered my chamber about three o’clock in the afternoon, and presented
a figure to my eyes that I could scarce believe real. In short, this
affectionate shaver, setting out towards Surgeons’ Hall, had inquired
for me there to no purpose: from whence he found his way to the Navy
Office, where he could hear no tidings of me, because I was unknown to
everybody then present; he afterwards went upon ’Change, in hopes of
seeing me upon the Scotch walk, but without success.

At last, being almost in despair of finding me, he resolved to ask
everybody he met in the street, if perchance anyone could give him
information about me! and actually put his resolution in practice, in
spite of the scoffs, curses, and reproaches with which he was answered;
until a blacksmith’s ’prentice seeing him stop a porter with a burden
on his back, and hearing his question, for which he received a hearty
curse, called to him, and asked if the person he inquired after was not
a Scotchman? Strap replied with great eagerness, “Yes, and had on a
brown coat, with long skirts.” “The same!” said the blacksmith. “I saw
him pass by an hour ago,” “Did you so?” cried Strap, rubbing his hands,
“Odd! I am very glad of that—which way went he?” “Towards Tyburn in a
cart,” said he, “if you make good speed, you may get thither time
enough to see him hanged.” This piece of wit incensed my friend to such
a degree, that he called the blacksmith scoundrel, and protested he
would fight him for half-a-farthing. “No, no!” said the other,
stripping; “I’ll have none of your money—you Scotchmen seldom carry
anything about you; but I’ll fight you for love.” There was a ring
immediately formed by the mob: and Strap, finding he could not get off
honourably without fighting, at the same time burning with resentment
against his adversary, quitted his clothes to the care of the
multitude, and the battle began with great violence on the side of
Strap, who in a few minutes exhausted his breath and spirits on his
patient antagonist, who sustained the assault with great coolness, till
finding the barber quite spent, he returned the blows he had lent him,
with such interest, that Strap, after having received three falls on
the hard stones, gave out, and allowed the blacksmith to be the better
man.

The victory being thus decided, it was proposed to adjourn to a cellar
hard by, and drink friends. But when my friend began to gather up his
clothes, he perceived that some honest person or other had made free
with his shirt, neckcloth, hat, and wig, which were carried off; and
probably his coat and waistcoat would have met with the same fate, had
they been worth stealing. It was in vain for him to make a noise, which
only yielded mirth to the spectators; he was fain to get off in this
manner, which he accomplished with much difficulty and appeared before
me all besmeared with blood and dirt. Notwithstanding this misfortune,
such was his transport at finding me safe and sound, that he had almost
stifled and stunk me to death with his embraces. After he had cleaned
himself, and put on one of my shirts, and a woollen nightcap, I
recounted to him the particulars of my night’s campaign, which filled
him with admiration, and made him repeat with great energy an
observation which was often in his mouth, namely, ‘that surely London
is the devil’s drawing-room.’ As neither of us had dined, he desired me
to get up, and the milkwoman coming round at that instant, he went
downstairs, and brought up a quart, with a penny loaf, on which we made
a comfortable meal. He then shared his money with me, which amounted to
eighteen-pence, and left me with an intention to borrow an old wig and
hat of his friend the schoolmaster.

He was no sooner gone, than I began to consider my situation with great
uneasiness, and revolved all the schemes my imagination could suggest,
in order to choose and pursue some one that would procure me bread; for
it is impossible to express the pangs I felt, when I reflected on the
miserable dependence in which I lived at the expense of a poor barber’s
boy. My pride took the alarm, and having no hopes of succeeding at the
Navy Office, I came to a resolution of enlisting in the foot-guards
next day, be the event what it would. This extravagant design, by
flattering my disposition, gave great satisfaction; and I was charging
the enemy at the head of my own regiment, when Strap’s return
interrupted my reverie. The schoolmaster had made him a present of the
tie-wig which he wore, when I was introduced to him, together with an
old hat, whose brims would have overshadowed a Colossus. Though Strap
had ventured to wear them in the dusk, he did not choose to entertain
the mob by day; therefore went to work immediately, and reduced them
both to a moderate size. While he was employed in this office, he
addressed me thus: “To be sure, Mr. Random, you are born a gentleman,
and have a great deal of learning—and, indeed, look like a gentleman;
for, as to person, you may hold up your head with the best of them. On
the other hand, I am a poor but honest cobbler’s son: my mother was as
industrious a woman as ever broke bread, till such time as she took to
drinking, which you very well know; but everybody has failings—Humanum
est errare. Now myself, I am a poor journeyman barber, tolerably well
made and understand some Latin, and have a smattering of Greek; but
what of that? Perhaps I might also say, that I know a little of the
world; but that is to no purpose,—though you be gentle, and I simple,
it does not follow, but that I who am simple may do a good office to
you who are gentle. Now this is the case: my kinsman, the
schoolmaster—perhaps you did not know how nearly he is related to
me—I’ll satisfy you in that presently; his mother and my grandmother’s
sister’s nephew—no, that’s not it!—my grandfather’s brother’s
daughter—rabbit it! I have forgot the degree. But this I know, he and I
are cousins seven times removed.” My impatience to know the good office
he had done me, got the better of my temper, and I interrupted him at
this place with the exclamation, “If the schoolmaster or you can be of
any advantage to me, why don’t you tell me without all this preamble?”
When I pronounced these words with some vehemence, Strap looked at me
for same time with a grave countenance, and then went on: “I’m very
sorry to see such an alteration in your temper of late; you were always
fiery, but now you are grown as crabbed as old Periwinkle the drunken
tinker, on whom you and I (God forgive us!) played so many unlucky
tricks while we were at school—but I will no longer detain you in
suspense, because (doubtless) nothing is more uneasy than doubt—Dubio
procul dubio nil dubius. My friend or relation, or which you will, or
both, the schoolmaster, being informed of the regard I have for you;
for you may be sure I did not fail to let him know of your good
qualities—by the bye, he has undertaken to teach you the pronunciation
of the English tongue, without which, he says, you will be unfit for
business in this country—I say my relation has spoke in your behalf to
a French apothecary who wants a journeyman; and on his recommendation
you may have fifteen pounds a year, bed and board, whenever you
please.” I was too much interested in this piece of news to entertain
it with indifference; but, jumping up, insisted on Strap’s immediately
accompanying me to the house of his friend, that I might not lose this
opportunity through the least delay or neglect on my part.

We were informed, that the schoolmaster was in company at a publichouse
in the neighbourhood, whither we repaired, and found him drinking with
the very individual apothecary in question. When he was called to the
door at our desire, and observed my impatience, he broke out into his
usual term of admiration. “Oh! I suppose, when you heard of this offer,
you did not take leisure enough to come downstairs, but leaped out of
the window: did you overturn no porter nor oyster-woman in your way? It
was a mercy of God you did not knock your brains out against some post
in your career. Oh, my conscience! I believe, had I been in the inmost
recesses of my habitation—the very penetralia—your eagerness would have
surmounted bolts, bars, decency, and everything. The den of Cacus, or
sanctum sanctorum, could not have hid me from you. But come along the
gentleman of whom I spoke is in the house; I will present you to him
forthwith.” When I entered the room, I perceived four or five people
smoking, one of whom the schoolmaster accosted thus: “Mr. Lavement,
here’s the young man of whom I spoke to you.” The apothecary, who was a
little old withered man, with a forehead about an inch high, a nose
turned up at the end, large cheek-bones that helped to form a pit for
his little gray eyes, a great bag of loose skin hanging down on each
side in wrinkles, like the alforjos of a baboon, and a mouth so much
accustomed to that contraction which produces grinning, that he could
not pronounce a syllable without discovering the remains of his teeth,
which consisted of four yellow fangs, not improperly, by anatomists,
called canine. This person, I say, after having eyed me some time,
said, “Oho, ’tis ver well, Monsieur Concordance; young man, you are ver
welcome, take one coup of bierre—and come to mine house to-morrow
morning; Monsieur Concordance vil show you de way.” Upon this I made my
bow, and as I went out of the room could hear him say, “Ma foi! c’est
un beau garçon; c’est un gaillard.”

As I had by my own application, while I served Crab, acquired the
French tongue well enough to read authors written in that language and
understand anything that occurred in conversation, I determined to
pretend ignorance to my new master, that he and his family, whom I
supposed to be of the same country, not being on the reserve before me,
I might possibly discover something in discourse, which would either
yield me amusement or advantage. Next morning Mr. Concordance carried
me to the apothecary’s house, where the bargain was made, and orders
given to provide an apartment for me immediately. But before I entered
upon business the schoolmaster recommended me to his tailor, who gave
me credit for a suit of clothes, to be paid out of the first moiety of
my wages, and they were begun upon that very day; he afterwards
accommodated me with a new hat on the same term: so that in a few days
I hoped to make a very fashionable appearance. In the meantime, Strap
conveyed my baggage to the place allotted for me, which was a back room
up two pair of stairs, furnished with a pallet for me to lie upon, a
chair without a back, a bottle by way of candlestick, and a triangular
piece of glass instead of a mirror; the rest of its ornaments having
been lately removed to one of the garrets, for the convenience of the
servant of an Irish captain, who lodged in the first floor.




CHAPTER XIX


The character of Mr. Lavement, his wife and daughter—some anecdotes of
the family—the mother and daughter rivals—I am guilty of a mistake that
gives me present satisfaction, but is attended with troublesome
consequences


Next day, while I was at work in the shop, a bouncing damsel well
dressed came on pretence of finding a vial for some use or other; and
taking an opportunity, when she thought I did not mind her, of
observing me narrowly, went away with a silent look of disdain. I
easily guessed her sentiments, and my pride took the resolution of
entertaining the same indifference and neglect towards her. At dinner
the maids, with whom I dined in the kitchen, gave me to understand that
this was my master’s only daughter, who would have a very handsome
fortune, on account of which, and her beauty, a great many young
gentlemen made their addresses to her—that she had been twice on the
brink of marriage, but disappointed by the stinginess of her father,
who refused to part with a shilling to promote the match; for which
reason the young lady did not behave to her father with all the filial
veneration that might be expected. In particular she harboured the most
perfect hatred for his countrymen; in which disposition she resembled
her mother, who was an English-woman; and, by the hints they dropped, I
learned the gray mare was the better horse—that she was a matron of a
high spirit, which was often manifested at the expense of her
dependents; that she loved diversions, and looked upon miss as her
rival in all parties—which was indeed the true cause of her
disappointments; for had the mother been hearty in her interest, the
father would not have ventured to refuse her demands. Over and above
this intelligence, I, of myself, soon made more discoveries. Mr.
Lavement’s significant grins at his wife, while she looked another way,
convinced me that he was not at all content with his lot; and his
behaviour in presence of the captain made me believe his chief torment
was jealousy. As for my own part, I was considered in no other light
than that of a menial servant, and had been already six days in the
house without being honoured with one word from either mother or
daughter; the latter (as I understood from the maids) having at table
one day expressed some surprise that her papa should entertain such an
awkward mean-looking journeyman. I was nettled at this piece of
information, and next Sunday (it being my turn to take my diversion)
dressed myself in my new clothes to the greatest advantage, and, vanity
apart, made no contemptible figure.

After having spent most part of the day in company with Strap and some
of his acquaintance, I came home in the afternoon, and was let in by
miss, who not knowing me, dropped a low curtsey as I advanced, which I
returned with a profound bow, and shut the door. By the time I had
turned about, she had perceived her mistake, and changed colour, but
did not withdraw. The passage being narrow, I could not get away
without jolting her; so I was forced to remain where I was with my eyes
fixed to the ground, and my face glowing with blushes. At length, her
vanity coming to her assistance, she went away tittering, and I could
hear her pronounce the word ‘creature!’ From this day forward, she came
into the shop fifty times, every day upon various pretences, and put in
practice so many ridiculous airs, that I could easily perceive her
opinion of me was changed, and that she did not think me altogether an
unworthy conquest. But my heart was so steeled against her charms by
pride and resentment, which were two chief ingredients in my
disposition, that I remained insensible to all her arts; and
notwithstanding some advances she made, could not be prevailed upon to
yield her the least attention. This neglect soon banished all the
favourable impressions she felt for me, and the rage of a slighted
woman took place in her heart; this she manifested not only in all the
suggestions her malice could invent to my prejudice with her father,
but also in procuring for me such servile employments as she hoped
would sufficiently humble my spirit. One day in particular, she ordered
me to brush my master’s coat; but I refusing, a smart dialogue ensued,
which ended in her bursting into tears of rage; when her mother
interposing, and examining into the merits of the cause, determined it
in my favour: and this good office I owed not to any esteem or
consideration she had for me, but solely to the desire of mortifying
her daughter, who on this occasion observed, that let people be never
so much in the right, there were some folks who would never do them
justice, but, to be sure, they had their reasons for it, which some
people were ignorant of, although they despised their little arts. This
insinuation of some people and some folks put me upon observing the
behaviour of my mistress more narrowly for the future: and it was not
long before I had reason to believe that she looked upon her daughter
as a rival in the affections of Captain O’Donnell, who lodged in the
house.

In the meantime, my industry and knowledge gained me the goodwill of my
master, who would often say in French, “Mardy! c’est un bon garçon.” He
had a great deal of business; but he was mostly employed among his
fellow refugees, his profits were small. However, his expense for
medicines was not great; for he was the most expert man at a
succedaneum of any apothecary in London, so that I have been sometimes
amazed to see him, without the least hesitation, make up a physician’s
prescription, though he had not in his shop one medicine mentioned in
it. Oyster-shells he could convert into crab’s eyes; common oil into
oil of sweet almonds; syrup of sugar into balsamic syrup; Thames water
into aqua cinnamoni; and a hundred more costly preparations were
produced in an instant, from the cheapest and coarsest drugs of the
materia medica: and when any common thing was ordered for a patient, he
always took care to disguise it in colour or taste, or both, in such a
manner that it could not possibly be known; for which purpose cochineal
and oil of cloves were of great service. Mr. Lavement had attempted
more than once to introduce a vegetable diet into his family, by
launching out into the praise of roots and greens, and decrying the use
of flesh, both as a physician and philosopher; but all his rhetoric
could not make one proselyte to his opinion, and even the wife of his
bosom declared against the proposal.

One afternoon, when her husband was abroad, and his daughter gone to
visit, this lady ordered me to call a hackney-coach, in which she and
the captain drove towards Covent Garden. Miss came home in the evening,
and, supping at her usual hour, went to bed. About eleven o’clock my
master entered, and asked if his wife was gone to sleep: upon which I
told him, my mistress went out in the afternoon, and was not yet
returned. This was like a clap of thunder to the poor apothecary, who
starting back, cried, “Mort de ma vie! vat you tell a me? My vife not
at home!” At that instant a patient’s servant arrived with a
prescription for a draught, which my master taking, went into the shop
to make it up with his own hand. While he rubbed the ingredients in a
glass mortar, he inquired of me, whether or no his wife went out alone;
and no sooner heard that she was in company with the captain, than with
one blow he split the mortar into a thousand pieces, and grinning like
the head of a bass viol, exclaimed, “Ah, traitresse!” It would have
been impossible for me to have preserved my gravity a minute longer,
when I was happily relieved by a rap at the door, which I opened, and
perceived my mistress coming out of the coach. She flounced immediately
into the shop, and addressed her husband thus: “I suppose you thought I
was lost, my dear. Captain O’Donnell has been so good as to treat me
with a play.” The reply, it may be supposed, was anything but courteous
but the captain, who had been all the time at the door discharging the
coach, entered, and Mr. Lavement, changing his tone, saluted him with
all the usual politesse of a Frenchman.

Shortly after this event, by the knowledge which I acquired of the
family secrets, my life became much more agreeable; and as I every day
improved in my knowledge of the town I shook off my awkward air by
degrees, and acquired the character of a polite journeyman apothecary.




CHAPTER XX


I am assaulted and dangerously wounded—suspect O’Donnell, and am
confirmed in my opinion—concert a scheme of revenge, and put it into
execution—O’Donnell robs his own servant and disappears—make my
addresses to a lady, and am miraculously delivered from her snare


One night, at about twelve o’clock, as I returned from visiting a
patient at Chelsea, I received a blow on my head from an unseen hand,
that stretched me senseless on the ground; and was left for dead with
three stabs of a sword in my body. The groans I uttered when I
recovered the use of my reason alarmed the people of a solitary
alehouse that stood near the spot where I lay: and they were humane
enough to take me in, and send for a surgeon, who dressed my wounds,
and assured me they were not mortal. One of them penetrated through the
skin and muscles of one side of my belly in such a manner, that
doubtless the assassin imagined he had run me through the entrails. The
second slanted along one of my ribs; and the last, which was intended
for the finishing stroke, having been directed to my heart, the sword
snapped upon my breast-bone, and the point remained sticking in the
skin. When I reflected upon this event, I could not persuade myself
that I had been assaulted by a common footpad, because it is not usual
for such people to murder though they rob, especially when they meet
with no resistance; and I found my money, and everything else about me
but my carcase, safe. I concluded, therefore, that I must either have
been mistaken for another, or obliged to the private resentment of some
secret enemy for what had happened; and as I could remember nobody who
had the least cause of complaint against me, except Captain O’Donnell
and my master’s daughter, my suspicion settled upon them, though I took
care to conceal it, that I might the sooner arrive at confirmation.

With this view, I went home in the chair about ten o’clock in the
morning; and as the chairman supported me into the house, met the
captain in the passage, who no sooner saw me than he started back and
gave evident signs of guilty confusion, which he would have accounted
for from surprise occasioned by the seeing me in such a condition. My
master having heard my story, condoled me with a good deal of sympathy,
and when he understood my wounds were not dangerous, ordered me to be
carried upstairs to bed; though not without some opposition from his
wife, who was of opinion that it would be better for me to go to an
hospital, where I should be more carefully attended. My meditation was
employed in concerting with myself some method of revenge against
Squire O’Donnell and his inamorata, whom I looked upon as the author of
my misfortune; when miss, who was not at home at my arrival, entered my
chamber, and saying she was sorry for the accident that had befallen
me, asked if I suspected anybody to be the assassin; upon which I fixed
my eyes steadfastly upon her and answered, “Yes.” She discovered no
symptom of confusion, but replied hastily, “If that be the case, why
don’t you take out a warrant, to have him apprehended? It will cost but
a trifle—if you have no money, I’ll lend you.” This frankness not only
cured me of my suspicion with respect to her, but even staggered my
belief with regard to the captain, of whose guilt I resolved to have
further proof before I should enterprise anything in the way of
revenge. I thanked her kindly for her generous offer, which, however, I
had no occasion to accept, being determined to do nothing rashly: for
though I could plainly perceive the person who attacked me to be a
soldier, whose face I thought was familiar to me, I could not swear
with a safe conscience to any particular man; and, granting I could, my
prosecution of him would not much avail.

This uncertainty I pretended, lest the captain, hearing from her that I
knew the person who wounded me, might think proper to withdraw before I
could be in a condition to requite him. In two days I was up and able
to do a little business, so that Mr. Lavement made shift to carry on
his practice without hiring another journeyman in my room.

The first thing I attempted towards a certain discovery of my secret
enemy, was to get into O’Donnell’s apartment, while he was abroad in an
undress, and examine his sword, the point of which being broken off, I
applied the fragment that was found sticking in my body, and found it
answered the fractured part exactly. There was no room left for doubt;
and all that remained was to fix upon a scheme of revenge, which almost
solely engrossed my thoughts during the space of eight nights and days.
Sometimes I was tempted to fall upon him in the same manner as he had
practised upon me, and kill him outright. But this assault my honour
opposed as a piece of barbarous cowardice, in which he was not to be
imitated. At other times I entertained thoughts of demanding
satisfaction in an honourable way; but was diverted from this
undertaking by considering the uncertainty of the event, and the nature
of the injury he had done me, which did not entitle him to such easy
terms. At last I determined to pursue a middle course, and actually put
my design in execution after this manner. Having secured the assistance
of Strap and two of his acquaintance whom he could depend upon, we
provided ourselves with disguises, and I caused the following letter to
be delivered to him by one of our associates in livery, one Sunday
evening:—

“Sir—If I may be allowed to judge from appearance, it will not be
disagreeable for you to hear that my husband is gone to Bagshot to
visit a patient, and will not return till to-morrow night; so that, if
you have anything to propose to me (as your behaviour on many occasions
has seemed to insinuate), you will do well to embrace the present
opportunity of seeing,


Yours, etc.”


This letter was signed with the name of an apothecary’s wife who lived
in Chelsea, of whom I had heard O’Donnell was an admirer. Everything
succeeded to our wish. The hero hastened towards the place of
appointment, and was encountered by us in the very place where he had
assaulted me. We rushed upon him all at once, secured his sword,
stripped off his clothes even to the skin, which was scourged with
nettles till he was blistered from head to foot, notwithstanding all
the eloquence of his tears and supplications. When I was satisfied with
the stripes I had bestowed, we carried off his clothes, which we hid in
a hedge near the place, and left him stark naked to find his way home
in the best manner he could, while I took care to be there before him.
I afterwards understood that, in his way to the lodgings of a friend,
who lived in the skirts of the town, he was picked up by the watch, who
carried him to the round-house, from whence he sent for clothes to his
lodgings, and next morning arrived at the door in a chair, wrapt up in
a blanket he had borrowed; for his body was so sore and swelled, that
he could not bear to be confined in his wearing apparel. He was treated
with the utmost tenderness by my mistress and her daughter, who vied
with each other in their care and attendance of him; but Lavement
himself could not forbear expressing his joy, by several malicious
grins, while he ordered me to prepare an unguent for his sores. As to
myself, nobody can doubt my gratification, when I had every day an
opportunity of seeing my revenge protracted on the body of my
adversary, by the ulcers of which I had been the cause; and, indeed, I
not only enjoyed the satisfaction of having flea’d him alive, but
another also which I had not foreseen. The story of his being attacked
and stripped in such a place having been inserted in the news, gave
information to those who found his clothes next day, whither to bring
them; and accordingly he retrieved everything he had lost except a few
letters, among which was that which I had writ to him in the name of
the apothecary’s wife. This, and the others, which were all on the
subject of love (for this Hibernian hero was one of those people who
are called fortune-hunters), fell into the hands of a certain female
author, famous for the scandal she has published; who, after having
embellished them with some ornaments of her own invention, gave them to
the to town in print. I was very much shocked on reflection, that I
might possibly be the occasion of a whole family’s unhappiness on
account of the letter I had written; but was eased of that
apprehension, when I understood that the Chelsea apothecary had
commenced a lawsuit against the printer for defamation, and looked upon
the whole as a piece of forgery committed by the author, who had
disappeared. But whatever might be his opinion of the matter, our two
ladies seemed to entertain a different idea of it: for as soon as the
pamphlet appeared, I could perceive their care of their patient
considerably diminish, till at last it ended in a total neglect. It was
impossible for him to be ignorant of this change, any more than of the
occasion of it; but as he was conscious to himself of having deserved
worse than contempt at their hands, he was glad to come off so cheaply,
and contented himself with muttering curses and threats against the
apothecary, who, as he imagined, having got an inkling of the
appointment with his wife, had taken revenge of him in the manner
described. By the time he had got a new scarf skin his character was
become so notorious, that he thought it high time for him to decamp;
and his retreat he performed in one night, without beat of drum, after
having robbed his own servant of everything that belonged to him except
the clothes he had on his back.

A few days after he disappeared, Mr. Lavement, for his own security,
took into his custody a large old trunk which he had left; and as it
was very heavy, made no question that the contents were sufficient to
indemnify him for what O’Donnell owed in lodging. But a month being
elapsed without hearing any tidings of this adventurer, and my master
being impatient to know what the trunk contained, he ordered me to
break it open in his presence, which task I performed with the pestle
of our great mortar, and discovered, to his inexpressible astonishment
and mortification, a heap of stones.

About this time, my friend Strap informed me of an offer he had to go
abroad with a gentleman in quality of valet de chambre and at the same
time assured me that, whatever advantage he might propose to himself
from this prospect, he could not bear the thoughts of parting from me,
so much was he attached to my fortune. In spite of all the obligations
I owed to this poor, honest fellow, ingratitude is so natural to the
heart of man, that I began to be tired of his acquaintance: and now
that I had contracted other friendships which appeared more creditable,
was even ashamed to see a journeyman barber inquiring after me with the
familiarity of a companion. I therefore, on pretence of consulting his
welfare, insisted upon his accepting the proposal, which he at last
determined to embrace, with great reluctance, and in a few days, took
his leave of me, shedding a flood of tears, which I could not behold
without emotion. I now began to look upon me as of a gentleman in
reality; learned to dance, frequented plays during the holidays; became
the oracle of an ale-house, where every dispute was referred to my
decision; and at length contracted an acquaintance with a young lady,
who found means to make a conquest of my heart, and upon whom I
prevailed, after much attendance and solicitation, to give me a promise
of marriage. As this beautiful creature passed for a rich heiress, I
blessed my good fortune, and was actually on the point of crowning all
my wishes by matrimony, when I made such a discovery as effectually
turned me from my design, and I abandoned all thoughts of marriage for
the future.




CHAPTER XXI


Squire Gawky comes to lodge with my master—is involved in a troublesome
affair, out of which he is extricated by me—he marries my master’s
daughter—they conspire against me—I am found guilty of theft,
discharged—deserted by my friends, I hire a room in St. Gile’s—where,
by accident, I find the lady to whom I paid my addresses in a miserable
condition—I relieve her


When I enjoyed myself at large in this temper of mind, Lavement let his
first floor to my countryman and acquaintance, Squire Gawky, who by
this time had got a lieutenancy in the army, and such a martial
ferocity in his appearance that I was afraid he would remember what
happened between us in Scotland, and atone for his breach of
appointment then by his punctuality now; but whether he had actually
forgot me, or was willing to make me believe so, he betrayed not the
least symptom of recognition at sight of me, and I remained quite cured
of my apprehension; though I had occasion not long after to be
convinced, that howsoever his externals might be altered, he was at
bottom the same individual Gawky, whom I have already described. For
coming home late one night from the house of a patient, I heard a noise
in the street, and as I approached, perceived two gentlemen in custody,
of three watchmen. The prisoners, who were miserable, disfigured with
dirt, complained bitterly of the loss of their hats and wigs; and one
of them, whom by his tongue I know to be a Scotchman, lamented most
piteously, offering a guinea for his liberty, which the watchman
refused, alleging that one of his companions was wounded grievously,
and that he must stand to the consequence. My prejudice in favour of my
native country was so strong, that I could not bear to see anybody
belonging to it in distress, and therefore, with one blow of my
faithful cudgel, knocked down the watchman who had hold of the person
for whom I was chiefly concerned. He was no sooner disengaged, than he
betook himself to his heels, and left me to maintain the dispute as I
should think proper; and, indeed, I came off but scurvily, for, before
I could avail myself of my speed, I received a blow on the eye, from
one of the other two, that had well nigh deprived me of the use of that
organ. However, I made shift to get home, where I was informed of
Captain Gawky’s being robbed and abused by a company of footpads, and
was ordered by my master to prepare an emollient glyster and paregoric
draught, in order to allay and compose the ferment of his spirits,
occasioned by the barbarous treatment he had undergone, while he took
twelve ounces of blood from him immediately.

When I inquired into the particulars of this adventure, and understood
by the servant that he came in just before me, without hat and wig, I
made no scruple of believing him to be the person I had released, and
was confirmed in my belief upon hearing his voice, to which (before
that event) I had long been a stranger.

My eye being considerably swelled and inflamed, I could not reflect
upon my enterprise without cursing my own folly, and even resolving to
declare the truth of the whole story in order to be revenged on the
cowardly wretch for whom I had suffered: accordingly, next day after he
had told, in presence of my master, his wife and daughter, who came to
him, a thousand lies concerning the prowess he had shown in making his
escape, I ventured to explain the mystery, and, calling in the evidence
of my contused eye, upbraided him with cowardice and ingratitude. Gawky
was so astonished at this that he could not answer one word, and the
rest of the company stared at one another; till at length my mistress
reprimanded me for my insolent behaviour, and threatened to turn me
away for my presumption. Upon which, Gawky (having recollected himself)
observed, as the young man might have mistaken another person for him,
he could forgive his insinuations, more especially as he seemed to have
suffered for his incivility; but advised me to be more certain in my
conjectures for the future, before I ventured to publish them to the
prejudice of any man. Miss applauded the Captain’s generosity in
pardoning one who had so villainously aspersed him, and I began to
imagine her praise was not at all disinterested. But the apothecary,
who perhaps had more penetration or less partiality than his wife and
daughter, differed from them in their sentiments of the matter, and
expressed himself to me in the shop in this manner: “Ah mon pauvre
Roderique! you have more of de veracite dan of de prudence—bot mine
vife and dater be diablement sage, and Monsieur le Capitaine un
fanfaron, pardieu!”

This eulogium on his wife and daughter, though spoken ironically by
him, was nevertheless literally just; by espousing the cause of Gawky,
the one obliged a valuable lodger, and the other acquired a husband at
a juncture when one was absolutely necessary. The young lady insinuated
herself so artfully into the affection of this new lodger, that in less
than a fortnight, on pretence of going to the play, they drove away
together to the Fleet, where they were married; and in the morning came
home, where they asked her father’s and mother’s blessing. The prudent
parents, notwithstanding the precipitation with which the match was
carried on, did not think fit to refuse their approbation; for the
apothecary was not ill pleased to find his daughter married to a young
man of a good prospect, who had not mentioned one syllable on the
article of her dowry; and his wife was rejoiced at being rid of a rival
and a spy upon her. Whatever face Gawky put on the matter, my discovery
of the adventure before related, and the reproaches I vented against
him, had stung him to the soul, and cherished the seeds of enmity so
strongly in his breast, that he imparted his indignation to his wife,
who being as desirous as himself to accomplish the ruin of one that not
only slighted her caresses, but was able on any occasion to discover
particulars not at all advantageous to her character, readily joined in
a conspiracy against me, which (had it taken effect as they expected)
would infallibly have brought me to an ignominious death.

My master having several times missed large quantities of medicines, of
which I could give no account, at last lost all patience, and in plain
terms taxed me with having embezzled them for my own use. As I could
only oppose my single asseveration to his suspicion, he told me one
day, “Your vord not be give me de satisfaction—me find necessaire to
chercher for my medicine; pardonnez moi—il faut chercher—me demand le
clef of your coffre a cette heure.” Then raising his voice to conceal
the fright he was in lest I should make any opposition, he went on,
“Oui! I charge you rendez le clef of your coffre—moi—si, moi qui vous
parle.” I was fired with so much resentment and disdain at this
accusation, that I burst into tears, which he took for a sign of guilt;
and pulling out my key, told him he might satisfy himself immediately,
though he would not find it so easy to satisfy me for the injury my
reputation had suffered from his unjust suspicion. He took the key and
mounted up to my chamber, attended by the whole family, saying, “Eh
bien, nous verrons—nous verrons.” But what was my horror and amazement,
when, opening my chest, he pulled out a handful of the very things that
were missing, and pronounced, “Ah, ha, vous etes bienvenu—mardy, Mons.
Roderique, you be fort innocent!” I had not power to utter one word in
my own vindication, but stood motionless and silent, while everybody
present made their respective remarks on what appeared against me. The
servants said they were sorry for my misfortune, and went away
repeating, “Who would have thought it?” My mistress took occasion from
this detection to rail against the practice of employing strangers in
general; and Mrs. Gawky, after having observed that she never had a
good opinion of my fidelity, proposed to have me carried before the
justice and committed to Newgate immediately. Her husband was actually
upon the stairs in his way for a constable, when Mr. Lavement knowing
the cost and trouble of a prosecution to which he must bind himself,
and at the same time dreading lest some particulars of my confession
might affect his practice, called out. “Restez, mon fils! restez, it be
veritablement one grand crime which dis pauvre diable have
committed—bot peut-etre de good God give him de penitence, and me vill
not have upon mine head de blood of one sinner.” The captain and his
lady used all the Christian arguments their zeal could suggest to
prevail upon the apothecary to pursue me to destruction, and
represented the injustice he did to the community of which he was a
member, in letting a villain escape, who would not fail of doing more
mischief in the world when he should reflect on his coming off so
easily now; but their eloquence made no impression on my master, who
turning to me said, “Go, miserable, go from mine house quick,
quick!—and make reparation for your mauvaise actions.” By this time my
indignation had roused me from the stupefaction in which I had hitherto
remained and I began in this manner:—“Sir, appearances I own condemn
me; but you are imposed upon as much as I am abused: I have fallen a
sacrifice to the rancour of that scoundrel” (pointing to Gawky) “who
has found means to convey your goods hither, that the detection of them
might blast my reputation, and accomplish my destruction. His hatred to
me is owing to a consciousness of his having wronged me in my own
country—for which injury he in a cowardly manner, refused me the
satisfaction of a gentleman; he knows, moreover, that I am no stranger
to his dastardly behaviour in this town, which I have recounted before,
and he is unwilling that such a testimony of his ingratitude and
pusillanimity should live upon the earth; for this reason he is guilty
of the most infernal malice to bring about my ruin. And I am afraid,
madam (turning to Mrs. Gawky) you have too easily entered into the
sentiments of your husband. I have often found you my enemy, and am
well acquainted with the occasion of your being so, which I don’t at
present think proper to declare; but I would advise you, for your own
sake, not to drive me to extremity.” This address enraged her so much
that with a face as red us scarlet and the eyes of a fury, she strutted
up to me and putting her hands in her side, spat in my face, saying, I
was a scandalous villain, but she defied my malice; and that unless her
papa would not prosecute me like a thief as I was, she would not stay
another night under his roof. At the same time, Gawky assuming a big
look, told me, he scorned what lies I could invent against him; but
that, if I pretended to asperse his wife, he would put me to death. To
this threat I answered, “I wish I could meet with thee in a desert,
that I might have an opportunity of punishing thee for thy perfidy
towards me, and rid the world of such a rascal. What hinders me this
moment,” said I, seizing an old bottle that stood by, “from doing
myself that justice?” I had no sooner armed myself in this manner, than
Gawky and his father-in-law retired in such a hurry, that the one
overturned the other, and they rolled together down stairs, while my
mistress swooned away with fear, and her daughter asked if I intended
to murder her. I gave her to understand, that nothing was farther from
my intention, that I would leave her to the stings of her own
conscience; but was firmly resolved to slit her husband’s nose,
whenever fortune should offer a convenient opportunity. Then going down
stairs, I met Lavement coming up trembling with the pestle in his hand,
and Gawky behind armed with his sword, pushing him forward. I demanded
a parley: and having assured him of my pacific disposition, Gawky
exclaimed, “Ah, villain! you have killed my dear wife.” And the
apothecary cried, “Ah, coquin! vere is my shild?” “The lady,” said I,
“is above stairs, unhurt by me, and will, a few months hence, I believe
reward your concern.” Here she called to them, and desired they would
let the wretch go, and trouble themselves no further about him. To
which request her father consented, observing, nevertheless, that my
conversation was ‘very mysterious.’

Finding it impossible to vindicate my innocence, I left the house
immediately, and went to the schoolmaster, with an intention of
clearing myself to him, and asking his advice with regard to my future
conduct; but, to my inexpressible vexation, he was gone to the country,
where he would stay two or three days. I returned with a design of
consulting some acquaintance I had acquired in the neighbourhood; but
my story had taken air through the officiousness of the servants, and
not one of my friends would vouchsafe me a hearing. Thus I found
myself, by the iniquity of mankind, in a much more deplorable condition
than ever: for though I had been formerly as poor, my reputation was
without blemish, and my health unimpaired till now; but at present my
good name was lost, my money gone, my friends were alienated, my body
was infected by an odious distemper; and my faithful Strap, who alone
could yield me pity and assistance, absent I knew not where.

The first resolution I could take in this melancholy conjuncture, was
to remove my clothes to the house of the person with whom I had
formerly lodged, where I remained two days in hopes of getting another
place by the interest of Mr. Concordance, to whom I made no doubt of
being able to vindicate my character; but in this supposition I
reckoned without my best, for Lavement took care to be beforehand with
me; and when I attempted to explain the whole affair to the
schoolmaster, I found him so prepossessed against me, that he would
scarce hear me to an end; but when I had finished my justification,
shook his head, and beginning with his usual exclamation said, “That
won’t go down with me. I am very sorry I should have the misfortune of
being concerned in the affair, but, however, shall be more cautious for
the future. I will trust no man from henceforward—no, not my father who
begat me, nor the brother who lay with me in my mother’s womb: should
Daniel rise from the dead, I would think him an impostor; and were the
genius of truth to appear, would question its veracity!” I told him,
that one day it was possible he might be convinced of the injury I had
suffered, and repent of his premature determination. To which remark he
answered, the proof of my innocence would make his bowels vibrate with
joy; “but till that shall happen,” continued he, “I must beg to have no
manner of connection with you—my reputation is at stake. I shall be
looked upon as your accomplice and abettor—people will say Jonathan
Wild was but a type of me—boys will hoot at me as I pass along; and the
cinder-wenches belch forth reproaches wafted in a gale impregnated with
gin: I shall be notorious—the very butt of slander, and sink of
infamy!” I was not in a humour to relish the climax of expressions upon
which this gentleman valued himself in all his discourses; but, without
any ceremony, took my leave, cursed with every sentiment of horror
which my situation could suggest. I considered, however, in the
intervals of my despondence, that I must, in some shape suit my expense
to my calamitous circumstances, and with that view hired an apartment
in a garret near St. Giles’s, at the rate of nine-pence per week.

I one day, when I sat in this solitary retreat musing upon the
unhappiness of my fate, was alarmed by a groan that issued from a
chamber contiguous to mine, into which I immediately ran, and found a
woman stretched on a miserable truckle bed, without any visible signs
of life. Having applied a smelling bottle to her nose, the blood began
to revisit her cheeks, and she opened her eyes; but, good heaven! what
were the emotions of my soul, when I discovered her to be the same
individual lady who had triumphed over my heart, and to whose fate I
had almost been inseparably joined! Her deplorable situation filled my
breast with compassion. She knew me immediately; and, straining me
gently in her arms, shed a torrent of tears, which I could not help
increasing. At length, casting a languishing look at me, she pronounced
with a feeble voice, “Dear Mr. Random, I do not deserve this concern at
your hands: I am a vile creature, who had a base design upon your
person—suffer me, to expiate that, and all my other crimes, by a
miserable death, which will not fail to overtake me in a few hours.” I
encouraged her as much as I could, told her I forgave all her
intentions with regard to me; and that, although my circumstances were
extremely low, I would share my last farthing with her. I begged in the
meantime to know the immediate cause of that fit from which she had
just recovered, and said, I would endeavour by my skill to prevent any
more such attacks. She seemed very much affected with this expression,
took my hand, and pressed it to her lips, saying, “You are too
generous! I wish I could live to express my gratitude—but alas! I
perish for want.” Then shutting her eyes, she relapsed into another
swoon. Such extremity of distress must have waked the most obdurate
heart to sympathy and compassion; what effect then must it have had on
mine, that was naturally prone to every tender passion? I ran
downstairs, and sent my landlady to a chemist’s shop for some cinnamon
water, while I, returning to this unfortunate creature’s chamber, used
all the means in my power to bring her to herself; this aim with much
difficulty I accomplished, and made her drink a glass of the cordial to
recruit her spirits: then I prepared a little mulled red wine and a
toast, which having taken, she found herself thoroughly revived, and
informed me, that she had not tasted food for eight and forty hours
before. As I was impatient to know the occasion and nature of her
calamity, she gave me to understand, that she was a woman of the town
by profession; that in the course of her adventures she found herself
dangerously infected with a distemper, to which all of her class are
particularly subject; that her malady gaining ground every day, she
became loathsome to herself and offensive to others: when she resolved
to retire to some obscure corner where she might be cured with as
little noise and expense as possible; that she had accordingly chosen
this place of retreat, and put herself into the hands of an advertising
doctor, who having fleeced her of all the money she had, or could
procure, left her three days ago in a worse condition than that in
which he found her; that except the clothes on her back, she had pawned
or sold everything that belonged to her to satisfy that rapacious
quack, and quiet the clamour of her landlady, who still persisted in
her threats to turn her out into the street. After having moralised
upon these particulars, I proposed that she should lodge in the same
room with me, an expedient that would save some money: and assured her,
I would undertake to cure her as well as my own, during which she
should partake of all the conveniences that I could afford to myself.
She embraced my offer with unfeigned acknowledgment, and I began to put
it in practice immediately. I found her not only an agreeable
companion, whose conversation greatly alleviated my chagrin, but also a
careful nurse, who served me with the utmost fidelity and affection.
One day, while I testified my surprise that a woman of her beauty, good
sense, and education (for she had a large portion of each), could be
reduced to such an infamous and miserable way of life, she answered
with a sigh, “These very advantages were the cause of my undoing.” This
remarkable reply inflamed my curiosity to such a degree, that I begged
she would favour me with the particulars of her story, and she complied
in these words.




CHAPTER XXII


The History of Miss Williams


‘My father was an eminent merchant in the city who having, in the
course of trade, suffered very considerable losses, retired in his old
age with his wife to a small estate in the country, which he had
purchased with the remains of his fortune. At that time, I being but
eight years of age, was left in town for the convenience of education,
boarded with an aunt, who was a rigid presbyterian, and confined me so
closely to what she called the duties of religion, that in time I grew
weary of her doctrines, and by degrees received an aversion for the
good books, she daily recommended to my perusal. As I increased in age,
and appeared with a person not disagreeable, I contracted a good deal
of acquaintance among my own sex; one of whom, after having lamented
the restraint I was under from the narrowness of my aunt’s sentiments,
told me I must now throw off the prejudices of opinion imbibed under
her influence and example, and learn to think for myself; for which
purpose she advised me to read Shaftsbury, Tindal, Hobbes, and all the
authors that are remarkable for their deviation from the old way of
thinking, and by comparing one with the other, I should soon be able to
form a system of my own. I followed her advice; and whether it was
owing to my prepossession against what I had formerly read, or the
clearness of argument in these my new instructors, I know not; but I
studied them with pleasure, and in a short time became a professed
freethinker. Proud of my improvement, I argued in all companies, and
that with such success, that I soon acquired the reputation of a
philosopher, and few people durst undertake me in a dispute. I grew
vain upon my good fortune, and at length pretended to make my aunt a
proselyte to my opinion; but she no sooner perceived my drift than,
taking the alarm, she wrote to my father an account of my heresy, and
conjured him, as he tendered the good of my soul, to remove me
immediately from the dangerous place where I had contracted such sinful
principles. Accordingly, my father ordered me into the country, where I
arrived in the fifteenth year of my age, and, by his command gave him a
detail of all the articles of my faith, which he did not find so
unreasonable as they had been represented. Finding myself suddenly
deprived of the company and pleasures of the town, I grew melancholy
and it was some time before I could relish my situation. But solitude
became every day more and more familiar to me and I consoled myself in
my retreat with the enjoyment of a good library, at such times as were
not employed in the management of the family (for my mother had been
dead three years), in visiting, or some other party of rural diversion.
Having more imagination than judgment, I addicted myself too much to
poetry and romance; and, in short, was looked upon as a very
extraordinary person by everybody in the country where I resided.

‘I had one evening strayed, with a book in my hand, into a wood that
bordered on the high road, at a little distance from my father’s house,
when a certain drunken squire, riding by, perceived me, and crying,
“Holloa, there’s a charming creature!” alighted in a moment, caught me
in his arms, and treated me so rudely that I shrieked as loud as I
could, and in the meantime opposed his violence with all the strength
that rage and resentment could inspire. During this struggle, another
horseman came up, who, seeing a lady so unworthily used, dismounted,
and flew to my assistance. The squire, mad with disappointment, or
provoked with the reproaches of the other gentleman, quitted me, and
running to his horse, drew a pistol from the saddle, and fired it at my
protector, who happily receiving no damage, went up, and, with the
butt-end of his whip laid him prostrate on the ground before he could
use the other, which his antagonist immediately seized, and, clapping
to the squire’s breast, threatened to put him to death for his
cowardice and treachery. In this dilemma I interposed and begged his
life, which was granted to my request, after he had asked pardon, and
swore his intention was only to obtain a kiss. However, my defender
thought proper to unload the other pistol, and throw away the flints,
before he gave him his liberty. This courteous stranger conducted me
home, where my father having learned the signal service he had done me,
loaded him with caresses, and insisted on his lodging that night at our
house. If the obligation he had conferred upon me justly inspired me
with sentiments of gratitude, his appearance and conversation seemed to
entitle him to somewhat more. He was about the age of two-and-twenty,
among the tallest of the middle size; had chestnut-coloured hair, which
he wore tied up in a ribbon; a high polished forehead, a nose inclining
to the aquiline, lively blue eyes, red pouting lips, teeth as white as
snow, and a certain openness of countenance—but why need I describe any
more particulars of his person? I hope you will do me the justice to
believe I do not flatter, when I say he was the exact resemblance of
you; and if I had not been well acquainted with his family and degree,
I should have made no scruple of concluding that you was his brother.
He spoke and seemed to have no reserve: for what he said was ingenuous,
sensible, and uncommon. “In short,” said she, bursting into tears, “he
was formed for the ruin of our sex. His behaviour was modest and
respectful, but his looks were so significant, that I could easily
observe he secretly blessed the occasion that introduced him to my
acquaintance. We learned from his discourse that he was the eldest son
of a wealthy gentleman in the neighbourhood, to whose name we were no
strangers—that he had been to visit an acquaintance in the country,
from whose house he was returning home, when my shrieks brought him to
my rescue.”

‘All night long my imagination formed a thousand ridiculous
expectations: there was so much of knight-errantry in this gentleman’s
coming to the relief of a damsel in distress, with whom he immediately
became enamoured, that all I had read of love and chivalry recurred to
my fancy; and I looked upon myself as a princess in some region of
romance, who being delivered from the power of some brutal giant or
satyr, by a generous Oroondates, was bound in gratitude, as well as led
by inclination, to yield up my affections to him without reserve. In
vain did I endeavour to chastise these foolish conceits by reflections
more reasonable and severe: the amusing images took full possession of
my mind, and my dreams represented my hero sighing at my feet, in the
language of a despairing lover. Next morning after breakfast he took
his leave, when my father begged the favour of further acquaintance
with him; to which request he replied by a compliment to him, and a
look to me so full of eloquence and tenderness, that my whole soul
received the soft impression. In a short time he repeated his visit;
and as a recital of the particular steps he pursued to ruin me would be
tedious and impertinent, let it suffice to say, he made it his business
to insinuate himself into my esteem, by convincing me of his own good
sense, and at the same time flattering my understanding. This task he
performed in the most artful manner, by seeming to contradict me often
through misapprehension, that I might have an opportunity of clearing
myself the more to my own honour. Having thus secured my good opinion,
he began to give me some tokens of a particular passion, founded on a
veneration of the qualities of my mind, and, as an accidental ornament,
admired the beauties of my person; till at being fully persuaded of his
conquest, he chose a proper season for the theme, and disclosed his
love in terms so ardent and sincere, that it was impossible for me to
disguise the sentiments of my heart, and he received my approbation
with the most lively transport. After this mutual declaration, we
contrived to meet more frequently in private interviews, where we
enjoyed the conversation of one another, in all the elevation of fancy
and impatience of hope that reciprocal adoration can inspire. He
professed his honourable intentions, of which I made no question;
lamented the avaricious disposition of his father, who had destined him
for the arms of another, and vowed eternal fidelity with such an
appearance of candour and devotion—that I became a dupe to his deceit.
Cursed be the day on which I gave away my innocence and peace! Cursed
be my beauty that first attracted the attention of the seducer! Cursed
be my education, that, by refining my sentiments, made my heart the
more susceptible! Cursed be my good sense, that fixed me to one object,
and taught me the preference I enjoyed was but my due! Had I been ugly,
nobody would have tempted me; had I been ignorant, the charms of my
person would not have atoned for the coarseness of my conversation; had
I been giddy, my vanity would have divided my inclinations, and my
ideas would have been so diffused, that I should never have listened to
the enchantments of one alone.

‘But to return to my unfortunate story. After some months, the visits
of my lover became less frequent, and his behaviour less warm: I
perceived his coldness, my heart took the alarm, my tears reproached
him, and I insisted upon the performance of his promise to espouse me,
that, whatever should happen, my reputation might be safe. He seemed to
acquiesce in my proposal, and left me on pretence of finding a proper
clergyman to unite us in the bands of wedlock. But alas! the inconstant
had no intention to return. I waited a whole week with the utmost
impatience; sometimes doubting his honour, at other times inventing
excuses for him, and condemning myself for harbouring suspicions of his
faith. At length I understood from a gentleman who dined at our house,
that this perfidious wretch was on the point of setting out for London
with his bride, to buy clothes for their approaching nuptials. This
information distracted me! Rage took possession of my soul; I denounced
a thousand imprecations, and formed as many schemes of revenge against
the traitor who had undone me. Then my resentment would subside to
silent sorrow. I recalled the tranquillity I lost, I wept over my
infatuation, and sometimes a ray of hope would intervene, and for a
moment cheer my drooping heart; I would revolve all the favourable
circumstances of his character, repeat the vows he made, ascribe his
absence to the vigilance of a suspicious father who compelled him to a
match his soul abhorred, and comfort myself with the expectation of
seeing him before the thing should be brought to any terms of
agreement. But how vain was my imagination! That villain left me
without remorse, and in a few days the news of his marriage were spread
all over the country. My horror was then inconceivable; and had not the
desire of revenge diverted the resolution, I should infallibly have put
an end to my miserable life. My father observed the symptoms of my
despair: and though I have good reason to believe he guessed the cause,
was at a great deal of pains to seem ignorant of my affliction, while
he endeavoured with parental fondness to alleviate my distress. I saw
his concern, which increased my anguish, and raised my fury against the
author of my calamity to an implacable degree.

‘Having furnished myself with a little money, I made an elopement from
this unhappy parent in the night-time, and about break of day arrived
at a small town, from whence a stage coach set out for London, in which
I embarked, and next day alighted in town; the spirit of revenge having
supported me all the way against every other reflection, My first care
was to hire a lodging, in which I kept myself very retired, assumed a
feigned name, that my character and situation might be better
concealed. It was not long before I found out the house of my lover,
whither I immediately repaired in a transport of rage, determined to
act some desperate deed for the satisfaction of my despair, though the
hurry of my spirits would not permit me to concert or resolve upon a
particular plan. When I demanded admission to Lothario (so let me call
him), I was desired to send up my name and business; but this I
refused, telling the porter I had business for his master’s private
ear; upon which I was conducted into a parlour until he should be
informed of my request. There I remained about a quarter of an hour,
when a servant entered and told me his master was engaged with company,
and begged to be excused at that time. My temper could hold out no
longer. I pulled out a poniard from my bosom, where I had concealed it,
and rushing out flew up stairs like a fury, exclaiming, “Where’s this
perfidious villain? could I plunge this dagger into his false heart, I
should then die satisfied!” The noise I made alarmed not only the
servants, but the company also, who hearing my threats came forward to
the staircase to see was the matter. I was seized, disarmed, and
withheld by two footmen; and in this situation felt the most exquisite
torture in beholding my undoer approach with his young wife. I could
not endure the sight, was deprived of my senses, and fell into a severe
fit, during which I know not how I was treated; but when I recovered
the use of reflection, found myself on a bed in a paltry apartment,
where I was attended by an old woman, who asked a thousand impertinent
questions relating to my condition, and informed me that my behaviour
had thrown the whole family into confusion; that Lothario affirmed I
was mad, and proposed to have me sent to Bedlam; but my lady persuaded
herself there was more in my conduct than he cared should be known, and
had taken to her bed on bare suspicion, having first ordered that I
should be narrowly looked to. I heard all she said without making any
other reply than desiring she would do me the favour to call a chair;
but this she told me could not be done without her master’s consent,
which, however, was easily procured, and I was conveyed to my lodgings
in a state of mind that baffles all description. The agitation of my
thoughts produced a fever, which brought on a miscarriage; and I
believe it is well for my conscience that heaven thus disposed of my
burden; for let me own to you with penitence and horror, if I had
brought a living child into the world, my frenzy would have prompted me
to sacrifice the little innocent to my resentment of the father’s
infidelity.

‘After this event my rage abated, and my hate became more deliberate
and calm: when one day my landlady informed me that there was a
gentleman below who desired to see me, he having something of
consequence to impart, which he was sure would contribute to my peace
of mind. I was exceedingly alarmed at this declaration, which I
attempted to interpret a thousand ways; and before I came to any
determination he entered my room, with an apology for intruding without
my knowledge or consent. I surveyed him some time, and not being able
to recollect his face, demanded, with a faltering accent, what his
business was with me? Upon which he desired I would give him a
particular audience, and he did not doubt of communicating something
that would conduce to my satisfaction and repose. As I thought myself
sufficiently guarded against any violence, I granted his request, and
bade the woman withdraw. The stranger, then advancing, gave me to
understand that he was well acquainted with the particulars of my
story, having been informed of them from Lothario’s own mouth—that from
the time he knew my misfortunes he had entertained a detestation for
the author of them, which had of late been increased and inflamed to a
desire of revenge, by a piece of dishonourable conduct towards him—that
hearing of my melancholy situation, he had come with an intention of
offering his assistance and comfort, and was ready to espouse my
quarrel, and forthwith take vengeance on my seducer, provided I would
grant him one consideration, which, he hoped, I should see no reason to
refuse. Had all the artifice of hell been employed in composing a
persuasive, it could not have had a more instantaneous or favourable
effect than this discourse had upon me. I was transported with a
delirium of gloomy joy. The contract was made; he devoted himself to my
revenge, undertook to murder Lothario that very night, and to bring me
an account of his death before morning. Accordingly, about two of the
clock, he was introduced to my chamber, and assured me that my
perfidious lover was no more: that although he was not entitled to such
an honourable proceeding, he had fairly challenged him to the field,
where he upbraided him with his treachery towards me, for whom, he told
me, his sword was drawn, and after a few passes left him weltering in
his blood. I was so savaged by my wrongs, that I delighted in the
recital of this adventure, made him repeat the particulars and feasted
my eyes on the blood that remained on his clothes and sword. My
imagination was so engrossed by these ideas, that in my sleep I dreamed
Lothario appeared before me pale, mangled, and bloody, blamed my
rashness, protested his innocence, and pleaded his cause so
pathetically, that I was convinced of his fidelity, and waked in a fit
of horror and remorse. I dropped asleep again, and the same apparition
recurred to my fancy. In short, I passed the night in great misery, and
looked upon my avenger with such abhorrence, that in the morning,
perceiving my aversion, he insinuated there was still a possibility of
Lothario’s recovery: it was quite true he left him wounded on the
ground, but not quite dead, and perhaps his hurts might not be mortal.
At these words I started up, bade him fly for intelligence, and if he
could not bring me tidings of Lothario’s safety, at least consult his
own, and never return; for I was resolved to surrender myself to
justice, and declare all I knew of the affair, that, if possible I
might expiate my own guilt, by incurring the rigours of a sincere
repentance and ignominious death. He very coolly represented the
unreasonableness of my prejudice against him, who had done nothing but
what his love of me inspired, and honour justified: that now he had, at
the risk of his life, been subservient to my revenge, I was about to
discard him as an infamous agent, occasionally necessary; and that,
even if he should be so lucky as to bring news of Lothario’s safety, it
was probable my former resentment might revive, and I would upbraid him
with having failed in his undertaking. I assured him, that on the
contrary, he should be dearer to me than ever, as I then should be
convinced he acted more on the principles of a man of honour than on
those of a mercenary assassin, and scorned to take away the life of an
adversary, how inveterate soever, which fortune had put in his power.
“Well, then madam,” said he, “whatever may have happened, I shall find
it no difficult matter to acquit myself in point of honour;” and took
his leave in order to inquire into the consequences of his duel. I was
now more sensible than ever of the degrees of guilt and misery; all the
affliction I had suffered hitherto was owing to my own credulity and
weakness, and my conscience could only accuse me of venial crimes; but
now that I looked upon myself as a murderer, it is impossible to
express the terrors of my imagination, which was incessantly haunted by
the image of the deceased, and my bosom stung with the most exquisite
agonies, of which I saw no end. At length, Horatio (for so I shall call
my new friend) returned, and telling me I had nothing to fear,
delivered into my hands a billet containing these words.

“Madam,
    “As I understand it is of consequence to your peace, I take this
    liberty to inform you, that the wounds I received from Horatio are
    not mortal. This satisfaction my humanity could not deny, even to a
    person who has endeavoured to disturb the repose as well as the
    life of


“Lothario.”


‘Being well acquainted with this hand, I had no reason to suspect an
imposition in this letter, which I read over and over with a transport
of joy, and caressed Horatio so much that he appeared the happiest man
alive. Thus was I won from despair by the menaces of a greater
misfortune than that which depressed me. Griefs are like usurpers,—the
most powerful deposes all the rest. But my raptures were not lasting:
that very letter which in a manner re-established my tranquillity, in a
little time banished my peace. His unjust reproaches, while they waked
my resentment, recalled my former happiness, and filled my soul with
rage and sorrow. Horatio, perceiving the situation of my mind,
endeavoured to divert my chagrin, by treating me with all the
amusements and entertainments of the town. I was gratified with every
indulgence I could desire; introduced into the company of women in my
own situation, by whom an uncommon deference was paid to me; and I
began to lose all remembrance of my former condition, when an accident
brought it back to my view with all its interesting circumstances.
Diverting myself one day with some newspapers, which I had not before
perused, the following advertisement attracted my attention:

‘“Whereas a young gentlewoman disappeared from her father’s house in
the county of —, about the end of September, on account (as is
supposed) of some uneasiness of mind, and has not been as yet heard of.
Whoever will give any information about her to Mr. — of Gray’s Inn,
shall be handsomely rewarded; or if she will return to the arms of her
disconsolate parent, she will be received with the utmost tenderness,
whatever reason she may have to think otherwise, and may be the means
of prolonging the life of a father already weighed down almost to the
grave with age and sorrow.”

‘This pathetic remonstrance had such an effect on me, that I was fully
resolved to return, like the prodigal son, and implore the forgiveness
of him who gave me life; but, alas! Upon inquiry, I found he had paid
his debt to nature a month before, lamenting my absence to his last
hour, having left his fortune to a stranger, as a mark of his
resentment of my unkind and undutiful behaviour. Penetrated with
remorse on this occasion, I sank into the most profound melancholy, and
considered myself as the immediate cause of his death. I lost all
relish for company; and, indeed, most of my acquaintances no sooner
perceived my change of temper, than they abandoned me. Horatio,
disgusted at my insensibility, or from some other cause, became colder
and colder every day, till at last he left me altogether, without
making any apology for his conduct, or securing me against the miseries
of want, as a man of honour ought to have done, considering the share
he had in my ruin; for I afterwards learned, that the quarrel between
Lothario and him was a story trumped up to rid the one of my
importunities, and give the other a recommendation to me, which, it
seems, he desired, upon seeing me at the house of my seducer. Reduced
to this extremity, I cursed my own simplicity, uttered horrid
imprecations against the treachery of Horatio; and, as I became every
day more and more familiarised to the loss of innocence, resolved to be
revenged on the sex in general, by practising their own arts upon
themselves. Nor was an opportunity long wanting: an old gentlewoman,
under pretence of sympathising, visited me, and after having condoled
me on my misfortunes, and professed a disinterested friendship, began
to display the art of her occupation, in encomiums on my beauty, and
invectives against the wretch who had forsaken me; insinuating withal,
that it would be my own fault if I did not still make my fortune by the
extraordinary qualifications with which nature had endowed me. I soon
understood her drift, and gave her such encouragement to explain
herself, that we came to an agreement immediately to divide whatever
profits might accrue from such gallants as she should introduce to my
acquaintance. The first stroke of my dissimulation was practised upon a
certain judge, to whom I was recommended by this matron as an innocent
creature just arrived from the country.’




CHAPTER XXIII


Miss Williams interrupted by a bailiff, who carries her to the
Marshalsea—I accompany her—prove she is not the person named in the
writ—the bailiff is fain to discharge her—we shift our lodging—her
story, and my reflections thereupon—progress of a common woman of the
town—resolves to quit that way of life


Her story was here interrupted by a rap at the door, which I no sooner
opened, than three or four terrible fellows rushed in, one of whom
accosted my fellow-lodger thus: “Madam, your servant—you must do me the
favour to come along with me, I have a writ against you.” While the
bailiff (for so he was) spoke thus, his followers surrounded the
prisoner, and began to handle her very roughly. This treatment incensed
me so much, that I snatched up the poker and would certainly have used
it in defence of the lady, without any regard to the strength and
number of her adversaries, had she not begged me, with a composure of
countenance for which I could not account, to use no violence on her
behalf, which could be of no service to her, but might be very
detrimental to myself. Then turning to the leader of this formidable
troop, she desired to see the writ, and having perused it, said with a
faltering voice, “I am not the person whose name is here mentioned,
arrest me at your peril.” “Ay, ay, madam,” replied the catchpole. “We
shall prove your identity. In the meantime, whither will you be pleased
to be carried, to my house, or to jail?” “If I must be confined,” said
she, “I would rather be in your house than in a common jail.” “Well,
well,” answered he, “if you have money enough in your pocket, you shall
be entertained like a princess.” But when she acquainted him with her
poverty, he swore he never gave credit, and ordered one of his
myrmidons to call a coach, to carry her to the Marshalsea at once.
While they waited for the convenience, she took me aside, and bade me
be under no concern on her account, for she knew how to extricate
herself from this difficulty very soon, and perhaps gain something by
the occasion. Although her discourse was a mystery to me, I was very
well pleased with her assurance; and when the coach came to the door, I
offered to accompany her to prison, to which proposal, after much
entreaty, she consented.

When we arrived at the gate of the Marshalsea, our conductor alighted,
and having demanded entrance, presented the writ to the turnkey, who no
sooner perceived the name of Elizabeth Cary than he cried, “Ah, ah: my
old acquaintance Bet! I’m glad to see thee with all my heart.” So
saying, he opened the coach door, and helped her to dismount; but when
he observed her face, he started back, saying, “Who have we got here?”
The bailiff, alarmed at this interrogation, cried with some emotion,
“Who should it be but the prisoner, Elizabeth Cary?” The turnkey
replied, “That Elizabeth Cary! I’ll be hanged if that’s Elizabeth Cary
more than my grandmother.” Here the lady thought fit to interpose, and
tell the catchpole, if he had taken her word for it at first, he might
have saved himself and her a great deal of trouble. “It may be so,”
answered he, “but I’ll have further evidence that you are not the
person, before you and I part.” “Yes, yes,” said she, “you shall have
further evidence, to your cost.” Then we adjourned into the lodge, and
called for a bottle of wine, where my companion wrote a direction to
two of her acquaintance, and begged the favour of me to go to their
lodgings, and request them to come to her immediately. I found them
together at a house in Brydges Street, Drury Lane, and as they were
luckily unengaged, they set out with me in a hackney-coach without
hesitation, after I had related the circumstances of the affair, which
flattered them with the hopes of seeing a bailiff trounced; for there
is an antipathy as natural between women of that class and bailiffs, as
that subsisting between mice and cats. Accordingly, when they entered
the lodge, they embraced the prisoner very affectionately by the name
of Nancy Williams, and asked how long she had been nabbed, and for
what? On hearing the particulars of her adventure repeated, they
offered to swear before a justice of peace that she was not the person
mentioned in the writ, whom, it seems, they all knew; but the bailiff,
who was by the time convinced of his mistake, told them he would not
put them to that trouble. “Ladies,” said he, “there’s no harm done—you
shall give me leave to treat you with another bottle, and then we’ll
part friends.” This proposal was not at all relished by the sisterhood:
and Miss Williams told him, sure he did not imagine her such a fool as
to be satisfied with a paltry glass of sour wine? Here the turnkey
interrupted her by affirming with an oath, that the wine was as good as
ever was tipped over tongue. “Well,” continued she, “that may be, but
were it the best of champagne, it is no recompense for the damage I
have suffered both in character and health, by being wrongfully dragged
to jail; at this rate, no innocent person is safe, since an officer of
justice, out of malice, private pique, or mistake, may injure and
oppress the subject with impunity; but, thank heaven, I live under the
protection of laws that will not suffer such insults to pass
unpunished, and I know very well how to procure redress.” Mr. Vulture,
for that was the bailiff’s name, finding he had to deal with one who
would not be imposed upon, began to look very sullen and perplexed,
and, leaning his forehead on his hand, entered into a deliberation with
himself, which lasted a few minutes, and then broke out in a volley of
dreadful curses against the old jade our landlady, as he called her,
for having misinformed him. After much wrangling and swearing, the
matter was referred to the decision of the turnkey, who calling for the
other bottle, mulcted the bailiff in all the liquor that had been
drunk, coach hire, and a couple of guineas for the use of the
plaintiff. The money was immediately deposited; Miss Williams gratified
the two evidences with one half, and putting the other in her pocket
drove home with me, leaving the catchpole grumbling over his loss, yet
pleased in the main, for having so cheaply got clear of a business that
might have cost him ten times the sum, and his place to boot. This
guinea was a very seasonable relief to us, who were reduced to great
necessity, six of my shirts, and almost all my clothes, except those on
my back, having been either pawned or sold for our maintenance before
this happened. As we resented the behaviour of our landlady, our first
care was to provide ourselves with another lodging, whither we removed
next day, with an intention to keep ourselves as retired as possible,
until our cure should be completed. When we were fixed in our new
habitation, I entreated her to finish the story of her life, which she
pursued in this manner:—

‘The success of our experiment on the judge encouraged us to practice
the same deceit on others; but this harvest lasted not long, my
character taking air, and my directress deserting me for some new game.
Then I took lodgings near Charing-Cross, at two guineas a week, and
began to entertain company in a public manner; but my income being too
small to defray my expenses, I was obliged to retrench, and enter into
articles with the porters of certain taverns, who undertook to find
employment enough for me, provided I would share my profits with them.
Accordingly, I was almost every night engaged with company, among whom
I was exposed to every mortification, danger, and abuse, that flow from
drunkenness and brutality. As my spirit was not sufficiently humbled to
the will, nor my temper calculated for the conversation of my gallants,
it was impossible for me to overcome an aversion I felt for my
profession, which manifested itself in a settled gloom on my
countenance, and disgusted those sons of mirth and riot so much, that I
was frequently used in a shocking manner, and kicked down stairs with
disgrace. The messengers, seeing me disagreeable to their benefactors
and employers, seldom troubled me with a call, and I began to find
myself almost totally neglected.

‘To contribute towards my support I was fain to sell my watch, rings,
trinkets, with the best part of my clothes; and I was one evening
musing by myself on misery before me when I received a message from a
tavern, whither I repaired in a chair, and was introduced to a
gentleman dressed like an officer, with whom I supped in a sumptuous
manner. In the morning, when I awoke, I found my gallant had got up,
and, drawing aside the curtain, could not perceive him in the room. I
waited a full hour for his return, and then in the greatest perplexity,
rose up and rang the bell. When the waiter came to the door, he found
it locked, and desired admittance, which I granted, after observing,
with great surprise, that the key remained on the inside, as when we
went to bed. I no sooner inquired for the captain, than the fellow,
staring with a distracted look, cried, “How, madam, is he not abed?”
And when he was satisfied as to that particular, ran into a closet
adjoining to the chamber, the window of which he found open. Through
this the adventurer had got upon a wall, front whence he dropped down
into a court and escaped, leaving me to be answerable not only for the
reckoning, but also for a large silver tankard and posset-bowl, which
he had carried off with him.

‘It is impossible to describe the consternation I was under, when I saw
myself detained as a thief’s accomplice; for I was looked upon in that
light, and carried before a justice, who mistaking my confusion for a
sign of guilt committed me, after a short examination, to Bridewell,
having admonished me, as the only means to save my life, to turn
evidence, and impeach my confederate. I now concluded the vengeance of
Heaven had overtaken me, and that I must soon finish my career by an
ignominious death. This reflection sank so deep into my soul, that I
was for some days deprived of my reason, and actually believed myself
in hell, tormented by fiends. Indeed, there needs not a very
extravagant imagination to form that idea: for of all the scenes on
earth that of Bridewell approaches nearest the notion I had always
entertained of the regions. Here I saw nothing but rage, anguish and
impiety, and heard nothing but groans, curses, and blasphemy. In the
midst of this hellish crew, I was subjected to the tyranny of a
barbarian, who imposed upon me tasks that I could not possibly perform,
and then punished my incapacity with the utmost rigour and inhumanity.
I was often whipped into a swoon, and lashed out of it (during which
miserable interval, I was robbed by my fellow-prisoners of everything
about me, even to my cap, shoes, and stockings): I was not only
destitute of necessaries, but even of food, so that my wretchedness was
extreme. Not one of my acquaintance to whom I imparted my situation,
would grant me the least succour or regard, on pretence of my being
committed for theft, and my landlord refused to part with some of my
own clothes which I sent for, because I was indebted to him for a
week’s lodging.

‘Overwhelmed with calamity, I grew desperate, and resolved to put an
end to my grievances and life together: for this purpose I got up in
the middle of the night, when I thought everybody around me asleep, and
fixing one end of a large hook in the ceiling, that supported the
scales on which the hemp is weighed, I stood upon a chair, and making a
noose on the other end, put my neck into it, with an intention to hang
myself; but before I could adjust the knot I was surprised and
prevented by two women, who had been awake all the while and suspected
my design. In the morning, my attempt was published among the prisoners
and punished with thirty stripes, the pain of which, co-operating with
my disappointment and disgrace, bereft me of my senses, and threw me
into an ecstacy of madness, during which I tore the flesh from my bones
with my teeth, and dashed my head against the pavement; so that they
were obliged to set a watch over me, to restrain me from doing further
mischief to myself and others. This fit of frenzy continued three days,
at the end of which I grew calm and sullen: but as the desire of making
away with myself still remained, I came to a determination of starving
myself to death, and with that view refused all sustenance.

‘Whether it was owing to the want of opposition, or to the weakness of
nature, I know not; but on the second day of my fast, I found my
resolution considerably impaired, and the calls of hunger almost
insupportable. At this critical conjuncture a lady was brought into the
prison, with whom I had contracted an acquaintance while I lived with
Horatio; she was then on the same footing as I was, but afterwards
quarrelling with her gallant, and not finding another to her mind,
altered her scheme of life, and set up a coffee-house among the
hundreds in Drury, where she entertained gentlemen with claret, arrack,
and the choice of half-a-dozen damsels who lived in her house. This
serviceable matron having neglected to gratify a certain justice for
the connivance she enjoyed, was indicted at the quarter sessions, in
consequence of which her bevy was dispersed, and herself committed to
Bridewell. She had not been long there before she learned my disaster,
and coming up to me, after a compliment of condolence, inquired into
the particulars of my fate. While we were engaged in discourse
together, the master came and told me, that the fellow on whose account
I had suffered was taken, that he had confessed the theft, and cleared
me of any concern in the affair; for which reason he, the master, had
orders to discharge me, and that I was from that moment free.

‘This piece of news soon banished all thoughts of death, and had such
an instantaneous effect on my countenance, that Mrs. Coupler (the lady
then present), hoping to find her account in me, very generously
offered to furnish me with what necessaries I wanted, and take me into
her own house as soon as she could compromise matters with the
justices. The conditions of her offer were, that I should pay three
guineas weekly for my board, and a reasonable consideration besides,
for the use of such clothes and ornaments as she should supply me with,
to be deducted from the first profits of my occupation. These were hard
terms, but not to be rejected by one who was turned out helpless and
naked into the wide world, without a friend to pity or assist her. I
therefore embraced her proposal, and she being bailed in a few hours,
took me home with her in a coach. As I was by this time conscious of
having formerly disgusted my admirers by my reserved loud haughty
behaviour, I now endeavoured to conquer that disposition, and the
sudden change of my fortune giving me a flow of spirits, I appeared in
the most winning and gay manner I could assume. Having the advantage of
a good voice and education, I exerted my talents to the uttermost, and
soon became the favourite with all company. This success alarmed the
pride and jealousy of Mrs. Coupler, who could not bear the thoughts of
being eclipsed: she therefore made a merit of her envy, and whispered
among the customers that I was unsound. There needed no more to ruin my
reputation and blast my prosperity; everybody shunned me with marks of
aversion and disdain, and in a very short time I was as solitary as
ever. Want of gallants was attended with want of money to satisfy my
malicious landlady, who having purposely given me credit to the amount
of eleven pounds, took out a writ against me and I was arrested in her
own house. Though the room was crowded with people when the bailiff
entered, not one of them had compassion enough to mollify my
prosecutrix, far less to pay the debt; they even laughed at my tears,
and one of them bade me be of good cheer, for I should not want
admirers in Newgate.

‘At this instant a sea-lieutenant came in, and seeing my plight, began
to inquire into the circumstances of my misfortune. “Harkee, my girl,”
he inquired “how far have you overrun the constable?” I told him that
the debt amounted to eleven pounds, besides the expenses of the writ.
“An that be all,” said he, “you shan’t go to the bilboes this bout.”
And taking out his purse, he paid the money, discharged the bailiff,
and telling me I had got into the wrong port, advised me to seek out a
more convenient harbour, where I could be safely hove down; for which
purpose he made me a present of five guineas more. I was so touched
with this singular piece of generosity, that for some time I had not
power to thank him. However, as soon as I recollected myself, I begged
the favour of him to go with me to the next tavern, where I explained
the nature of my disaster, and convinced him of the falsehood of what
was reported to my prejudice so effectually, that he from that moment
attached himself to me, and we lived in great harmony together, until
he was obliged to go to sea, where he perished in a storm.

‘Having lost my benefactor, and almost consumed the remains of his
bounty, I saw myself in danger of relapsing into my former necessity,
and began to be very uneasy at the prospect of bailiffs and jails! when
one of the sisterhood advised me to take lodgings in a part of the town
where I was unknown, and pass for an heiress, by which artifice I might
entrap somebody to be my husband, who would possibly be able to allow
me a handsome maintenance, or at worst screen me from the dread and
danger of a prison, by becoming liable for whatever debts I should
contract. I approved of this scheme, towards the execution of which my
companion clubbed her wardrobe, and undertook to live with me in
quality of my maid, with the proviso that she should be reimbursed and
handsomely considered out of the profits of my success. She was
immediately detached to look out for a convenient place, and that very
day hired a genteel apartment in Park Street, whither I moved in a
couch loaded with her baggage, and my own. I made my first appearance
in a blue riding habit trimmed with silver; and my maid acted her part
so artfully, that in a day or two my fame spread all over the
neighbourhood, and I was said to be a rich heiress just arrived from
the country. This report brought a swarm of gay young fellows about me;
but I soon found them to be all indigent adventurers like myself, who
crowded to me like crows to a carrion, with a view of preying upon my
fortune. I maintained, however, the appearance of wealth as long as
possible, in hopes of gaining some admirer more for my purpose, and at
length attracted the regard of one who would have satisfied my wishes,
and managed matters so well, that a day was actually fixed for our
nuptials. In the interim, he begged leave to introduce an intimate
friend to me, which request, as I could not refuse, I had the extreme
mortification and surprise to see, next night, in that friend, my old
keeper Horatio, who no sooner beheld me than he changed colour, but had
presence of mind to advance and salute me, bidding me (with a low
voice) be under no apprehension, for he would not expose me. In spite
of his assurance, I could not recover myself so far as to entertain
them, but withdrew to my chamber on pretence of a severe headache, to
the no small concern of my adorer, who took his leave in the tenderest
manner, and went off with his friend.

‘Having imparted my situation to my companion, she found it high time
for us to decamp, and that without any noise, because we were not only
indebted to our landlady, but also to several tradesmen in the
neighbourhood. Our retreat, therefore, was concerted and executed in
this manner: Having packed up all our clothes and moveables in small
parcels, she (on pretence of fetching cordials for me) carried them at
several times to the house of an acquaintance, where she likewise
procured a lodging, to which we retired in the middle of the night,
when every other body in the house was asleep. I was now obliged to aim
at lower game, and accordingly spread my nets among tradespeople, but
found them all too phlegmatic or cautious for my art and attractions,
till at last I became acquainted with you, on whom I practised all my
dexterity; not that I believed you had any fortune, or expectation of
me, but that I might transfer the burden of such debts as I had
incurred, or should contract, from myself to another, and at the same
time avenge myself of your sex, by rendering miserable one who bore
such resemblance to the wretch who ruined me; but Heaven preserved you
from my snares by the discovery you made, which was owing to the
negligence of my maid in leaving the chamber-door unlocked when she
went to buy sugar for breakfast. When I found myself detected and
forsaken by you, I was fain to move my lodging, and dwell two pair of
stairs higher than before. My companion, being disappointed in her
expectations, left me, and I had no other resource than to venture
forth, like the owls in the dark, to pick up a precarious and
uncomfortable subsistence. I have often sauntered between Ludgate Hill
and Charing Cross a whole winter night, exposed not only to the
inclemency of the weather, but likewise to the rage of hunger and
thirst, without being so happy as to meet with one dupe, then creep up
to my garret, in a deplorable draggled condition, sneak to bed, and try
to bury my appetite and sorrows in sleep. When I lighted on some rake
or tradesman reeling home drunk, I frequently suffered the most brutal
treatment, in spite of which I was obliged to affect gaiety and good
humour, though my soul was stung with resentment and disdain, and my
heart loaded with grief and affliction. In the course of these
nocturnal adventures, I was infected with the disease, that in a short
time rendered me the object of my own abhorrence, and drove me to the
retreat where your benevolence rescued me from the jaws of death.’

So much candour and good sense appeared in this lady’s narration, that
I made no scruple of believing every syllable of what she said, and
expressed my astonishment at the variety of miseries she had undergone
in so little time, for all her misfortunes had happened within the
compass of two years; I compared her situation with my own, and found
it a thousand times more wretched. I had endured hardships, ’tis
true—my whole life had been a series of such; and when I looked
forward, the prospect was not much bettered, but then they were become
habitual to me, and consequently I could bear them with less
difficulty. If one scheme of life should not succeed, I could have
recourse to another, and so to a third, veering about to a thousand
different shifts, according to the emergencies of my fate, without
forfeiting the dignity of my character beyond a power of retrieving it,
or subjecting myself wholly to the caprice and barbarity of the world.
On the other hand, she had known and relished the sweets of prosperity,
she had been brought up under the wings of an indulgent parent, in all
the delicacies to which her sex and rank entitled her; and without any
extravagance of hope, entertained herself with the view of
uninterrupted happiness through the whole scene of life. How fatal
then, how tormenting, how intolerable, must her reverse of fortune
be!—a reverse, that not only robs her of these external comforts, and
plunges her into all the miseries of want, but also murders her peace
of mind, and entails upon her the curse of eternal infamy! Of all
professions I pronounced that of a courtesan the most deplorable, and
her of all courtesans the most unhappy. She allowed my observation to
be just in the main, but at the same time affirmed that notwithstanding
the disgraces which had fallen to her share, she had not been so
unlucky in the condition of a prostitute as many others of the same
community. “I have often seen,” said she, “while I strolled about the
streets at midnight, a number of naked wretches reduced to rags and
filth, huddled together like swine, in the corner of a dark alley, some
of whom, but eighteen months before, I had known the favourites of the
town, rolling in affluence, and glittering in all the pomp of equipage
and dress. Miserable wretch that I am! perhaps the same horrors are
decreed for me!” “No!” cried she, after some pause, “I shall never live
to such extremity of distress; my own hand shall open a way for my
deliverance, before I arrive at that forlorn period!” Her condition
filled me with sympathy and compassion: I revered her qualifications,
looked upon her as unfortunate, not criminal, and attended her with
such care and success, that in less than two months her health, as well
as my own, was perfectly re-established. As we often conferred upon our
mutual affairs, and interchanged advice, a thousand different projects
were formed, which, upon further canvassing, appeared impracticable. We
would have gladly gone to service, but who would take us in without
recommendation? At length an expedient occurred to her, of which she
intended to lay hold; and this was, to procure with the first money she
should earn, the homely garb of a country wench, go to some village at
a good distance from town, and come up in a waggon, as a fresh girl for
service: by which means she might be provided for, in a manner much
more suitable to her inclination than her present way of life.




CHAPTER XXIV


I am reduced to a great misery—assaulted on Tower Hill by a press-gang,
who put me on board a tender—my usage there—my arrival on board at a
man-of-war, where I am put in irons, and released by the good offices
of Mr. Thompson, who recommends me as assistant to the surgeon—-he
relates his own story—characters of the captain, surgeon, and first
mate


I applauded the resolution of Miss Williams, who a few days after, was
hired in quality of bar-keeper, by one of the ladies who had witnessed
in her behalf at the Marshalsea, and who since that time had got credit
with a wine merchant, whose favourite she was, to set up a convenient
house of her own. Thither my fellow-lodger repaired, after having taken
leave of me with a torrent of tears, and a thousand protestations of
eternal gratitude; assuring me she would remain in this situation no
longer than she could pick up money sufficient to put her other design
in execution.

As for my own part, I saw no resource but the army or navy, between
which I hesitated so long that I found myself reduced to a starving
condition. My spirit began to accommodate itself to my beggarly fate,
and I became so mean as to go down towards Wapping, with an intention
to inquire for an old schoolfellow, who, I understood, had got the
command of a small coasting vessel then in the river, and implore his
assistance. But my destiny prevented this abject piece of behaviour;
for as I crossed Tower Wharf, a squat tawny fellow with a hanger by his
side, and a cudgel in his hand came up to me, calling, “Yo ho! brother,
you must come along with me.” As I did not like his appearance, instead
of answering his salutation, I quickened my pace, in hope of ridding
myself of his company; upon which he whistled aloud, and immediately
another sailor appeared before me, who laid hold of me by the collar,
and began to drag me along. Not being in a humour to relish such
treatment, I disengaged myself of the assailant, and, with one blow of
my cudgel, laid him motionless on the ground; and perceiving myself
surrounded in a trice by ten or a dozen more, exerted myself with such
dexterity and success, that some of my opponents were fain to attack me
with drawn cutlasses; and after an obstinate engagement, in which I
received a large wound on my head, and another on my left cheek, I was
disarmed, taken prisoner, and carried on board a pressing tender,
where, after being pinioned like a malefactor, I was thrust down into
the hold among a parcel of miserable wretches, the sight of whom well
nigh distracted me. As the commanding officer had not humanity enough
to order my wounds to be dressed, and I could not use my own hands, I
desired one of my fellow captives who was unfettered, to take a
handkerchief out of my pocket, and tie it round my head, to stop the
bleeding. He pulled out my handkerchief, ’tis true, but instead of
applying it to the use for which I designed it, went to the grating of
the hatchway, and, with astonishing composure, sold it before my face
to a bumboat woman (1) then on board, for a quart of gin, with which he
treated his companions, regardless of my circumstances and entreaties.

(1) A Bumboat woman is one who sells bread, cheese, greens, liquor, and
fresh potatoes to the sailors, in a small boat that lies alongside the
ship


I complained bitterly of this robbery to the midshipman on deck,
telling him at the same time, that unless my hurts were dressed, I
should bleed to death. But compassion was a weakness of which no man
could justly accuse this person, who, squirting a mouthful of dissolved
tobacco upon me through the gratings, told me “I was a mutinous dog,
and that I might die for anything he cared!” Finding there was no other
remedy, I appealed to patience, and laid up this usage in my memory, to
be called at a more fitting opportunity. In the meantime, loss of
blood, vexation, and want of food, contributed, with the noisome stench
of the place, to throw me into a swoon, out of which I was recovered by
a tweak of the nose, administered by the tar who stood sentinel over
us, who at the same time regaled me with a draught of flip, and
comforted me with the hopes of being put on board of the Thunder next
day, where I should be freed of my handcuffs, and cured of my wounds by
the doctor. I no sooner heard him name the Thunder, than I asked if he
had belonged to that ship long; and be giving me to understand he had
belonged to her five years, I inquired if he knew Lieutenant Bowling?
“Know Lieutenant Bowling!” said he, “Odds my life! and that I do; and a
good seaman he is as ever stepped upon forecastle, and a brave fellow
as ever cracked biscuit—none of your Guinea pigs, nor your fresh water,
wish-washy, fair-weather fowls. Many a taut gale of wind have honest
Tom Bowling and I weathered together. Here’s his health, with all my
heart: wherever he is, a-loft, or a-low, the lieutenant needs not be
ashamed to show himself.” I was so much affected with this eulogium,
that I could not refrain from telling him that I was Lieutenant
Bowling’s kinsman; in consequence of which connection, he expressed his
inclination to serve me, and when he was relieved, brought some cold
boiled beef in a platter, and biscuit, on which we supped plentifully,
and afterwards drank another can of flip together. While we were thus
engaged, he recounted a great many exploits of my uncle, who, I found,
was very much beloved by the ship’s company, and pitied for the
misfortune that had happened to him in Hispaniola, which I was very
glad to be informed was not so great as I imagined; for Captain Oakum
had recovered of his wounds, and actually at that time commanded the
ship. Having by accident, in my pocket, my uncle’s letter, written from
Port Louis, I gave it my benefactor (whose name was Jack Rattlin) for
his perusal; but honest Jack told me frankly he could not read, and
desired to know the contents, which I immediately communicated. When he
heard that part of it in which he says he had written to his landlord
in Deal, he cried, “Body o’ me! that was old Ben Block; he was dead
before the letter came to hand. Ey, ey, had Ben been alive, Lieutenant
Bowling would have had no occasion to skulk so long. Honest Ben was the
first man that taught him to hand, reef, and steer. Well, well, we must
all die, that’s certain—we must all come to port sooner or later, at
sea or on shore—we must be fast moored one day: death’s like the best
bower anchor, as the saying is—it will bring us all up.” I could not
but signify my approbation of the justness of Jack’s reflections, and
inquired into the occasion of the quarrel between Captain Oakum and my
uncle, which he explained in this manner: “Captain Oakum, to be sure,
is a good man enough—besides, he’s my commander; but what’s that to me?
I do my duty, and value no man’s anger of a rope’s end. Now the report
goes, as how he’s a lord, or baron knight’s brother, whereby (d’ye see
me,) he carries a straight arm, and keeps aloof from his officers,
though mayhap they may be as good men in the main as he. Now we lying
at anchor in Tuberon Bay, Lieutenant Bowling had the middle watch, and
as he always kept a good look out, he made (d’ye see) three lights in
the offing, whereby he ran down to the great cabin for orders, and
found the captain asleep; whereupon he waked him, which put him in a
main high passion, and he swore woundily at the lieutenant, and called
him lousy Scotch son of a whore (for, I being then sentinel in the
steerage, heard all), and swab, and lubber, whereby the lieutenant
returned the salute, and they jawed together fore and aft a good spell,
till at last the captain turned out, and, laying hold of a rattan, came
athwart Mr. Bowling’s quarter: whereby he told the captain that, if he
was not his commander, he would heave him overboard, and demanded
satisfaction ashore; whereby in the morning watch, the captain went
ashore in the pinnace, and afterwards the lieutenant carried the cutter
ashore, and so they, leaving the boats’ crews on their oars, went away
together; and so (d’ye see) in less than a quarter of an hour we heard
firing, whereby we made for the place, and found the captain lying
wounded on the beach, and so brought him on board to the doctor, who
cured him in less than six weeks. But the lieutenant clapped on all the
sail he could bear, and had got far enough ahead before we knew
anything of the matter; so that we could never after get sight of him,
for which we were not sorry, because the captain was mainly wrath, and
would certainly have done him a mischief; for he afterwards caused him
to be run on the ship’s books, whereby he lost all his pay, and, if he
should be taken, would be tried as a deserter.”

This account of the captain’s behaviour gave me no advantageous idea of
his character; and I could not help lamenting my own fate, that had
subjected me to such a commander. However, making a virtue of
necessity, I put a good face on the matter, and next day, was, with the
other pressed men, put on board of the “Thunder,” lying at the Nore.
When we came alongside, the mate, who guarded us thither, ordered my
handcuffs to be taken off, that I might get on board the easier; this
circumstance being perceived by some of the company who stood upon the
gangboard to see us enter, one of them called to Jack Rattlin, who was
busied in doing this friendly office for me, “Hey, Jack, what Newgate
galley have you boarded in the river as you came along? Have we not
thieves enow among us already?” Another, observing my wounds, which
remained exposed to the air, told me, my seams were uncaulked, and that
I must be new payed. A third, seeing my hair clotted together with
blood, as it were into distinct cords, took notice, that my bows were
mended with the red ropes, instead of my side. A fourth asked me, if I
could not keep my yards square without iron braces? And, in short, a
thousand witticisms of the same nature were passed upon me before I
could get up the ship’s side.

After we had been all entered upon the ship’s books, I inquired of one
of my shipmates where the surgeon was, that I might have my wounds
dressed, and had actually got as far as the middle deck (for our ship
carried eighty guns), in my way to the cockpit, when I was met by the
same midshipman who had used me so barbarously in the tender: he,
seeing me free from my chains, asked, with an insolent air, who had
released me? To this question, I foolishly answered, with a countenance
that too plainly declared the state of my thoughts, “Whoever did it, I
am persuaded did not consult you in the affair.” I had no sooner
uttered these words, than he cried, “Damn you, you saucy son of a
hitch, I’ll teach you to talk so to your officer.” So saying, he
bestowed on me several severe stripes with a supple jack he had in his
hand: and, going to the commanding officer, made such a report of me,
that I was immediately put in irons by the master-at-arms, and a
sentinel placed over me. Honest Rattlin, as soon as he heard of my
condition, came to me, and administered all the consolation he could,
and then went to the surgeon in my behalf, who sent one of his mates to
dress my wounds. This mate was no other than my old friend Thompson,
with whom I became acquainted at the Navy Office, as before mentioned.
If I knew him at first sight, it was not easy for him to recognise me,
disfigured with blood and dirt, and altered by the misery I had
undergone. Unknown as I was to him, he surveyed me with looks of
compassion, and handled my sores with great tenderness. When he had
applied what he thought proper, and was about to leave me, I asked him
if my misfortunes had disguised me so much that he could not recollect
my face? Upon this address he observed me with great earnestness for
some time, and at length protested he could not recollect one feature
of my countenance. To keep him no longer in suspense, I told him my
name, which when he heard, he embraced me with affection, and professed
his sorrow at seeing me in such a disagreeable situation. I made him
acquainted with my story, and, when he heard how inhumanly I had been
used in the tender, he left me abruptly, assuring me I should see him
again soon. I had scarce time to wonder at his sudden departure, when
the master-at-arms came to the place of my confinement, and bade me
follow him to the quarter-deck, where I was examined by the first
lieutenant, who commanded the ship in the absence of the captain,
touching the treatment I had received in the tender from my friend the
midshipman, who was present to confront me.

I recounted the particulars of his behaviour to me, not only in the
tender, but since my being on board the ship, part of which being
proved by the evidence of Jack Rattlin and others, who had no great
devotion for my oppressor, I was discharged from confinement, to make
way for him, who was delivered to the master-at-arms to take his turn
in the bilboes. And this was not the only satisfaction I enjoyed, for I
was, at the request of the surgeon, exempted from all other duty than
that of assisting his mates, in making and administering medicines to
the sick. This good office I owed to the friendship of Mr. Thompson,
who had represented me in such a favourable light to the surgeon, that
he demanded me of the lieutenant to supply the place of his third mate,
who was lately dead. When I had obtained this favour, my friend
Thompson carried me down to the cockpit, which is the place allotted
for the habitation of the surgeon’s mates; and when he had shown me
their berth (as he called it), I was filled with astonishment and
horror, We descended by divers ladders to a space as dark as a dungeon,
which, I understood, was immersed several feet under water, being
immediately above the hold. I had no sooner approached this dismal
gulph, than my nose was saluted with an intolerable stench of putrified
cheese and rancid butter, that issued from an apartment at the foot of
the ladder, resembling a chandler’s shop, where, by the faint
glimmering of a candle, I could perceive a man with a pale, meagre
countenance, sitting behind a kind of desk, having spectacles on his
nose, and a pen in his hand. This (I learned of Mr. Thompson) was the
ship’s steward, who sat there to distribute provision to the several
messes, and to mark what each received. He therefore presented my name
to him, and desired I might be entered in his mess; then, taking a
light in his hand, conducted me to the place of his residence, which
was a square of about six feet, surrounded with the medicine-chest,
that of the first mate, his own, and a board by way of table fastened
to the after powder room; it was also inclosed with canvas nailed round
to the beams of the ship, to screen us from the cold, as well as from
the view of the midshipmen and quartermaster, who lodged within the
cable-tiers on each side of us. In this gloomy mansion he entertained
me with some cold suit pork, which he brought from a sort of locker,
fixed above the table: and calling for the boy of the mess, sent for a
can of beer, of which he made excellent flip to crown the banquet.

By this time I began to recover my spirits, which had been exceedingly
depressed with the appearance of everything about me, and could no
longer refrain from asking the particulars of Mr. Thompson’s fortune
since I had seen him in London. He told me, that being disappointed in
his expectations of borrowing money to gratify the rapacious s—t—ry at
the Navy Office, he found himself utterly unable to subsist any longer
in town, and had actually offered his service, in quality of mate, to
the surgeon of a merchant ship, bound to Guinea on the slaving trade;
when, one morning, a young fellow, of whom he had some acquaintance,
came to his lodgings, and informed him that he had seen a warrant made
out in his name at the Navy Office, for surgeon’s second mate of a
third-rate. This unexpected piece of good news he could scarcely
believe to be true, more especially as he had been found qualified at
Surgeons’ Hall for third mate only; but that he might not be wanting to
himself, he went thither to be assured, and actually found it so:
whereupon, demanding his warrant, it was delivered to him, and the
oaths administered immediately. That very afternoon he went to
Gravesend in the tilt-boat, from whence he took place in the tide-coach
for Rochester; next morning got on board the “Thunder,” for which he
was appointed, then lying in the harbour at Chatham; and the same day
was mustered by the clerk of the checque. And well it was for him that
such expedition was used; for, in less than twelve hours after his
arrival, another William Thompson came on board, affirming that he was
the person for whom the warrant was expedited, and that the other was
an impostor.

My friend was grievously alarmed at this accident, the more so, as his
namesake had very much the advantage over him both in assurance and
dress. However, to acquit himself of the suspicion of imposture, he
produced several letters written from Scotland to him in that name,
and, recollecting that his indentures were in a box on board, he
brought them up, and convinced all present that he had not assumed a
name which did not belong to him. His competitor, enraged that they
should hesitate in doing him justice (for to be sure the warrant had
been designed for him), behaved with so much indecent heat, that the
commanding officer (who was the same gentleman I had seen) and the
surgeon were offended at his presumption, and making a point of it with
their friends in town, in less than a week got the first confirmed in
his station. “I have been on board,” said he, “ever since; and, as this
way of life is becoming familiar to me, have no cause to complain of my
situation. The surgeon is a good-natured, indolent man; the first mate
(who is now on shore on duty) is indeed a little proud and choleric, as
all Welshmen are, but in the main a friendly honest fellow. The
lieutenants I have no concern with; and, as for the captain, he is too
much of a gentleman to know a surgeon’s mate, even by sight.”




CHAPTER XXV


The behaviour of Mr. Morgan—his pride, displeasure, and generosity—the
economy of our mess described—Thomson’s further friendship—the nature
of my duty explained—the situation of the sick


While he was thus discoursing to me, we heard a voice on the cockpit
ladder pronounce with great vehemence, in a strange dialect, “The devil
and his dam blow me from the top of Monchdenny, if I go to him before
there is something in my pelly. Let his nose be as yellow as saffron,
or as plue as a pell (look you), or as green as a leek, ’tis all one.”
To this declaration somebody answered, “So it seems my poor messmate
must part his cable for want of a little assistance. His foretopsail is
loose already; and besides the doctor ordered you to overhaul him; but
I see you don’t mind what your master says.” Here he was interrupted
with, “Splutter and cons! you lousy tog, who do you call my master? Get
you gone to the doctor, and tell him my birth, and education, and my
abilities; and moreover, my behaviour is as good as his, or any
shentleman’s (no disparagement to him,) in the whole world. Cot pless
my soul I does he think, or conceive, or imagine, that I am a horse, or
an ass, or a goat, to trudge backwards and forwards, and upwards and
downwards, and by sea and by land; at his will and pleasure? Go your
ways, you rapscallion, and tell Doctor Atkins that I desire and request
that he will give a look upon the tying man, and order something for
him, if he be dead or alive, and I will see him take it by and by, when
my craving stomach is satisfied, look you.” At this, the other went
away, saying, “that if they should serve him so when he was dying, by
God he would be foul of them in the other world.” Here Mr. Thompson let
me know, that the person we heard was Mr. Morgan, the first mate, who
was just come on board from the hospital, whither he had attended some
of the sick in the morning; at the same time I saw him come into the
berth. He was a short thick man, with a face garnished with pimples, a
snub nose turned up at the end, an excessive wide mouth, and little
fiery eyes, surrounded with skin puckered up in innumerable wrinkles.
My friend immediately made him acquainted with my case; when he
regarded me with a very lofty look, but without speaking, set down a
bundle he had in his hand, and approached the cupboard, which, when he
had opened, he exclaimed in a great passion, “Cot is my life, all the
pork is gone, as I am a Christian!” Thompson then gave him to
understand, that, as I had been brought on board half famished, he
could do no less than to entertain me with what was in the locker, and
the rather as he had bid the steward enter me in the mess. Whether this
disappointment made Mr. Morgan more peevish than usual, or he really
thought himself too little regarded by his fellow mate, I know not, but
after some pause, he went on in this manner: “Mr. Thompson, perhaps you
do not use me with all the good manners, and complaisance, and respect
(look you,) that becomes you, because you have not vouchsafed to advise
with me in this affair. I have in my time (look you,) been a man of
some weight, and substance, and consideration, and have kept house and
home, and paid scot and lot, and the king’s taxes; ay, and maintained a
family to boot. And moreover, also, I am your senior, and your older,
and your petter, Mr. Thompson.” “My elder, I’ll allow you to be, but
not my better!” cried Thompson, with some heat. “Cot is my Saviour, and
witness too,” said Morgan, with great vehemence, “that I am more elder,
and therefore more petter by many years than you.” Fearing this dispute
might be attended with some bad consequence, I interposed, and told Mr.
Morgan I was very sorry for having been the occasion of any difference
between him and the second mate; and that, rather than cause the least
breach in their good understanding, I would eat my allowance to myself,
or seek admission into some other company. But Thompson, with more
spirit than discretion (as I thought), insisted upon my remaining where
he had appointed me; and observed that no man, possessed of generosity
and compassion, would have any objection to it, considering my birth
and talents, and the misfortunes I had of late so unjustly undergone.

This was touching Mr. Morgan on the right key, who protested with great
earnestness, that he had no objection to my being received in the mess;
but only complained that the ceremony of asking his consent was not
observed. “As for a sheltenman in distress,” said he, shaking me by the
hand, “I lofe him as I lofe my own powels: for, Cot help me! I have had
vexations enough upon my own pack.” And as I afterwards learned, in so
saying, he spoke no more than what was true; for he had been once
settled in a very good situation in Glamorganshire, and was ruined by
being security for an acquaintance. All differences being composed, he
untied his bundle, which consisted of three bunches of onions, and a
great lump of Cheshire cheese, wrapped up in a handkerchief: and,
taking some biscuit from the cupboard, fell to with a keen appetite,
inviting us to share of the repast. When he had fed heartily on his
homely fare, he filled a large cup, made of a cocoa-nut shell, with
brandy, and, drinking it off, told us, “Prandy was the best menstruum
for onions and sheese.” His hunger being appeased, he began to be in
better humour; and, being inquisitive about my birth, no sooner
understood that I was descended of a good family, than he discovered a
particular good-will to me on that account, deducing his own pedigree
in a direct line from the famous Caractacus, king of the Britons, who
was first the prisoner, and afterwards the friend of Claudius Caesar.
Perceiving how much I was reduced in point of linen, he made me a
present of two good ruffled shirts, which, with two more of check which
I received from Mr. Thompson, enabled me to appear with decency.

Meanwhile the sailor, whom Mr. Morgan had sent to the doctor, brought a
prescription for his messmate, which when the Welshman had read, he got
up to prepare it, and asked, “if the man was dead or alive.” “Dead!”
replied Jack; “if he was dead, he would have no occasion for doctor’s
stuff. No, thank God, death han’t as yet boarded him. But they have
been yard-arm and yard-arm these three glasses.” “Are his eyes open,”
continued the mate. “His starboard eye,” said the sailor, “is open, but
fast jammed in his head: and the haulyards of his under jaw have given
way.” “Passion of my heart!” cried Morgan, “the man is as pad as one
would desire to be! Did you feel his pulses!” To this the other replied
with “Anan!” Upon which this Cambro Briton, with great earnestness and
humanity, ordered the tar to run to his messmate, and keep him alive
till he should come with the medicine, “and then,” said he, “you shall
peradventure pehold what you shall see.”

The poor fellow, with great simplicity, ran to the place where the sick
man lay, but in less than a minute returned with a woful countenance,
and told us his comrade had struck. Morgan, hearing this, exclaimed,
“Mercy upon my salvation! why did you not stop him till I came?” “Stop
him!” said the other; “I hailed him several times, but he was too far
on his way, and the enemy had got possession of his close quarters; so
that he did not mind me.” “Well, well,” said he, “we all owe heaven a
teath. Go your ways, you ragamuffin, and take an example and a warning,
look you, and repent of your misteets.” So saying, he pushed the seaman
out of the berth.

While we entertained us with reflections suitable to this event, we
heard the boatswain pipe to dinner; and immediately the boy belonging
to our mess ran to the locker, from whence he carried off a large
wooden platter, and, in a few minutes, returned with it full of boiled
peas, crying “Scaldings” all the way as he came. The cloth, consisting
of a piece of an old sail, was instantly laid, covered with three
plates, which by the colour I could with difficulty discern to be
metal, and as many spoons of the same composition, two of which were
curtailed in the handles, and the other abridged in the lip. Mr. Morgan
himself enriched this mess with a lump of salt butter scooped from an
old gallipot, and a handful of onions shorn, with some pounded pepper.
I was not very much tempted with the appearance of this dish, of which,
nevertheless, my messmates ate heartily, advising me to follow their
example, as it was banyan day and we could have no meat till next noon.
But I had already laid in sufficient for the occasion, and therefore
desired to be excused: expressing a curiosity to know the meaning of
banyan day. They told me, that, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,
the ship’s company had no allowance of meat, and that these meagre days
were called banyan days, the reason of which they did not know; but I
have since learned they take their denomination from a sect of devotees
in some parts of the East Indies, who never taste flesh.

After dinner Thompson led me round the ship, showed me the different
parts, described their uses, and, as far as he could, made me
acquainted with the particulars of the discipline and economy practised
on board. He then demanded of the boatswain a hammock for me, which was
slung in a very neat manner by my friend Jack Rattlin; and, as I had no
bed-clothes, procured credit for me with the purser, for a mattress and
two blankets. At seven o’clock in the evening Morgan visited the sick,
and, having ordered what was proper for each, I assisted Thompson in
making up his prescriptions: but when I followed him with the medicines
into the sick berth, or hospital, and observed the situation of the
patients, I was much less surprised that people should die on board,
than that a sick person should recover. Here I saw about fifty
miserable distempered wretches, suspended in rows, so huddled one upon
another, that not more than fourteen inches space was allotted for each
with his bed and bedding; and deprived of the light of the day, as well
as of fresh air; breathing nothing but a noisome atmosphere of the
morbid steams exhaling from their own excrements and diseased bodies,
devoured with vermin hatched in the filth that surrounded them, and
destitute of every convenience necessary for people in that helpless
condition.




CHAPTER XXVI


A disagreeable accident happens to me in the discharge of my
office—Morgan’s nose is offended—a dialogue between him and the Ship’s
steward—upon examination, I find more causes of complaint than one—my
hair is cut off—Morgan’s cookery—the manner of sleeping on board—I am
waked in the night by a dreadful noise


Could not comprehend how it was possible for the attendants to come
near those who hung on the inside towards the sides of the ship, in
order to assist them, as they seemed barricadoed by those who lay on
the outside, and entirely out of the reach of all visitation; much less
could I conceive how my friend Thompson would be able to administer
clysters, that were ordered for some, in that situation; when I saw him
thrust his wig in his pocket, and strip himself to his waistcoat in a
moment, then creep on all fours under the hammocks of the sick, and,
forcing up his bare pate between two, keep them asunder with one
shoulder, until he had done his duty. Eager to learn the service, I
desired he would give me leave to perform the next operation of that
kind; and he consenting, I undressed myself after his example, and
crawling along, the ship happened to roll: this motion alarming me, I
laid hold of the first thing that came within my grasp with such
violence, that I overturned it, and soon found, by the smell that
issued upon me, that I had unlocked a box of the most delicious
perfume. It was well for me that my nose was none of the most delicate,
else I know not how I might have been affected by this vapour, which
diffused itself all over the ship, to the utter discomposure of
everybody who tarried on the same dock! neither was the consequence of
this disgrace confined to my sense of smelling only; for I felt my
misfortune more ways than one. That I might not, however, appear
altogether disconcerted in this my first essay, I got up, and, pushing
my head with great force between two hammocks, towards the middle,
where the greatest resistance was, I made an opening indeed, but, not
understanding the knack of dexterously turning my shoulder to maintain
my advantage, had the mortification to find myself stuck up, as it
were, in a pillory, and the weight of three or four people bearing on
each side of my neck, so that I was in danger of strangulation. While I
remained in this defenceless posture, one of the sick men, rendered
peevish by his distemper, was so enraged at the smell I had occasioned
and the rude shock he had received from me in my elevation, that, with
many bitter reproaches, he seized me by the nose, which he tweaked so
unmercifully, that I roared with anguish. Thompson, perceiving my
condition, ordered one of the waiters to my assistance, who, with much
difficulty, disengaged me from this situation, and hindered me from
taking vengeance on the sick man, whose indisposition would not have
screened him from the effects of my indignation.

After having made an end of our ministry for that time, we descended to
the cockpit, my friend comforting me for what had happened with a
homely proverb, which I do not choose to repeat. When we had descended
half-way down the ladder, Mr. Morgan, before he saw us, having
intelligence by his nose of the approach of something extraordinary,
cried, “Cot have mercy upon my senses! I pelieve the enemy has poarded
us in a stinkpot!” Then, directing his discourse to the steward, from
whence he imagined the odour proceeded, he reprimanded him severely for
the freedoms he took among gentlemen of birth, and threatened to smoke
him like a padger with sulphur, if ever he should presume to offend his
neighbours with such smells for the future. The steward, conscious of
his own innocence, replied with some warmth, “I know of no smells but
those of your own making.” This repartee introduced a smart dialogue,
in which the Welshman undertook to prove, that, though the stench he
complained of did not flow from the steward’s own body, he was
nevertheless the author of it, by serving out damaged provisions to the
ship’s company; and, in particular, putrified cheese, from the use of
which only, he affirmed, such unsavoury steams could arise. Then he
launched out into the praise of good cheese, of which he gave the
analysis; explained the different kinds of that commodity, with the
methods practised to make and preserve it, concluded in observing,
that, in yielding good cheese, the county of Glamorgan might vie with
Cheshire itself, and was much superior to it in the produce of goats
and putter.

I gathered from this conversation, that, if I entered in my present
pickle, I should be no welcome guest, and therefore desired Mr.
Thompson to go before, and represent my calamity; at which the first
mate, expressing some concern, went upon deck immediately, taking his
way through the cable-tier and the main hatchway, to avoid encountering
me; desiring me to clean myself as soon as possible: for he intended to
regale himself with a dish of salmagundy and a pipe. Accordingly, I set
about this disagreeable business, and soon found I had more causes of
complaint than I at first imagined; for I perceived some guests had
honoured me with their company, whose visit I did not think seasonable:
neither did they seem inclined to leave me in a hurry, for they were in
possession of my chief quarters, where they fed without reserve at the
expense of my blood. But, considering it would be easier to extirpate
the ferocious colony in the infancy of their settlement, than after
they should be multiplied and naturalised to the soil, I took the
advice of my friend, who, to prevent such misfortunes, went always
close shaved, and made the boy of our mess cut off my hair, which had
been growing since I left the service of Lavement; and the second mate
lent me an old bobwig to supply the loss of that covering. This affair
being ended, and everything adjusted in the best manner my
circumstances would permit, the descendant of Caractacus returned, and,
ordering the boy to bring a piece of salt beef from the brine, cut off
a slice, and mixed it with an equal quantity of onions, which seasoning
with a moderate proportion of pepper and salt, he brought it to a
consistence with oil and vinegar; then, tasting the dish, assured us it
was the best salmagundy that ever he made, and recommended it to our
palate with such heartiness that I could not help doing honour to his
preparation. But I had no sooner swallowed a mouthful, than I thought
my entrails were scorched, and endeavoured with a deluge of small-beer
to allay the heat it occasioned. Supper being over, Mr. Morgan having
smoked a couple of pipes, and supplied the moisture he had expended
with as many cans of flip, of which we all partook, a certain yawning
began to admonish me that it was high time to repair by sleep the
injury I had suffered from want of rest the preceding night; which
being perceived by my companions, whose time of repose was now arrived,
they proposed we should turn in, or in other words, go to bed. Our
hammocks, which hung parallel to one another, on the outside of the
berth, were immediately unlashed, and I beheld my messmates spring with
great agility into their respective nests, where they seemed to lie
concealed, very much at their ease. But it was some time before I could
prevail upon myself to trust my carcase at such a distance from the
ground, in a narrow bag, out of which, I imagined, I should be apt, on
the least motion in my sleep, to tumble down at the hazard of breaking
my bones. I suffered myself, however, to be persuaded, and taking a
leap to get in, threw myself quite over, with such violence, that had I
not luckily got hold of Thompson’s hammock, I should have pitched upon
my head on the other side, and in all likelihood fractured my skull.

After some fruitless efforts, I succeeded at last; but the apprehension
of the jeopardy in which I believed myself withstood all the attacks of
sleep till towards the morning watch, when, in spite of my fears, I was
overpowered with slumber, though I did not long enjoy this comfortable
situation, being aroused with a noise so loud and shrill, that I
thought the drums of my ears were burst by it; this was followed by a
dreadful summons pronounced by a hoarse voice, which I could not
understand. While I was debating with myself, whether or not I should
wake my companion and inquire into the occasion of this disturbance, I
was informed by one of the quartermasters who passed by me with a
lantern in his hand, that the noise which alarmed me was occasioned by
the boatswain’s mates who called up the larboard watch, and that I must
lay my account with such an interruption every morning at the same
hour. Being now more assured of my safety, I undressed myself again to
rest, and slept till eight o’clock, when rising, and breakfasting with
my comrades on biscuit and brandy, the sick were visited and assisted
as before; after which visitation my good friend Thompson explained and
performed another piece of duty, to which I was a stranger. At a
certain hour in the morning, the boy of the mess went round all the
decks, ringing a small hand-bell, and, in rhymes composed for the
occasion, invited all those who had sores to repair before the mast,
where one of the doctor’s mates attended, with applications to dress
them.




CHAPTER XXVII


I acquire the friendship of the Surgeon, who procures a warrant for me,
and makes me a present of clothes—a battle between a Midshipman and
me—the Surgeon leaves the ship—the Captain comes on board with another
Surgeon—a dialogue between the Captain and Morgan—the sick are ordered
to be brought upon the Quarter-deck and examined—the consequences of
that order—a Madman accuses Morgan, and is set at liberty by command of
the Captain, whom he instantly attacks, and pummels without mercy


While I was busied with my friend in the practice. The doctor chanced
to pass by the place where we were, and stopping to observe me appeared
very well satisfied with my application; and afterwards sent for me to
his cabin, where, having examined me touching my skill in surgery, and
the particulars of my fortune, he interested himself so far in my
behalf, as to promise his assistance in procuring a warrant for me,
seeing I had already been found qualified at Surgeons’ Hall for the
station I filled on board; and in this good office he the more
cordially engaged when he understood I was nephew to lieutenant
Bowling, for whom he expressed a particular regard. In the meantime, I
could learn from his discourse that he did not intend to go to sea
again with Captain Oakum, having, as he thought, been indifferently
used by him during the last voyage.

While I lived tolerably easy, in expectation of preferment, I was not
altogether without mortifications, which I not only suffered from the
rude insults of the sailors and petty officers, among whom I was known
by the name of Loblolly Boy, but also from the disposition of Morgan,
who, though friendly in the main, was often very troublesome with his
pride, which expected a good deal of submission from me, and delighted
in recapitulating the favours I had received at his hands.

About six weeks after my arrival on board, the surgeon, bidding me to
follow him into his cabin, presented a warrant to me, by which I was
appointed surgeon’s third mate on board the Thunder. This he had
procured by his interest at the Navy Office; as also another for
himself, by virtue of which he was removed into a second-rate. I
acknowledged his kindness in the strongest terms my gratitude could
suggest, and professed my sorrow at the prospect of losing so valuable
a friend, to whom I hoped to have recommended myself still further, by
my respectful and diligent behaviour. But his generosity rested not
here; for before he left the ship he made me a present of a chest and
some clothes that enabled me to support the rank to which he had raised
me.

I found my spirit revive with my good fortune; and, now I was an
officer, resolved to maintain the dignity of my station, against all
opposition or affronts; nor was it long before I had occasion to exert
my resolution. My old enemy, the midshipman (whose name was Crampley),
entertaining an implacable animosity against me for the disgrace he had
suffered on my account, had since that time taken all opportunities of
reviling and ridiculing me, when I was not entitled to retort this bad
usage; and, even after I had been rated on the books, and mustered as
surgeon’s mate, did not think fit to restrain his insolence. In
particular, being one day present while I dressed a wound in a sailor’s
leg, he began to sing a song, which I thought highly injurious to the
honour of my country, and therefore signified my resentment, by
observing that the Scots always laid their account with finding enemies
among the ignorant, insignificant, and malicious. This unexpected piece
of assurance enraged him to such a degree, that he lent me a blow on
the face, which I verily thought had demolished my cheek-bone. I was
not slow in returning the obligation, and the affair began to be very
serious, when by accident Mr. Morgan, and one of the master’s mates,
coming that way, interposed, and, inquiring into the cause, endeavoured
to promote a reconciliation; but, finding us both exasperated to the
uttermost, and bent against accommodation, they advised us either to
leave our difference undecided, till we should have an opportunity of
terminating it on shore, like gentlemen, or else choose a proper place
on board, and bring it to an issue by boxing. The last expedient was
greedily embraced by us both; and, being forthwith conducted to the
ground proposed, we stripped in a moment, and began a furious contest,
in which I soon found myself inferior to my antagonist, not so much in
strength and agility, as in skill, which he had acquired in the school
of Hockley-in-the-Hole at Tottenham-court. Many cross buttocks did I
sustain, and pegs on the stomach without number, till at last my breath
being quite gone, as well as my vigour wasted, I grew desperate, and
collecting all my strength in one effort, threw in at once, head,
hands, and feet, with such violence, that I drove my antagonist three
paces backward into the main hatchway, down which he fell, and pitching
upon his head and right shoulder, remained without sense and motion.
Morgan, looking down, and seeing him lie in that condition, cried,
“Upon my conscience, as I am a Christian sinner, (look you,) I believe
his pattles are all ofer; but I take you all to witness that there was
no treachery in the case, and that he has suffered by the chance of
war.” So saying he descended to the deck below, to examine into the
situation of my adversary, and left me very little pleased with my
victory, as I found myself not only terribly bruised, but likewise in
danger of being called to account for the death of Crampley; but this
fear vanished when my fellow-mate having, by bleeding him in the
jugular, brought him to himself, and inquired into the state of his
body, called up to me to be under no concern, for the midshipman had
received no other damage than as pretty a luxation of the os humeri as
one would desire to see on a summer’s day. Upon this information I
crawled down to the cock-pit, and acquainted Thompson with the affair,
who, providing himself with bandages, etc, necessary for the occasion,
went up to assist Mr. Morgan in the reduction of the dislocation. When
this was successfully performed, they wished me joy of the event of the
combat; and the Welshman, after observing, that, in all likelihood, the
ancient Scots and Britons were the same people, bade me “praise Cot for
putting mettle in my pelly, and strength in my limbs to support it.” I
acquired such reputation by this rencontre, which lasted twenty
minutes, that everybody became more cautious in behaviour towards me;
though Crampley, with his arm in a sling, talked very high, and
threatened to seize the first opportunity of retrieving on shore the
honour he had lost by an accident, from which I could justly claim no
merit.

About this time, Captain Oakum, having received sailing orders, came on
board, and brought along with him a surgeon of his own country, who
soon made us sensible of the loss we suffered in the departure of
Doctor Atkins; for he was grossly ignorant, and intolerably assuming,
false, vindictive, and unforgiving; a merciless tyrant to his
inferiors, an abject sycophant to those above him. In the morning after
the captain came on board, our first mate, according to custom, went to
wait on him with a sick list, which, when this grim commander had
perused, he cried with a stern countenance, “Blood and cons! sixty-one
sick people on board of my ship! Harkee, you sir, I’ll have no sick in
my ship, by G—d.” The Welshman replied, “he should be very glad to find
no sick people on board: but, while it was otherwise, he did no more
than his duty in presenting him with a list.” “You and your list may be
d—n’d,” said the captain, throwing it at him; “I say, there shall be no
sick in this ship while I have the command of her.” Mr. Morgan, being
nettled at this treatment, told him his indignation ought to be
directed to Cot Almighty, who visited his people with distempers, and
not to him, who contributed all in his power towards their cure. The
bashaw, not being used to such behaviour in any of his officers, was
enraged to fury at this satirical insinuation, and, stamping with his
foot, called him insolent scoundrel, threatening to have him pinioned
to the deck, if he should presume to utter another syllable. But the
blood of Caractacus being thoroughly heated, disdained to be restricted
by such a command, and began to manifest itself in, “Captain Oakum, I
am a shentleman of birth and parentage (look you), and peradventure I
am moreover.” Here his harangue was broken off by the captain’s
steward, who, being Morgan’s countryman, hurried him out of the cabin
before he had time to exasperate his master to a greater degree, and
this would certainly have been the case; for the indignant Welshman
could hardly be hindered by his friend’s arguments and entreaties from
re-entering the presence-chamber, and defying Captain Oakum to his
teeth. He was, however appeased at length, and came down to the berth,
where, finding Thompson and me at work preparing medicines, he bade us
leave off our lapour to go to play, for the captain, by his sole word,
and power, and command, had driven sickness a pegging to the tevil, and
there was no more malady on board. So saying, he drank off a gill of
brandy sighed grievously three times, poured fort an ejaculation of
“Cot pless my heart, liver, and lungs!” and then began to sing a Welsh
song with great earnestness of visage, voice, and gesture. I could not
conceive the meaning of this singular phenomenon, and saw by the looks
of Thompson, who at the same time shook his head, that he suspected
poor Cadwallader’s brains were unsettled. He, perceiving our amazement,
told us he would explain the mystery; but at the same time bade us take
notice, that he had lived poy, patchelor, married man, and widower,
almost forty years, and in all that time there was no man, nor mother’s
son in the whole world who durst use him so ill as Captain Oakum had
done. Then he acquainted us with the dialogue that passed between them,
as I have already related it: and had no sooner finished this narration
than he received a message from the surgeon, to bring the sick-list to
the quarter-deck, for the captain had ordered all the patients thither
to be reviewed.

This inhuman order shocked us extremely, as we knew it would be
impossible to carry some of them on the deck, without imminent danger
of their lives: but, as we likewise knew it would be to no purpose for
us to remonstrate against it, we repaired to the quarter-deck in a
body, to see this extraordinary muster; Morgan observing by the way,
that the captain was going to send to the other world a great many
evidences to testify against himself. When we appeared upon deck, the
captain bade the doctor, who stood bowing at his right hand, look at
these lazy lubberly sons of bitches, who were good for nothing on board
but to eat the king’s provision, and encourage idleness in the
skulkers. The surgeon grinned approbation, and, taking the list, began
to examine the complaints of each as they could crawl to the place
appointed. The first who came under his cognizance was a poor fellow
just freed of a fever, which had weakened him so much that he could
hardly stand. Mr. Mackshane (for that was the doctor’s name), having
felt his pulse, protested he was as well as any man in the world; and
the captain delivered him over to the boatswain’s mate, with orders
that he should receive a round dozen at the gangway immediately, for
counterfeiting himself sick; but, before the discipline could be
executed, the man dropped down on the deck, and had well nigh perished
under the hands of the executioner. The next patient to be considered,
laboured under a quartan ague, and, being then in his interval of
health, discovered no other symptoms of distemper than a pale meagre
countenance and emaciated body; upon which he was declared fit for
duty, and turned over to the boatswain; but, being resolved to disgrace
the doctor, died upon the forecastle next day, during his cold fit. The
third complained of a pleuritic stitch, and spitting of blood, for
which Doctor Mackshane prescribed exercise at the pump to promote
expectoration! but whether this was improper for one in his situation,
or that it was used to excess, I know not, but in less than
half-an-hour he was suffocated with a deluge of blood that issued from
his lungs. A fourth, with much difficulty, climbed to the quarter-deck,
being loaded with a monstrous ascites, or dropsy, that invaded his
chest so much, he could scarce fetch his breath; but his disease being
interpreted into fat, occasioned by idleness and excess of eating, he
was ordered, with a view to promote perspiration and enlarge his chest,
to go aloft immediately. It was in vain for this unwieldy wretch to
allege his utter incapacity; the boatswain’s driver was commanded to
whip him up with the cat-and-nine-tails; the smart of this application
made him exert himself so much, that he actually arrived at the puttock
shrouds; but when the enormous weight of his body had nothing else to
support than his weakened arms, either out of spite or necessity, he
quitted his hold, and plunged into the sea, where he must have been
drowned, had not a sailor, who was in a boat alongside, saved his life,
by keeping him afloat till he was hoisted on board by a tackle.

It would be tedious and disagreeable to describe the fate of every
miserable object that suffered by the inhumanity and ignorance of the
captain and surgeon, who so wantonly sacrificed the lives of their
fellow-creatures. Many were brought up in the height of fevers, and
rendered delirious by the injuries they received in the way. Some gave
up the ghost in the presence of their inspectors; and others, who were
ordered to their duties, languished a few days at work among their
fellows, and then departed without any ceremony. On the whole, the
number of the sick was reduced to less than a dozen; and the authors of
this reduction were applauding themselves for the services they had
done to their king and country, when the boatswain’s mate informed his
honour, that there was a man below lashed to his hammock, by direction
of the doctor’s mate, and that he begged hard to be released;
affirming, he had been so maltreated only for a grudge Mr. Morgan bore
him, and that he was as much in his senses as any man aboard. The
captain hearing this, darted a severe look at the Welshman, and ordered
the man to be brought up immediately; upon which, Morgan protested with
great fervency, that the person in question was as mad as a March hare;
and begged for the love of Cot, they would at least keep his arms
pinioned during his examination, to prevent him from doing mischief.
This request the commander granted for his own sake, and the patient
was produced, who insisted upon his being in his right wits with such
calmness and strength of argument, that everybody present was inclined
to believe him, except Morgan, who affirmed there was no trusting to
appearances; for he himself had been so much imposed upon by his
behaviour two days before, that he had actually unbound him with his
own hands, and had well nigh been murdered for his pains: this was
confirmed by the evidence of one of the waiters, who declared he had
pulled this patient from the doctor’s mate, whom he had gotten down,
and almost strangled. To this the man answered, that the witness was a
creature of Morgan’s, and suborned to give his testimony against him by
the malice of the mate, whom the defendant had affronted, by
discovering to the people on board, that Mr. Morgan’s wife kept a
gin-shop in Ragfair. This anecdote produced a laugh at the expense of
the Welshman, who, shaking his head with some emotion, said, “Ay, ay,
’tis no matter. Cot knows, it is an arrant falsehood.” Captain Oakum,
without any farther hesitation, ordered the fellow to be unfettered; at
the same time, threatening to make Morgan exchange situations with him
for his spite; but the Briton no sooner heard the decision in favour of
the madman, than he got up to the mizen-shrouds, crying to Thompson and
me to get out of his reach, for we should see him play the devil with a
vengeance. We did not think fit to disregard his caution, and
accordingly got up on the poop, whence we beheld the maniac (as soon as
he was released) fly at the captain like a fury, crying, “I’ll let you
know, you scoundrel, that I am commander of this vessel,” and pummel
him without mercy. The surgeon, who went to the assistance of his
patron, shared the same fate; and it was with the utmost difficulty
that he was mastered at last, after having done great execution among
those who opposed him.




CHAPTER XXVIII


The Captain enraged, threatens to put the Madman to death with his own
hand—is diverted from that resolution by the arguments and persuasion
of the first Lieutenant and Surgeon—we set sail for St. Helen’s, join
the fleet under the command of Sir C— O—gle, and proceed for the West
Indies—are overtaken by a terrible tempest—my friend Jack Rattlin has
his leg broke by a fall from the mainyard—the behaviour of Mr.
Mackshane—Jack opposes the amputation of his limb, in which he is
seconded by Morgan and me, we undertake the cure and perform it
successfully


The captain was carried into his cabin, so enraged with the treatment
he had received, that he ordered the fellow to be brought before him,
that he might have the pleasure of pistoling him with his own hand; and
would certainly have satisfied his revenge in this manner, had not the
first lieutenant remonstrated against it, by observing that, in all
appearances, the fellow was not mad, but desperate; that he had been
hired by some enemy of the captain’s to him, and therefore ought to be
kept in irons till he could be brought to a court-martial, which, no
doubt, would sift the affair to the bottom (by which means important
discoveries might be made), and then sentence the criminal to a death
according to his demerits. This suggestion, improbable as it was, had
the desired effect upon the captain, being exactly calculated for the
meridan of his intellects; more especially as Dr. Mackshane espoused
this opinion, in consequence of his previous declaration that the man
was not mad. Morgan finding there was no more damage done, could not
help discovering by his countenance the pleasure he enjoyed on this
occasion; and, while he bathed the doctor’s face with an embrocation,
ventured to ask him, whether he thought there were more fools or madmen
on board? But he would have been wiser in containing this sally, which
his patient carefully laid up in his memory, to be taken notice of at a
more fit season. Meanwhile we weighed anchor, and, on our way to the
Downs, the madman, who was treated as a prisoner, took an opportunity,
while the sentinel attending him was at the head, to leap and frustrate
the revenge of the captain. We stayed not long at the Downs, but took
the benefit of the first easterly wind to go round to Spithead: where,
having received provisions on board for six months, we sailed from St.
Helen’s in the grand fleet bound for the West Indies, on the
ever-memorable expedition of Carthagena.

It was not without great mortification I saw myself on the point of
being transported to such a distant and unhealthy climate, destitute of
every convenience that could render such a voyage supportable, and
under the dominion of an arbitrary tyrant, whose command was almost
intolerable; however, as these complaints were common to a great many
on board, I resolved to submit patiently to my fate, and contrive to
make myself as easy as the nature of the case would allow. We got out
of the channel with a prosperous breeze, which died away, leaving us
becalmed about fifty leagues to the westward of the Lizard: but this
state of inaction did not last long; for next night our maintop-sail
was split by the wind, which, in the morning, increased to a hurricane.
I was awakened by a most horrible din, occasioned by the play of the
gun carriages upon the decks above, the cracking of cabins, the howling
of the wind through the shrouds, the confused noise of the ship’s crew,
the pipes of the boatswain and his mates, the trumpets of the
lieutenants, and the clanking of the chain pumps. Morgan who had never
been at sea before, turned out in a great hurry, crying, “Cot have
mercy and compassion upon us! I believe, we have cot upon the confines
of Lucifer and the d—n’d!” while poor Thompson lay quaking in his
hammock, putting up petitions to heaven for our safety. I rose and
joined the Welshman, with whom (after having fortified ourselves with
brandy) I went above; but if my sense of hearing was startled before,
how must my sight have been apalled in beholding the effects of the
storm! The sea was swelled into billows mountain-high, on the top of
which our ship sometimes hung as if it were about to be precipitated to
the abyss below! Sometimes we sank between two waves that rose on each
side higher than our topmast-head, and threatened by dashing together
to overwhelm us in a moment! Of all our fleet, consisting of a hundred
and fifty sail, scarce twelve appeared, and these driving under their
bare poles, at the mercy of the tempest. At length the mast of one of
them gave way, and tumbled overboard with a hideous crash! Nor was the
prospect in our own ship much more agreeable; a number of officers and
sailors ran backward and forward with distraction in their looks,
halloaing to one another, and undetermined what they should attend to
first. Some clung to the yards, endeavouring to unbend the sails that
were split into a thousand pieces flapping in the wind; others tried to
furl those which were yet whole, while the masts, at every pitch, bent
and quivered like twigs, as if they would have shivered into
innumerable splinters! While I considered this scene with equal terror
and astonishment, one of the main braces broke, by the shock whereof
two sailors were flung from the yard’s arm into the sea, where they
perished, and poor Jack Rattlin thrown down upon the deck, at the
expense of a broken leg. Morgan and I ran immediately to his
assistance, and found a splinter of the shin-bone thrust by the
violence of the fall through the skin; as this was a case of too great
consequence to be treated without the authority of the doctor I went
down to his cabin to inform him of the accident, as well as to bring up
dressings which we always kept ready prepared. I entered his apartment
without any ceremony, and, by the glimmering of a lamp, perceived him
on his knees before something that very much resembled a crucifix; but
this I will not insist upon, that I may not seem too much a slave to
common report, which indeed assisted my conjecture on this occasion, by
representing Dr. Mackshane as a member of the church of Rome. Be this
as it will, he got up in a sort of confusion, occasioned (I suppose) by
his being disturbed in his devotion, and in a trice snatched the
subject of my suspicion from my sight.

After making an apology for my intrusion, I acquainted him with the
situation of Rattlin, but could by no means prevail upon him to visit
him on deck, where he lay; he bade me desire the boatswain to order
some of the men to carry him down to the cockpit, “and in the
meantime,” said he, “I will direct Thompson to get ready the
dressings.” When I signified to the boatswain the doctor’s desire, he
swore a terrible oath, that he could not spare one man from deck,
because he expected the mast would go by the board every minute. This
piece of information did not at all contribute to my peace of mind;
however, as my friend Rattlin complained very much, with the assistance
of Morgan I supported him to the lower deck, whither Mr. Mackshane,
after much entreaty, ventured to come, attended by Thompson, with a box
full of dressings, and his own servant, who carried a whole set of
capital instruments. He examined the fracture and the wound, and
concluding, from a livid colour extending itself upon the limb, that
mortification would ensue, resolved to amputate the leg immediately.
This was a dreadful sentence to the patient, who, recruiting himself
with a quid of tobacco, pronounced with a woful countenance, “What! is
there no remedy, doctor! must I be dock’d? can’t you splice it?”
“Assuredly, Doctor Mackshane,” said the first mate, “with submission,
and deference, and veneration, to your superior apilities, and
opportunities, and stations, look you, I do apprehend, and conjure, and
aver, that there is no occasion nor necessity to smite off this poor
man’s leg.” “God Almighty bless you, dear Welshman!” cried Rattlin,
“may you have fair wind and weather wheresoever you’re bound, and come
to an anchor in the road of heaven at last!” Mackshane, very much
incensed at his mate’s differing in opinion from him, so openly,
answered, that he was not bound to give an account of his practice to
him; and in a peremptory tone, ordered him to apply the tourniquet. At
the sight of which, Jack, starting up, cried, “Avast, avast! D—n my
heart, if you clap your nippers on me, till I know wherefore! Mr.
Random, won’t you lend a hand towards saving my precious limb! Odd’s
heart, if Lieutenant Bowling was here, he would not suffer Jack
Rattlin’s leg to be chopped off like a piece of old junk.”

This pathetic address to me, joined to my inclination to serve my
honest friend, and the reasons I had to believe there was no danger in
delaying the amputation, induced me to declare myself of the first
mate’s opinion, and affirm that the preternatural colour of the skin
was owing to an inflammation, occasioned by a contusion, and common in
all such cases, without any indication of an approaching gangrene.
Morgan, who had a great opinion of my skill, manifestly exulted in my
fellowship, and asked Thompson’s sentiments in the matter, in hopes of
strengthening our association with him too; but he, being of a meek
disposition, and either dreading the enmity of the surgeon, or speaking
the dictates of his own judgment, in a modest manner espoused the
opinion of Mackshane, who by this time having consulted with himself,
determined to act in such a manner as to screen himself from censure,
and at the same time revenge himself on us, for our arrogance in
contradicting him. With this view, he asked if we would undertake to
cure the leg at our peril: that is, be answerable for the consequence.
To this question, Morgan replied, that the lives of his creatures are
at the hands of Cot alone; and it would be great presumption in him to
undertake for an event that was in the power of his Maker, no more than
the doctor could promise to cure all the sick to whom he administered
his assistance; but if the patient would put himself under our
direction, we would do our endeavour to bring his distemper to a
favourable issue, to which at present we saw no obstruction.

I signified my concurrence; and Rattlin was so overjoyed that, shaking
us both by the hands, he swore nobody else should touch him, and, if he
died, his blood should be upon his own head. Mr. Mackshane, flattering
himself with the prospect of our miscarriage, went away, and left us to
manage it as we should think proper; accordingly, having sawed off part
of the splinter that stuck through the skin, we reduced the fracture,
dressed the wound, applied the eighteen-tailed bandage, and put the leg
in a box, secundam artem. Everything succeeded according to our wish,
and we had the satisfaction of not only preserving the poor fellow’s
leg, but likewise of rendering the doctor contemptible among the ship’s
company, who had all their eyes on us during the course of this cure,
which was completed in six weeks.




CHAPTER XXIX


Mackshane’s malice—I am taken up and imprisoned for a spy—Morgan meets
with the same fate—Thompson is tampered with to turn evidence against
us—disdains the proposal, and is maltreated for his integrity—Morgan is
released to assist the Surgeon during an engagement with some French
ships-of-war—I remain fettered on the poop, exposed to the enemy’s
shot, and grow delirious with fear—am comforted after the battle by
Morgan, who speaks freely of the captain, is overheard by the sentinel,
who informs against him, and again imprisoned—Thompson grows desperate,
and, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Morgan and me, goes overboard
in the night


In the meantime the storm subsided into a brisk gale, that carried us
into the warm latitudes, where the weather became intolerable, and the
crew very sickly. The doctor left nothing unattempted towards the
completion of his vengeance against the Welshman and me. He went among
the sick under pretence of inquiring into their grievances, with a view
of picking up complaints to our prejudice; but, finding himself
frustrated in that expectation by the goodwill we had procured from the
patients by our diligence and humanity, he took the resolution of
listening to our conversation, by hiding himself behind the canvas that
surrounded our berth; here too he was detected by the boy of our mess,
who acquainted us with this piece of behaviour, and one night, while we
were picking a large bone of salt beef, Morgan discerned something stir
on the outside of our hangings, which immediately interpreting to be
the doctor, he tipped me the wink, and pointed to the place, where I
could perceive somebody standing; upon which, I snatched up the bone,
and levelled it with all my force at him, saying, “Whoever you are,
take that for your curiosity.” It had the desired effect, for we heard
the listener tumble down, and afterwards crawl to his own cabin. I
applauded myself much for this feat, which turned out one of the most
unlucky exploits of my life, Mackshane, from that time, marking me out
for destruction.

About a week after this exploit, as I was going my rounds among the
sick, I was taken prisoner, and carried to the poop by the
master-at-arms, where I was loaded with irons, and stapled to the deck,
on pretence that I was a spy on board, and had conspired against the
captain’s life. How ridiculous soever this imputation was, I did not
fail to suffer by it all the rigour that could be shown to the worst of
criminals, being exposed in this miserable condition to the scorching
heat of the sun by day, and the unwholesome damps by night, during the
space of twelve days, in which I was neither brought to trial, nor
examined touching the probability of the charge. I had no sooner
recovered the use of my reflection, which had been quite overthrown by
this accident, than I sent for Thompson, who, after condoling me on the
occasion, hinted, that I owed this misfortune to the hatred of the
doctor, who had given an information against me to the captain, in
consequence of which I was arrested, and all my papers seized. While I
was cursing my capricious fate, I saw Morgan ascend the poop, guarded
by two corporals, who made him sit down by me, that he might be
pinioned in the same machine. Notwithstanding my situation, I could
scarce refrain from laughing at the countenance of my fellow prisoner,
who, without speaking one word, allowed his feet to be inclosed in the
rings provided for that purpose; but, when they pretended to fasten him
on his back he grew outrageous, and drawing a large couteau from his
side-pocket, threatened to rip up the belly of the first man that
should approach him, in order to treat him in such an unworthy manner.
They were prepared to use him very roughly, when the lieutenant on the
quarter-deck called up to them to let him remain as he was. He then
crept towards me, and, taking me by the hand, bade me “put my trust in
Cot.” And looking at Thompson, who sat by us trembling, with a pale
visage; told him there were two more rings for his feet, and he should
be glad to find him in such good company. But it was not the intention
of our adversary to include the second mate in our fate: him he
expected to be his drudge in attending the sick and, if possible, his
evidence against us: with this view he sounded him afar off, but,
finding his integrity incorruptible, harrassed him so much out of
spite, that in a short time this mild creature grew weary of his life.

While I and my fellow prisoner comforted each other in our tribulation,
the admiral discovered four sail to leeward and made signal for our
ship and four more to chase: hereupon everything was cleared for an
engagement, and Mackshane, foreseeing he should have occasion for more
assistants than one obtained Morgan’s liberty, while I was let in this
deplorable posture to the chance of battle. It was almost dark when we
came up with the sternmost chase, which we hailed, and inquired who
they were. They gave us to understand they were French men-of-war, upon
which Captain Oakum commanded them to send their boat on board of him!
but they refused, telling him, if he had any business with them, to
come on board of their ship: he then threatened to pour in a broadside
upon them, which they promised to retain. Both sides were as good as
their word, and the engagement began with great fury. The reader may
guess how I passed my time, lying in this helpless situation, amidst
the terrors of a sea-fight; expecting every moment to be cut asunder,
or dashed in pieces by the enemy’s shot! I endeavoured to compose
myself as much as possible, by reflecting that I was not a whit more
exposed than those who were stationed about me; but, when I beheld them
employed without intermission in annoying the foe, and encouraged by
the society and behaviour of one another, I could easily perceive a
wide difference between their condition and mine: however, I concealed
my agitation as well as I could till the head of the officer of marines
who stood near me, being shot off, bounced from the deck athwart my
face, leaving me well nigh blinded with brains. I could contain myself
no longer, but began to bellow with all the strength of my lungs; when
a drummer, coming towards me asked if I was wounded, and, before I
could answer, received a great shot in his belly, which tore out his
entrails, and he fell flat on my breast. This accident entirely bereft
me of all discretion; I redoubled my cries, which were drowned in the
noise of the battle; and, finding myself disregarded, lost all
patience, and became frantic. I vented my rage in oaths and
execrations, till my spirits, being quite exhausted, I remained quiet,
as insensible of the load that oppressed me.

The engagement lasted till broad day, when Captain Oakum, finding he
was like to gain neither honour nor advantage by the affair, pretended
to be undeceived by seeing their colours; and, hailing the ship whom he
had fought all night, protested he believed them Spaniards; and the
guns being silenced on each side, ordered the barge to be hoisted out,
and went on board the French commodore. Our loss amounted to ten
killed, and eighteen wounded, most part of whom afterwards died. My
fellow-mates had no sooner despatched their business in the cock-pit,
than, full of friendly concern, they came to visit me. Morgan,
ascending first, and seeing my face almost covered with brains and
blood, concluded I was no longer a man for this world; and, calling to
Thompson with great emotion, bade him come up, and take his last
farewell of his comrade and countryman, who was posted to a better
place, where there were no Mackshanes nor Oakums to asperse and torment
him. “No,” said he, taking me by the hand, “you are going to a country
where there is more respect sown to unfortunate shentlemen, and where
you will have the satisfaction of peholding your adversaries tossing
upon pillows of purning primstone.” Thompson, alarmed at this
apostrophe, made haste to the place where I lay, and sitting down by
me, with tears in his eyes inquired into the nature of my calamity. By
this time I had recollected myself so far as to be able to converse
rationally with my friends, whom, to their great satisfaction, I
immediately undeceived with regard to their apprehension of my being
mortally wounded.

After I had got myself disengaged from the carnage in which I wallowed,
and partaken of a refreshment which my friends brought along with them,
we entered into discourse upon the hardships we sustained, and spoke
very freely of the author of our misery; but our discourse being
overheard by the sentinel who guarded me, he was no sooner relieved
than he reported to the captain every syllable of our conversation,
according to the orders he had received. The effect of this information
soon appeared in the arrival of the master-at-arms, who replaced Morgan
in his former station, and gave the second mate a caution to keep a
strict guard over his tongue, if he did not choose to accompany us in
our confinement. Thompson, foreseeing that the whole slavery of
attending the sick and wounded, as well as the cruelty of Mackshane,
must now fall upon his shoulders, grew desperate at the prospect, and,
though I never heard him swear before, imprecated dreadful curses on
the heads of his oppressors, declaring that he would rather quit life
altogether than be much longer under the power of such barbarians. I
was not a little startled at his vivacity, and endeavoured to alleviate
his complaints, by representing the subject of my own, with as much
aggravation as it would bear, by which comparison he might see the
balance of misfortune lay on my side, and take an example from me of
fortitude and submission, till such time as we could procure redress,
which I hoped was not far off, considering that we should probably be
in a harbour in less than three days, where we should have an
opportunity of preferring our complaints to the admiral. The Welshman
joined in my remonstrance, and was at great pains to demonstrate that
it was every man’s duty as well as interest to resign himself to the
divine will, and look upon himself as a sentinel upon duty, who is by
no means at liberty to leave his post before he is relieved. Thompson
listened attentively to what he said, and at last, shedding a flood of
tears, shook his hand, and left us without making any reply. About
eleven at night he came to see us again with a settled gloom on his
countenance, and gave us to understand that he had undergone excessive
toil since he saw us, and in recompense had been grossly abused by the
doctor, who taxed him with being confederate with us, in a design of
taking away his life and that of the captain. After some time spent in
mutual exhortation, he got up, and squeezing me by the hand with
uncommon fervour, cried, “God bless you both!” and left us to wonder at
his singular manner of parting with us, which did not fail to make a
deep impression on us both.

Next morning, when the hour of visitation came round, the unhappy young
man was missing, and, after strict search, supposed to have gone
overboard in the night; and this was certainly the case.




CHAPTER XXX


We lament the fate of our companion—the Captain offers Morgan his
liberty, which he refuses to accept—we are brought before him and
examined—Morgan is sent back into custody, whither also I am remanded
after a curious trial


The news of this event affected my fellow prisoner and me extremely, as
our unfortunate companion had justly acquired by his amiable
disposition the love and esteem of us both; and the more we regretted
his untimely fate, the greater horror we conceived for the villain who
was undoubtedly the occasion of it. This abandoned miscreant did not
discover the least symptom of concern for Thompson’s death, although he
must have been conscious to himself of having driven him by ill usage
to the fatal resolution, but desired the captain to set Morgan at
liberty again to look after the patients. Accordingly one of the
corporals was sent up to unfetter him, but he protested he would not be
released until he should know for what he was confined; nor would he be
a tennisball, nor a shuttlecock, nor a trudge, nor a scullion, to any
captain under the sun. Oakum, finding him obstinate, and fearing it
would not be in his power to exercise his tyranny much longer with
impunity, was willing to show some appearance of justice and therefore
ordered us both to be brought before him on the quarter-deck, where he
sat in state, with his cleric on one side, and his counsellor Mackshane
on the other. When we approached, he honoured us with this salutation:
“So, gentlemen, d—n my blood! many a captain in the navy would have
ordered you both to be tucked up to the yard’s arm, without either
judge or jury, for the crimes you have been guilty of; but, d—n my
blood, I have too much good nature in allowing such dogs as you to make
defence.” “Captain Oakum,” said my fellow-sufferer, “certainly it is in
your power (Cot help the while) to tack us all up at your will, desire,
and pleasures. And perhaps it would be petter for some of us to be
tucked up than to undergo the miseries to which we have been exposed.
So may the farmer hang his kids for his diversion, and amusement, and
mirth; but there is such a thing as justice, if not upon earth, surely
in heaven, that will punish with fire and primstone all those who take
away the lives of innocent people out of wantonness, and parparity
(look you). In the mean time. I shall be glad to know the crimes laid
to my charge, and see the person who accuses me.” “That you shall,”
said the captain; “here, doctor, what have you to say?” Mackshane,
stepping forward, hemmed a good while, in order to clear his throat,
and, before he began, Morgan accosted him thus: “Doctor Mackshane, look
in my face—look in the face of an honest man, who abhors a false
witness as he abhors the tevil, and Cot be judge between you and me.”
The doctor, not minding this conjuration, made the following speech, as
near as I can remember: “I’ll tell you what, Mr. Morgan; to be sure
what you say is just, in regard to an honest man, and if so be it
appears as how you are an honest man, then it is my opinion that you
deserve to be acquitted, in relation to that there affair, for I tell
you what, Captain Oakum is resolved for to do everybody justice. As for
my own part, all that I have to allege is, that I have been informed
you have spoken disrespectful words against your captain, who, to be
sure, is the most honourable and generous commander in the king’s
service, without asparagement or acception of man, woman, or child.”

Having uttered this elegant harangue, on which he seemed to plume
himself, Morgan replied, “I do partly guess, and conceive, and
understand your meaning, which I wish could be more explicit; but,
however, I do suppose, I am not to be condemned upon bare hearsay; or,
if I am convicted of speaking disrespectfully of Captain Oakum, I hope
there is no treason in my words.” “But there’s mutiny, by G—d, and
that’s death by the articles of war!” cried Oakum: “In the meantime,
let the witnesses be called.” Hereupon Mackshane’s servant appeared,
and the boy of our mess, whom they had seduced and tutored for the
purpose. The first declared, that Morgan as he descended the
cockpit-ladder one day, cursed the captain, and called him a savage
beast, saying, he ought to be hunted down as an enemy to mankind.
“This,” said the clerk, “is a strong presumption of a design, formed
against the captain’s life. For why? It presupposes malice
aforethought, and a criminal intention a priori.” “Right,” said the
captain to this miserable grub, who had been an attorney’s boy, “you
shall have law enough: here’s Cook and Littlejohn to it.” This evidence
was confirmed by the boy, who affirmed, he heard the first mate say,
that the captain had no more bowels than a bear, and the surgeon had no
more brain than an ass. Then the sentinel, who heard our discourse on
the poop was examined, and informed the court that the Welshman assured
me, Captain Oakum and Doctor Mackshane would toss upon billows of
burning brimstone in hell for their barbarity. The clerk observed, that
there was an evident prejudication, which confirmed the former
suspicion of a conspiracy against the life of Captain Oakum; for,
because, how could Morgan so positively pronounce that the captain and
surgeon would d—n’d, unless he had intention to make away with them
before they could have time to repent? This sage explanation had great
weight with our noble commander, who exclaimed, “What have you to say
to this, Taffy? you seem to be taken all a-back, brother, ha!” Morgan
was too much of a gentleman to disown the text, although he absolutely
denied the truth of the comment. Upon which the captain, strutting up
to him with a ferocious countenance, said, “So Mr. son of a bitch, you
confess you honoured me with the names of bear and beast, and
pronounced my damnation? D—n my heart! I have a good mind to have you
brought to a court-martial and hang’d, you dog.” Here Mackshane, having
occasion for an assistant, interposed, and begged the captain to pardon
Mr. Morgan with his wonted goodness, upon condition that he the
delinquent should make such submission as the nature of his
misdemeanour demanded. Upon which the Cambro-Briton, who on this
occasion would have made no submission to the Great Mogul, surrounded
with his guards, thanked the doctor for his mediation, and acknowledged
himself in the wrong for calling the image of Cot a peast, “but,” said
he, “I spoke by metaphor, and parable, and comparison, and types; as we
signify meekness by a lamb, lechery by a goat, and craftiness by a fox;
so we liken ignorance to an ass, and brutality to a bear, and fury to a
tiger; therefore I made use of these similes to express my sentiments
(look you), and what I said before Cot, I will not unsay before man nor
peast neither.”

Oakum was so provoked at this insolence (as he termed it,) that he
ordered him forthwith to be carried to the place of his confinement,
and his clerk to proceed on the examination of me. The first question
put to me was touching the place of my nativity, which I declared to be
the north of Scotland. “The north of Ireland more like!” cried the
captain; “but we shall bring you up presently.” He then asked what
religion I professed; and when I answered “the Protestant,” swore I was
an arrant Roman as ever went to mass. “Come, come, clerk,” continued
he, “catechise him a little on this subject.” But before I relate the
particulars of the clerk’s inquiries, it will not be amiss to inform
the reader that our commander himself was an Hibernian, and, if not
shrewdly belied, a Roman Catholic to boot. “You say, you are a
Protestant,” said the clerk; “make the sign of the cross with your
finger, so, and swear upon it to that affirmation.” When I was about to
perform the ceremony, the captain cried with some emotion, “No, no,
d—me! I’ll have no profanation neither. But go on with your
interrogations.” “Well then,” proceeded my examiner, “how many
sacraments are there?” To which I replied, “Two.” “What are they?” said
he. I answered, “Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.” “And so you would
explode confirmation and marriage altogether?” said Oakum. “I thought
this fellow was a rank Roman.” The clerk, though he was bred under an
attorney, could not refrain from blushing at this blunder, which he
endeavoured to conceal, by observing, that these decoys would not do
with me, who seemed to be an old offender. He went on with asking, if I
believed in transubstantiation; but I treated the notion of real
presence with such disrespect, that his patron was scandalised at my
impiety, and commanded him to proceed to the plot. Whereupon this
miserable pettifogger told me, there was great reason to suspect me of
being a spy on board, and that I had entered into a conspiracy with
Thompson, and others not yet detected, against the life of Captain
Oakum, which accusation they pretended to support by the evidence of
our boy, who declared he had often heard the deceased Thompson and me
whispering together, and could distinguish the words, “Oakum, rascal,
poison, pistol;” by which expressions it appeared, we did intend to use
sinister means to accomplish his destruction. That the death of
Thompson seemed to confirm this conjecture, who, either feeling the
stings of remorse for being engaged in such a horrid confederacy, or
fearing a discovery, by which he must have infallibly suffered an
ignominious death, had put a fatal period to his own existence. But
what established the truth of the whole was, a book in cyphers found
among my papers, which exactly tallied with one found in his chest,
after his disappearance. This, he observed, was a presumption very near
positive proof, and would determine any jury in Christendom to find me
guilty. In my own defence, I alleged, that I had been dragged on board
at first very much against my inclination, as I could prove by the
evidence of some people now in the ship, consequently could have no
design of becoming spy at that time; and ever since had been entirely
out of the reach of any correspondence that could justly entail that
suspicion upon me. As for conspiring against my captain’s life, it
could not be supposed that any man in his right wits would harbour the
least thought of such an undertaking, which he could not possibly
perform without certain infamy and ruin to himself, even if he had all
the inclination in the world. That, allowing the boy’s evidence to be
true (which I affirmed was false and malicious), nothing conclusive
could be gathered from a few incoherent words; neither was the fate of
Mr. Thompson a circumstance more favourable for the charge; for I had
in my pocket a letter which too well explained that mystery, in a very
different manner from that which was supposed. With these words, I
produced the following letter, which Jack Rattlin brought to me the
very day after Thompson disappeared; and told me it was committed to
his care by the deceased, who made him promise not to deliver it
sooner. The clerk, taking it out of my hand, read aloud the contents,
which were these;

‘Dear Friend,—I am so much oppressed with the fatigue I daily and
nightly undergo, and the barbarous usage of Doctor Mackshane, who is
bent on your destruction as well as mine, that I am resolved to free
myself from this miserable life, and, before you receive this, shall be
no more. I could have wished to die in your good opinion, which I am
afraid I shall forfeit by the last act of my life; but, if you cannot
acquit me, I know you will at least preserve some regard for the memory
of an unfortunate young man who loved you. I recommend it to you, to
beware of Mackshane, whose revenge is implacable. I wish all prosperity
to you and Mr. Morgan, to whom pray offer my last respects, and beg to
be remembered as your unhappy friend and countryman,


‘William Thompson.’


This letter was no sooner read, than Mackshane, in a transport of rage,
snatched it out of the clerk’s hands, and tore it into a thousand
pieces, saying, it was a villainous forgery, contrived and executed by
myself. The captain and clerk declared themselves of the same opinion,
although I insisted of having the remains of it compared with other
writings of Thompson, which they had in their possession; and I was
ordered to answer the last article of my accusation, namely, the book
of ciphers found among my papers. “That is easily done,” said I. “What
you are pleased to call ciphers, are no other than the Greek
characters, in which, for my amusement, I keep a diary of everything
remarkable that has occurred to my observation since the beginning of
the voyage, till the day in which I was put in irons; and the same
method was practised by Mr. Thompson, who copied mine.” “A very likely
story,” cried Mackshane; “what occasion was there for using Greek
characters, if you were not afraid of discovering what you had wrote?
But what d’ye talk of Greek characters? D’ye think I am so ignorant of
the Greek language, as not to distinguish its letters from these, which
are no more Greek than Chinese? No, no, I will not give up my knowledge
of the Greek for you, nor none that ever came from your country.” So
saying, with an unparalleled effrontery, he repeated some gibberish,
which by the sound seemed to be Irish, and made it pass for Greek with
the captain, who, looking at me with a contemptuous sneer, exclaimed,
“Ah, ah! have you caught a tartar?” I could not help smiling at the
consummate assurance of this Hibernian, and offered to refer the
dispute to anybody on board who understood the Greek alphabet. Upon
which Morgan was brought back, and, being made acquainted with the
affair, took the book, and read a whole page in English, without
hesitation, deciding the controversy in my favour. The doctor was so
far from being out of countenance at this detection, that he affirmed
Morgan was in the secret, and repeated from his own invention. Oakum
said, “Ay, ay, I see they are both in a story;” and dismissed my
fellow-mate to his cockloft, although I proposed that he and I should
read and translate, separately, any chapter or verse in the Greek
Testament in his possession, by which it would appear whether we or the
surgeon spoke truth. Not being endued with eloquence enough to convince
the captain that there could be no juggle nor confederacy in this
expedient, I begged to be examined by some unconcerned person on board,
who understood Greek. Accordingly, the whole ship’s company, officers
and all, were called upon deck, among whom it was proclaimed that, if
anyone of them could speak Greek, he or they so qualified should ascend
the quarter-deck immediately. After some pause, two foremast men came
up, and professed their skill in that language, which, they said, they
acquired during several voyages to the Levant, among the Greeks of the
Morea. The captain exulted much in this declaration, and put my journal
book into the hands of one of them, who candidly owned he could neither
read nor write; the other acknowledged the same degree of ignorance,
but pretended to speak the Greek lingo with any man on board; and,
addressing himself to me, pronounced some sentences of a barbarous
corrupted language, which I did not understand. I asserted that the
modern Greek was as different from that spoken and written by the
ancients, as the English used now from the old Saxon spoke in the time
of Hengist: and, as I had only learned the true original tongue, in
which Homer, Pindar, the Evangelists, and other great men of antiquity
wrote, it could not be supposed that I should know anything of an
imperfect Gothic dialect that rose on the ruins of the former, and
scarce retained any traces of the old expression: but, if Doctor
Mackshane, who pretended to be master of the Greek language, could
maintain a conversation with these seamen, I would retract what I had
said, and be content to suffer any punishment be should think proper to
inflict. I had no sooner uttered these words than the surgeon, knowing
one of the fellows to be his countryman, accosted him in Irish, and was
answered in the same brogue; then a dialogue ensued between them, which
they affirmed to be in Greek, after having secured the secrecy of the
other tar, who had his cue in the language of the Morea, from his
companion, before they would venture to assert such an intrepid
falsehood. “I thought,” said Oakum, “we should discover the imposture
at last. Let the rascal be carried back to his confinement. I find he
must dangle.” Having nothing further to urge in my own behalf, before a
court so prejudiced with spite, and fortified with ignorance against
truth, I suffered myself to be reconducted peaceably to my
fellow-prisoner, who, hearing the particulars of my trial, lifted up
his hands and eyes to Heaven, and uttered a dreadful groan: and, not
daring to disburden his thoughts to me by speech, lest he might be
overheard by the sentinel, burst forth into a Welsh song, which he
accompanied with a thousand contortions of face and violent gestures of
body.




CHAPTER XXXI


I discover a subornation against me, by means of a quarrel between two
of the evidences; in consequence of which I am set at liberty, and
prevail upon Morgan to accept of his freedom on the same
terms—Mackshane’s malice—we arrive at Jamaica, from whence in a short
time we beat up to Hispaniola, in conjunction with the West India
squadron—we take in water, sail again, and arrive at
Carthagena—Reflections on our conduct there


Meanwhile, a quarrel happening between the two modern Greeks, the one,
to be revenged of the other, came and discovered to us the mystery of
Mackshane’s dialogue, as I have explained it above. This detection
coming to the ears of the doctor, who was sensible that (now we were in
sight of Jamaica) we should have an opportunity of clearing ourselves
before a court-martial, and, at the same time, of making his malice and
ignorance conspicuous, he interceded for us with the captain so
effectually, that in a few hours we were set at liberty, and ordered to
return to our duty. This was a happy event for me, my whole body being
blistered by the sun, and my limbs benumbed by want of motion: but I
could scarce persuade the Welshman to accept of this indulgence, he
persisted in his obstinacy to remain in irons, until he should be
discharged by a court-martial, which, he believed would also do him
justice on his enemies. At length I represented to him the precarious
issue of a trial, the power and interest of his adversaries, and
flattered his revenge with the hope of wreaking his resentment with his
own hands upon Mackshane after our return to England. This last
argument had more weight with him than all the rest, and prevailed upon
him to repair with me to the cockpit, which I no sooner entered, than
the idea of my departed friend presented itself to my remembrance, and
filled my eyes with tears. We discharged from our mess the boy who had
acted so perfidiously, notwithstanding his tears, intreaties, and of
penitence for what he had done; but not before he had confessed that
the surgeon had bribed him to give evidence against us, with a pair of
stockings and a couple of old check shirts, of which his servant had
since plundered him.

The keys of our chests and lockers being sent to us by the doctor, we
detained the messenger until we had examined the contents; and my
fellow-mate, finding all his Cheshire cheese consumed to a crust, his
brandy exhausted, and his onions gone, was seized with a fit of choler,
which he discharged on Mackshane’s man in oaths and execrations,
threatening to prosecute him as a thief. The fellow swore in his turn,
that he never had the keys in his possession till that time, when he
received them from his master with orders to deliver them to us. “As
Cot is my judge,” cried Morgan, “and my salfation, and my witness;
whosoever has pilfered my provisions is a lousy, peggarly, rascally
knave! and by the soul of my grandsire, I will impeach, and accuse, and
indict him, of a roppery, if I did but know who he is.” Had this
misfortune happened at sea, where we could not repair the loss, in all
probability this descendant of Caractacus would have lost his wits
entirely; but, when I observed how easy it would be to remedy this
paltry mischance, he became more calm, and reconciled himself to the
occasion.

A little while after this transport the surgeon came into the birth,
under pretence of taking something out of the medicine chest, and, with
a smiling aspect, wished us joy of our deliverance, which, he said, he
had been at great pains to obtain of the captain, who was very justly
incensed at our behaviour; but he, the doctor, had passed his word for
our future conduct, and he hoped we should give him no cause to repent
of his kindness. He expected, no doubt, an acknowledgment from us for
this pretended piece of service, as well as a general amnesty of what
was past; but he had to do with people who were not quite so apt to
forgive injuries as he imagined, or to forget that, if our deliverance
was owing to his mediation, our calamity was occasioned by his malice;
I therefore sat silent, while my companion answered, “Ay, ay, ’tis no
matter, Cot knows the heart; there is a time for all things, as the
wise man saith; there is a time for throwing away stones, and to gather
them up.” He seemed to be disconcerted at this reply, and went away in
a pet, muttering something about “Ingratitude,” and “Fellows,” of which
we did not think fit to take any notice.

Our fleet, having joined another that waited for us, lay at anchor
about a month in the harbour of Port Royal in Jamaica, during which
time something of consequence was certainly transacted; notwithstanding
the insinuations of some, who affirmed we had no business at all in
that place; that, in order to take the advantage of the season proper
for our enterprise, the West India squadron, which had previous notice
of our coming, ought to have joined us at the west end of Hispaniola,
with necessary stores and refreshments, from whence we could have
sailed directly for Carthagena, before the enemy could put themselves
in a good posture of defence, or, indeed, have an inkling of our
design. Be this as it will, we sailed from Jamaica, and, in ten days or
a fortnight, beat up against the wind as far as the Isle of Vache, with
an intention, as was said, to attack the French fleet, then supposed to
be lying near that place; but before we arrived, they had sailed for
Europe, having first dispatched an advice-boat to Carthagena, with an
account of our being in those seas, as also of our strength and
destination. We loitered here some days longer, taking in wood and
brackish water, in the use whereof, however, our admiral seemed to
consult the health of the men, by restricting each to a quart a day.

At length we set sail, and arrived in a bay to the windward of
Carthagena, where we came to an anchor, and lay at our ease ten days
longer. Here, again, certain malicious people took occasion to blame
the conduct of their superiors, by saying, that in so doing they not
only unprofitably wasted time, which was very precious, considering the
approach of the rainy season, but also allowed the Spaniards to
recollect themselves from a terror occasioned by the approach of an
English fleet, at least three times as numerous as ever appeared in
that part of the world before. But if I might be allowed to give my
opinion of the matter, I would ascribe this delay to the generosity of
our chiefs, who scorned to take any advantage that fortune might give
them even over an enemy. At last, however, we weighed, and anchored
again somewhat nearer the harbour’s mouth, where we made shift to land
our marines, who encamped on the beach, in despite of the enemy’s shot,
which knocked a good many of them on the head. This piece of conduct,
in choosing a camp under the walls of an enemy’s fortification, which I
believe never happened before, was practised, I presume, with a view of
accustoming the soldiers to stand fire, who were not as yet much used
to discipline, most of them having been taken from the plough-tail a
few months before. This expedient, again, has furnished matter for
censure against the ministry, for sending a few raw recruits on such an
important enterprise, while so many veteran regiments lay inactive at
home. But surely our governors had their reasons for so doing, which
possibly may be disclosed with other secrets of the deep. Perhaps they
were loth to risk their best troops on such desperate service, or the
colonel and the field officers of the old corps, who, generally
speaking, enjoyed their commissions as sinecures or pensions, for some
domestic services rendered to the court, refused to embark in such a
dangerous and precarious undertaking; for which refusal, no doubt, they
are to be much commended.




CHAPTER XXXII


Our Land Forces being disembarked, erect a fascine battery—our ship is
ordered, with four more, to batter the port of Bocca Chica—Mackshane’s
cowardice—the Chaplain’s frenzy—honest Rattlin loses one hand—his
heroism and reflections on the battle—Crampley’s behaviour to me during
the heat of the Fight


Our forces being landed and stationed as I have already mentioned, set
about erecting a fascine battery to cannonade the principal fort of the
enemy; and in something more than three weeks, it was ready to open.
That we might do the Spaniards as much honour as possible, it was
determined, in a council of war, that five of our largest ships should
attack the fort on one side, while the battery, strengthened by two
mortars and twenty-four cohorns, should ply it on the other.

Accordingly, the signal for our ship to engage, among others, was
hoisted, we being advertised, the night before, to make everything
clear for that purpose; and, in so doing, a difference happened between
Captain Oakum and his well-beloved cousin and counsellor Mackshane,
which had well nigh terminated in an open rupture. The doctor, who had
imagined there was no more danger of being hurt by the enemy’s shot in
the cockpit than in the centre of the earth, was lately informed that a
surgeon’s mate had been killed in that part of the ship by a
cannon-ball from two small redoubts that were destroyed before the
disembarkation of our soldiers; and therefore insisted upon having a
platform raised for the convenience of the sick and wounded in the
after-hold, where he deemed himself more secure than on the deck above.
The captain, offended at this extraordinary proposal, accused him of
pusillanimity, and told him, there was no room in the hold for such an
occasion: or, if there was, he could not expect to be indulged more
than the rest of the surgeons of the navy, who used the cockpit for
that purpose. Fear rendering Mackshane obstinate, he persisted in his
demand, and showed his instructions, by which it was authorised; the
captain swore these instructions were dictated by a parcel of lazy
poltroons who were never at sea; nevertheless he was obliged to comply,
and sent for the carpenter to give him orders about it. But, before any
such measure could be taken, our signal was thrown out, and the doctor
compelled to trust his carcass in the cockpit, where Morgan and I were
busy in putting our instruments and dressings in order.

Our ship, with others destined for this service, immediately weighed,
and in less than half-an-hour came to an anchor before the castle of
Bocca Chica, with a spring upon our cable, and the cannonading (which
indeed was dreadful) began. The surgeon, after having crossed himself,
fell flat on the deck; and the chaplain and purser, who were stationed
with us in quality of assistants, followed his example, while the
Welshman and I sat upon a chest looking at one another with great
discomposure, scarce able to refrain from the like prostration. And
that the reader may know it was not a common occasion that alarmed us
thus, I must inform him of the particulars of this dreadful din that
astonished us. The fire of the Spaniards proceeded from eighty-four
great guns, besides a mortar and small arms, in Bocca Chica; thirty-six
in Fort St. Joseph; twenty in two fascine batteries, and four
men-of-war, mounting sixty-four guns each. This was answered by our
land-battery mounted with twenty-one cannon, two mortars, and
twenty-four cohorns, and five great ships of seventy or eighty guns,
that fired without intermission.

We had not been many minutes engaged, when one of the sailors brought
another on his back to the cockpit, where he tossed him down like a bag
of oats, and pulling out his pouch, put a large chew of tobacco in his
mouth without speaking a word. Morgan immediately examined the
condition of the wounded man, and cried out, “As I shall answer now,
the man is as dead as my great grandfather.” “Dead,” said his comrade;
“he may be dead now, for aught I know, but I’ll be d—d if he was not
alive when I took him up.” So saying, he was about to return to his
quarters, when I bade him carry the body along with him, and throw it
overboard. “D—n the body!” said he, “I think ’tis fair enough if I take
care of my own.” My fellow mate, snatching up the amputation knife,
pursued him half-way up the cock-pit ladder, crying, “You lousy rascal,
is this the churchyard, or the charnel-house, or the sepulchre, or the
golgotha, of the ship?”—but was stopped in his career by one calling,
“Yo he, avast there—scaldings!” “Scaldings!” answered Morgan; “Cot
knows ’tis hot enough indeed: who are you?” “Here’s one!” replied the
voice; and I immediately knew it to be that of my honest friend Jack
Rattlin, who coming towards me, told me, with great deliberation, he
was come to be docked at last, and discovered the remains of one hand,
which had been shattered to pieces with a grape shot. I lamented with
unfeigned sorrow his misfortune, which he bore with heroic courage,
observing, that every shot had its commission: “It was well it did not
take him in the head! or if it had, what then? he should have died
bravely, fighting for his king and country. Death was a debt which
every man owed, and must pay; and that now was as well as another
time.” I was much pleased and edified with the maxims of this
sea-philosopher, who endured the amputation of his left hand without
shrinking, the operation being performed (at his request) by me, after
Mackshane, who was with difficulty prevailed to lift his head from the
deck, had declared there was a necessity for his losing the limb.

While I was employed in dressing the stump, I asked Jack’s opinion of
the battle, who, shaking his head, frankly told me, he believed we
should do no good: “For why? because, instead of dropping anchor close
under shore, where we should have to deal with one corner of Bocca
Chica only, we had opened the harbour, and exposed ourselves to the
whole fire of the enemy from their shipping and Fort St. Joseph, as
well as from the castle we intended to cannonade; that, besides, we lay
at too great a distance to damage the walls, and three parts in four of
our shot did not take place; for there was scarce anybody on board who
understood the pointing of a gun. Ah! God help us!” continued he, “If
your kinsman, Lieutenant Bowling, had been here, we should have had
other guess work.” By this time, our patients had increased to such a
number, that we did not know which to begin with; and the first mate
plainly told the surgeon, that if he did not get up immediately and
perform his duty, he would complain of his behaviour to the admiral,
and make application for his warrant. This remonstrance effectually
roused Mackshane, who was never deaf to an argument in which he thought
his interest was concerned; he therefore rose up, and in order to
strengthen his resolution, had recourse more than once to a case-bottle
of rum, which he freely communicated to the chaplain, and purser, who
had as much need of such extraordinary inspiration as himself. Being
thus supported, he went to work, and arms and legs were hewed down
without mercy. The fumes of the liquor mounting into the parson’s
brain, conspired, with his former agitation of spirits, to make him
quite delirious; he stripped himself to the skin; and, besmearing his
body with blood, could scarce be withheld from running upon deck in
that condition. Jack Rattlin, scandalised at this deportment,
endeavoured to allay his transports with reason; but finding all he
said ineffectual, and great confusion occasioned by his frolics, he
knocked him down with his right hand, and by threats kept him quiet in
that state of humiliation. But it was not in the power of rum to
elevate the purser, who sat on the floor wringing his hands, and
cursing the hour in which he left his peaceable profession of a brewer
in Rochester, to engage in such a life of terror and disquiet.

While we diverted ourselves at the expense of this poor devil, a shot
happened to take us between wind and water, and (its course being
through the purser’s store room) made a terrible havoc and noise among
the jars and bottles in its way, and disconcerted Mackshane so much,
that he dropped his scalpel, and falling down on his knees, pronounced
his Pater-noster aloud: the purser fell backward, and lay without sense
or motion; and the chaplain grew so outrageous, that Rattlin with one
hand could not keep him under; so that we were obliged to confine him
in the surgeon’s cabin, where he was no doubt guilty of a thousand
extravagancies. Much about this time, my old antagonist, Crampley, came
down, with express orders, as he said, to bring me up to the
quarter-deck, to dress a slight wound the captain had received by a
splinter: his reason for honouring me in particular with this piece of
service, being, that in case I should be killed or disabled by the way,
my death or mutilation would be of less consequence to the ship’s
company than that of the doctor or his first mate. At another time,
perhaps, I might have disputed this order, to which I was not bound to
pay the least regard; but as I thought my reputation depended upon my
compliance, I was resolved to convince my rival that I was no more
afraid than he of exposing myself to danger. With this view I provided
myself with dressings, and followed him immediately to the
quarter-deck, through a most infernal scene of slaughter, fire, smoke,
and uproar. Captain Oakum, who leaned against the mizen-mast, no sooner
saw me approach in my shirt, with the sleeves tucked up to my armpits,
and my hands dyed with blood, than he signified his displeasure by a
frown, and asked why the doctor himself did not come? I told him that
Crampley had singled me out, as if by express command; at which reply
he seemed surprised, and threatened to punish the midshipman for his
presumption, after the engagement. In the meantime, I was sent back to
my station, and ordered to tell Mackshane, that the captain expected
him immediately. I got safe back, and delivered my commission to the
doctor, who flatly refused to quit the post assigned to him by his
instructions; whereupon Morgan, who I believe, was jealous of my
reputation for courage, undertook the affair, and ascended with great
intrepidity. The captain, finding the surgeon obstinate, suffered
himself to be dressed, and swore he would confine Mackshane as soon as
the service should be over.




CHAPTER XXXIII


A breach being made in the walls, our soldiers give the assault, and
take the place without opposition—our sailors at the same time, become
masters of all the other strengths near Bocca Chica, and take
possession of the harbour—the good consequence of this success—we move
nearer the town—find two forts deserted, and the Channel blocked up
with sunk vessels; which however we find means to clear—land our
soldiers at La Quinta—repulse a body of militia—attack the castle of
St. Lazar, and are forced to retreat with great loss—the remains of our
army are re-embarked—an effort of the Admiral to take the town—the
economy of our expedition described


Having cannonaded the fort during the space of four hours, we were all
ordered to slip our cables, and sheer off; but next day the engagement
was renewed, and continued from the morning till the afternoon, when
the enemy’s fire from Bocca Chica slackened, and towards evening was
quite silenced. A breach being made on the other side, by our land
battery, large enough to admit a middle-sized baboon, provided he could
find means to climb up to it, our general proposed to give the assault
that very night, and actually ordered a detachment on that duty.
Providence stood our friend upon this occasion, and put it into the
hearts of the Spaniards to abandon the fort, which might have been
maintained by resolute men till the day of judgment against all the
force we could exert in the attack. And while our soldiers took
possession of the enemy’s ramparts without resistance, the same good
luck attended a body of sailors, who made themselves masters of Fort
St. Joseph, the fascine batteries, and one Spanish man-of-war; the
other three being burnt or sunk by the foe, that they might not fall
into our hands. The taking of these forts, in the strength of which the
Spaniards chiefly confided, made us masters of the outward harbour, and
occasioned great joy among us, as we laid our accounts at finding
little or no opposition from the town: and indeed, if a few great ships
had sailed up immediately, before they had recovered from the confusion
and despair that our unexpected success had produced among them, it is
not impossible that we might have finished the affair to our
satisfaction, without any more bloodshed; but this step our heroes
disdained as a barbarous insult over the enemy’s distress, and gave
them all the respite they could desire, in order to recollect
themselves. In the meantime, Mackshane, taking the advantage of this
general exultation, waited on our captain, and pleaded his own cause so
effectually that he was re-established in his good graces; and as for
Crampley, there was no more notice taken of his behaviour towards me
during the action. But of all the consequences of the victory, none was
more grateful than plenty of fresh water, after we had languished five
weeks on the allowance of a purser’s quart per day for each man in the
Torrid Zone, where the sun was vertical, and the expense of bodily
fluid so great, that a gallon of liquor could scarce supply the waste
of twenty-four hours; especially as our provision consisted of putrid
salt beef, to which the sailors gave the name of Irish horse; salt
pork, of New England, which, though neither fish nor flesh, savoured of
both; bread from the same country, every biscuit whereof, like a piece
of clockwork, moved by its own internal impulse, occasioned by the
myriads of insects that dwelt within it; and butter served out by the
gill, that tasted like train oil thickened with salt. Instead of small
beer, each man was allowed three half-quarterns of brandy or rum, which
were distributed every morning, diluted with a certain quantity of his
water, without either sugar or fruit to render it palatable, for which
reason, this composition was by the sailors not ineptly styled
Necessity. Nor was this limitation of simple element owing to a
scarcity of it on board, for there was at this time water enough in the
ship for a voyage of six months, at the rate of half-a-gallon per day
to each man: but this fast must, I suppose, have been enjoined by way
of penance on the ship’s company for their sins; or rather with a view
to mortify them into a contempt of life, that they might thereby become
more resolute and regardless of danger. How simply then do those people
argue, who ascribe the great mortality among us, to our bad provision
and want of water; and affirm, that a great many valuable lives might
have been saved, if the useless transports had been employed in
fetching fresh stock, turtle, fruit, and other refreshments from
Jamaica and other adjacent islands, for the use of the army and fleet!
seeing it is to be hoped, that those who died went to a better place,
and those who survived were the more easily maintained. After all, a
sufficient number remained to fall before the walls of St. Lazar, where
they behaved like their own country mastiffs, which shut their eyes,
run into the jaws of a bear, and have their heads crushed for their
valour.

But to return to my narration. After having put garrisons into the
forts we had taken, and re-embarked our soldiers and artillery (a piece
of service that detained us more than a week), we ventured up to the
mouth of the inner harbour, guarded by a large fortification on one
side, and a small redoubt on the other, both of which were deserted
before our approach, and the entrance of the harbour blocked up by
several old galleons, and two men-of-war that the enemy had sunk in the
channel. We made shift, however, to open a passage for some ships, that
favoured a second landing of our troops at a place called La Quinta,
not far from the town, where, after a faint resistance from a body of
Spaniards, who opposed their disembarkation, they encamped with a
design of besieging the castle of St. Lazar, which overlooked and
commanded the city. Whether our renowned general had nobody in his army
who knew how to approach it in form, or that he trusted entirely to the
fame of his arms, I shall not determine; but, certain it is, a
resolution was taken in a council of war, to attack the place with
musketry only. This was put in execution, and succeeded accordingly;
the enemy giving them such a hearty reception, that the greatest part
of their detachment took up their everlasting residence on the spot.

Our chief, not relishing this kind of complaisance in the Spaniard’s,
was wise enough to retreat on board with the remains of his army,
which, from eight thousand able men landed on the beach near Bocca
Chica, was now reduced to fifteen hundred fit for service. The sick and
wounded were squeezed into certain vessels, which thence obtained the
name of hospital ships, though methinks they scarce deserved such a
creditable title, seeing few of them could boast of their surgeon,
nurse, or cook; and the space between decks was so confined that the
miserable patients had not room to sit upright in their beds. Their
wounds and stumps, being neglected, contracted filth and putrefaction,
and millions of maggots were hatched amidst the corruption of their
sores. This inhuman disregard was imputed to the scarcity of surgeons;
though it is well known that every great ship in the fleet could have
spared one at least for this duty, an expedient which would have been
more than sufficient to remove this shocking inconvenience. But perhaps
our general was too much of a gentleman to ask a favour of this kind
from his fellow chief, who, on the other hand, would not derogate so
much from his own dignity, as to offer such assistance unasked; for, I
may venture to affirm, that by this time the Demon of Discord, with her
sooty wings, had breathed her influence upon our councils; and it might
be said of these great men (I hope they will pardon the comparison) as
of Cesar and Pompey, the one could not brook a superior, and the other
was impatient of an equal; so that, between the pride of one and
insolence of another, the enterprise miscarried, according to the
proverb, “Between two stools the backside falls to the ground.” Not
that I would be thought to liken any public concern to that opprobrious
part of the human body, though I might with truth assert, if I durst
use such a vulgar idiom, that the nation did hang on arse at its
disappointment on this occasion; neither would I presume to compare the
capacity of our heroic leaders to any such wooden convenience as a
joint-stool or a close-stool; but only to signify by this simile, the
mistake the people committed in trusting to the union of two
instruments that were never joined.

A day or two after the attempt on St. Lazar, the admiral ordered one of
the Spanish men-of-war we had taken to be mounted with sixteen guns,
and manned with detachments from our great ships, in order to batter
the town; accordingly, she was towed into the inner harbour in the
night, and moored within half a mile of the walls, against which she
began to fire at daybreak; and continued about six hours exposed to the
opposition of at least thirty pieces of cannon, which at length obliged
our men to set her on fire, and get off as well as they could in their
boats. This piece of conduct afforded matter of speculation to all the
wits, either in the army or navy, who were at last fain to acknowledge
it a stroke of policy above their comprehension. Some entertained such
an irreverent opinion of the admiral’s understanding, as to think he
expected the town would surrender to his floating battery of sixteen
guns: others imagined his sole intention was to try the enemy’s
strength, by which he should be able to compute the number of great
ships that would be necessary to force the town to a capitulation. But
this last conjecture soon appeared groundless, inasmuch as no ships of
any kind whatever were afterwards employed on that service. A third
sort swore, that no other cause could be assigned for this undertaking
than that which induced Don Quixote to attack the windmill. A fourth
class (and that the most numerous, though, without doubt, composed of
the sanguine and malicious), plainly taxed this commander with want of
honesty as well as sense; and alleged that he ought to have sacrificed
private pique to the interest of his country; that, where the lives of
so many brave fellow-citizens were concerned, he ought to have
concurred with the general without being solicited or even desired,
towards their preservation and advantage, that, if his arguments could
not dissuade him from a desperate enterprise, it was his duty to have
rendered it as practicable as possible, without running extreme hazard;
that this could have been done, with a good prospect of success, by
ordering five or six large ships to batter the town, while the land
forces stormed the castle; by these means a considerable diversion
would have been made in favour of those troops, who, in their march to
the assault and in the retreat, suffered much more from the town than
from the castle! that the inhabitants, seeing themselves vigorously
attacked on all hands, would have been divided, distracted, and
confused, and in all probability, unable to resist the assailants. But
all these suggestions surely proceeded from ignorance or malevolence,
or else the admiral would not have found it such an easy matter, at his
return to England, to justify his conduct to a ministry at once so
upright and discerning. True it is, that those who undertook to
vindicate him on the spot, asserted, that there was not water enough
for our great ships near the town: though this was a little
unfortunately urged, because there happened to be pilots in the fleet
perfectly well acquainted with the soundings of the harbour, who
affirmed there was water enough for five eighty-gun ships to lie
abreast almost up to the very walls. The disappointments we suffered
occasioned a universal dejection, which was not at all alleviated by
the objects that daily and hourly entertained our eyes, nor by the
prospect of what must have inevitably happened, had we remained much
longer in this place. Such was the economy in some ships that, rather
than be at the trouble of interring the dead, their commanders ordered
their men to throw their bodies overboard, many without either ballast
or winding-sheet; so that numbers of human carcases floated in the
harbour, until they were devoured by sharks and carrion crows, which
afforded no agreeable spectacle to those who survived. At the same time
the wet season began, during which a deluge of rain falls, from the
rising to the setting sun, without intermission, and that no sooner
ceases than it begins to thunder, and lighten with such continued
flashing, that one can see to read a very small print by the
illumination.




CHAPTER XXXIV


An epidemic Fever rages among us—we abandon our Conquests—I am seized
with Distemper—write a Petition to the Captain, which is rejected—I am
in danger of Suffocation through the Malice of Crampley, and relieved
by a Serjeant—my Fever increases—the Chaplain wants to confess me—I
obtain a favourable Crisis—Morgan’s Affection for me proved—the
Behaviour of Mackshane and Crampley towards me—Captain Oakum is removed
into another Ship with his beloved Doctor—our new Captain described—An
Adventure of Morgan


The change of the atmosphere, occasioned by this phenomenon, conspired,
with the stench that surrounded us, the heat of the climate, our own
constitutions, impoverished by bad provisions, and our despair, to
introduce the bilious fever among us, which raged with such violence,
that three-fourths of those whom it invaded died in a deplorable
manner; the colour of their skin being, by the extreme putrefaction of
the juices, changed into that of soot.

Our conductors, finding things in this situation, perceived it was high
to relinquish our conquests, and this we did, after having rendered
their artillery useless, and blown up their walls with gunpowder. Just
as we sailed from Bocca Chica, on our return to Jamaica, I found myself
threatened with the symptoms of this terrible distemper; and knowing
very well that I stood no chance for my life, if I should be obliged to
be in the cockpit, which by this time was grown intolerable, even to
people in health, by reason of the heat and unwholesome smell of
decayed provision, I wrote a petition to the captain, representing my
case, and humbly imploring his permission to be among the soldiers in
the middle deck, for the benefit of the air: but I might have spared
myself the trouble; for this humane commander refused my request, and
ordered me to continue in the place allotted for the surgeon’s mates,
or else be contented to be in the hospital, which, by the by, was three
degrees more offensive and more suffocating than our own berth below.
Another, in my condition, perhaps, would have submitted to his fate,
and died in a pet; but I could not brook the thought of perishing so
pitifully, after I had weathered so many gales of hard fortune: I
therefore, without minding Oakum’s injunction, prevailed upon the
soldiers (whose good-will I had acquired) to admit my hammock among
them; and actually congratulated myself upon my comfortable situation;
which Crampley no sooner understood, than he signified to the captain
my contempt of his orders, and was invested with power to turn me down
again into my proper habitation.

This barbarous piece of revenge incensed me so much against the author,
that I vowed, with bitter imprecations, to call him to a severe
account, if ever it should be in my power; and the agitation of my
spirits increased my fever to a violent degree. While I lay gasping for
breath in this infernal abode, I was visited by a sergeant, the bones
of whose nose I had reduced and set to rights, after they had been
demolished by a splinter during our last engagement; he, being informed
of my condition, offered me the use of his berth in the middle deck,
which was enclosed with canvas, and well aired by a port-hole that
remained open within it. I embraced this proposal with joy, and was
immediately conducted to the place, where I was treated, while my
illness lasted, with the utmost tenderness and care by this grateful
halberdier, who had no other bed for himself than a hencoop during the
whole passage. Here I lay and enjoyed the breeze, notwithstanding which
my malady gained ground, and at length my life was despaired of, though
I never lost hopes of recovery, even when I had the mortification to
see, from my cabin-window, six or seven thrown overboard every day, who
died of the same distemper. This confidence, I am persuaded, conduced a
great deal to the preservation of my life, especially when joined to
another resolution I took at the beginning, namely, to refuse all
medicine, which I could not help thinking co-operated with the disease,
and, instead of resisting putrefaction, promoted a total degeneracy of
the vital fluid. When my friend Morgan, therefore, brought his
diaphoretic bolases, I put them into my mouth, ’tis true, but without
any intention of swallowing them: and, when he went away, spit them
out, and washed my mouth with water-gruel. I seemingly complied in this
matter, that I might not affront the blood of Caractacus, by a refusal
which might have intimated a diffidence of his physical capacity, for
he acted as my physician; Doctor Mackshane never once inquiring about
me, or even knowing where I was. When my distemper was at the height,
Morgan thought my case desperate, and, after having applied a blister
to the nape of my neck, squeezed my hand, bidding me, with a woful
countenance, recommend myself to Cot and my Reteemer; then, taking his
leave, desired the chaplain to come and administer some spiritual
consolation to me; but, before he arrived, I made shift to rid myself
of the troublesome application the Welshman had bestowed on my back.
The person, having felt my pulse, inquired into the nature of my
complaints, hemmed a little, and began thus: “Mr. Random, God out of
his infinite mercy has been pleased to visit you with a dreadful
distemper, the issue of which no man knows. You may be permitted to
recover and live many days on the face of the earth; and, which is more
probable, you may be taken away, and cut off in the flower of your
youth. It is incumbent on you, therefore, to prepare for the great
change, by repenting sincerely of your sins; of this there cannot be a
greater sign, than an ingenuous confession, which I conjure you to make
without hesitation or mental reservation; and, when I am convinced of
your sincerity, I will then give you such comfort as the situation of
your soul will admit of. Without doubt, you have been guilty of
numberless transgressions to which youth is subject, as swearing,
drunkenness, whoredom, and adultery: tell me therefore, without
reserve, the particulars of each, especially of the last, that I may be
acquainted with the true state of your conscience; for no physician
will prescribe for his patient until he knows the circumstances of his
disease.”

As I was not under any apprehensions of death, I could not help smiling
at the chaplain’s inquisitive remonstrance, which I told him savoured
more of the Roman than of the Protestant church, in recommending
auricular confession; a thing, in my opinion, not at all necessary to
salvation, and which, for that reason, I declined. This reply
disconcerted him a little; however, he explained away his meaning, in
making learned distinctions between what was absolutely necessary and
what was only convenient; then proceeded to ask what religion I
professed. I answered, that I had not as yet considered the difference
of religions, consequently had not fixed on any one in particular, but
that I was bred a Presbyterian. At this word the chaplain expressed
great astonishment, and said, he could not comprehend how a
presbyterian was entitled to any post under the English government.
Then he asked if I had ever received the sacrament, or taken the oaths;
to which questions, I replying in the negative, he held up his hands,
assured me he could do me no service, wished I might not be in a state
of reprobation, and returned to his messmates, who were making merry in
the ward-room, round a table well stored with bumbo(2) and wine.

(2)bumbo is a liquor composed of rum, sugar, water, and nutmeg


This insinuation, terrible as it was, had not such an effect upon me as
the fever, which, soon after he had left me, grew outrageous. I began
to see strange chimeras and concluded myself upon the point of being
delirious; in the meantime, being in great danger of suffocation, I
started up in a kind of frantic fit, with an intention to plunge myself
into the sea; and, as my friend the sergeant was not present, would
certainly have cooled myself to some purpose, had I not perceived a
moisture upon my thigh, as I endeavoured to get out of my hammock: the
appearance of this revived my hopes, and I had reflection and
resolution enough to take the advantage of this favourable symptom, by
tearing the shirt from my body, and the sheets from my bed, and
wrapping myself in a thick blanket, in which inclosure, for about a
quarter of an hour, felt all the pains of hell: but it was not long
before I was recompensed for my suffering by a profuse sweat, that,
bursting from the whole surface of my skin, in less than two hours,
relieved me from all my complaints except that of weakness; and left me
as hungry as a kite. I enjoyed a very comfortable nap, after which I
was regaling myself with the agreeable reverie of future happiness,
when I heard Morgan, on the outside of the curtain, ask the sergeant if
I was alive still? “Alive!” cried the other, “God forbid he should be
otherwise! he has lain quiet these five hours, and I do not choose to
disturb him, for sleep will do him great service.” “Ay,” said my
fellow-mate, “he sleeps so sound (look you), that he will not waken
till the great trump plows—Cot be merciful to his soul. He has paid his
debt like an honest man—ay, and moreover, he is at rest from all
persecutions, and troubles, and afflictions, of which, Cot knows, and I
know, he had his own share—Ochree! Ochree! he was a promising youth
indeed!” So saying he groaned grievously, and began to whine in such a
manner, as persuaded me he had a real friendship for me. The sergeant,
alarmed at his words, came into the berth, and, while he looked upon
me, I smiled, and tipped him the wink: he immediately guessed my
meaning and remaining silent, Morgan was confirmed in his opinion of my
being dead; whereupon he approached, with tears in his eyes, in order
to indulge his grief with a sight of the object: and I counterfeited
death so well, by fixing my eyes and dropping my under-jaw, that he
said, “There he lies, no petter than a lump of clay, Cot help me!” and
observed, by the distortion of my face, that I must have had a strong
struggle.

I should not have been able to contain myself much longer, when he
began to perform the last duty of a friend, in closing my eyes and my
mouth, upon which I suddenly snapped at his fingers and discomposed him
so much that he started back, turned pale as ashes, and stared like the
picture of horror; although I could not help laughing at his
appearance, I was concerned for his situation, and stretched out my
hand, telling him I hoped to live and eat some salmagundy of his making
in England. It was some time before he could recollect himself so far
as to feel my pulse, and inquire into the particulars of my disease;
but when he found I had enjoyed a favourable crisis, he congratulated
me upon my good fortune; not failing to ascribe it, under Cot, to the
blister he had applied to my back, at his last visit; which, by the
bye, said he, must now be removed and dressed; he was actually going to
fetch dressings, when I, feigning astonishment, said, “Bless me! sure
you never applied a blister to me—there is nothing on my back, I assure
you.” But he could not be convinced till he had examined it, and then
endeavoured to conceal his confusion, by expressing his surprise in
finding the skin untouched and the plaster missing. In order to excuse
myself for paying so little regard to his prescription, I pretended to
have been insensible when it was put on, and to have pulled it off
afterwards in a fit of delirium. This apology satisfied my friend, who,
on this occasion, abated a good deal of his stiffness in regard to
punctilio; and as we were now safely arrived at Jamaica, where I had
the benefit of fresh provisions and other refreshments, I recovered
strength every day, and, in a short time, my health and vigour were
perfectly re-established.

When I got up at first, and was just able to crawl about the deck with
a staff in my hand, I met Doctor Mackshane, who passed by me with a
disdainful look, and did not vouchsafe to honour me with one word.
After him came Crampley, who, strutting up to me with a fierce
countenance, pronounced, “Here’s fine discipline on-board, when such
lazy, skulking sons of bitches as you are allowed, on pretence of
sickness, to lollop at your ease, while your betters are kept to hard
duty!” The sight and behaviour of this malicious scoundrel enraged me
so much that I could scarce refrain from laying my cudgel across his
pate; but when I considered my present feebleness, and the enemies I
had in the ship, who wanted only a pretence to ruin me, I restrained my
passion, and contented myself with telling him, I had not forgot his
insolence and malice, and that I hoped we should meet one day on shore.
At this declaration he grinned, shook his fist, and swore he longed for
nothing more than such an opportunity. Meanwhile our ship was ordered
to be heaved down, victualled, and watered, for her return to England;
and our captain, for some reason or other, not thinking it convenient
for him to revisit his native country at this time, exchanged with a
gentleman, who, on the other hand, wished for nothing so much as to be
safe without the tropic: all his care and tenderness of himself being
insufficient to preserve his complexion from the injuries of the sun
and weather.

Our tyrant having left the ship, and carried his favourite Mackshane
along with him, to my inexpressible satisfaction, our new commander
came on board in a ten-oared barge, overshadowed with a vast umbrella,
and appeared in everything the reverse of Oakum, being a tall, thin
young man, dressed in this manner: a white hat, garnished with a red
feather, adorned his head, from whence his hair flowed upon his
shoulders, in ringlets tied behind with a ribbon. His coat, consisting
of pink-coloured silk, lined with white, by the elegance of the cut
retired backward, as it were, to discover a white satin waistcoat
embroidered with gold, unbuttoned at the upper part to display a brooch
set with garnets, that glittered in the breast of his shirt, which was
of the finest cambric, edged with right Mechlin: the knees of his
crimson velvet breeches scarce descended so low as to meet his silk
stockings, which rose without spot or wrinkle on his meagre legs, from
shoes of blue Meroquin, studded with diamond buckles that flamed forth
rivals to the sun! A steel-hilted sword, inlaid with gold, and decked
with a knot of ribbon which fell down in a rich tassel, equipped his
side; and an amber-headed cane hung dangling from his wrist. But the
most remarkable parts of his furniture were, a mask on his face, and
white gloves on his hands, which did not seem to be put on with an
intention to be pulled off occasionally, but were fixed with a curious
ring on the little finger of each hand.

In this garb, Captain Whiffle, for that was his name, took possession
of the ship, surrounded with a crowd of attendants, all of whom, in
their different degrees, seemed to be of their patron’s disposition;
and the air was so impregnated with perfumes, that one may venture to
affirm the climate of Arabia Felix was not half so sweet-scented. My
fellow-mate, observing no surgeon among his train, thought he had found
an occasion too favourable for himself to be neglected; and,
remembering the old proverb, “Spare to speak, and spare to speed,”
resolved to solicit the new captain’s interest immediately, before any
other surgeon could be appointed for the ship. With this view he
repaired to the cabin in his ordinary dress, consisting of a check
shirt and trousers, a brown linen waistcoat, and a nightcap of the same
(neither of them very clean,) which, for his further misfortune,
happened to smell strong of tobacco. Entering without any ceremony into
this sacred place, he found Captain Whiffle reposing upon a couch, with
a wrapper of fine chintz about his body, and a muslin cap bordered with
lace about his head; and after several low congees began in this
manner: “Sir, I hope you will forgive, and excuse, and pardon, the
presumption of one who has not the honour of being known to you, but
who is, nevertheless a shentleman porn and pred, and moreover has had
misfortunes, Cot help me, in the world.”

Here he was interrupted by the captain, who, on seeing him, had started
up with great amazement, at the novelty of the apparition; and, having
recollected himself, pronounced with a look and tone signifying
disdain, curiosity and surprise, “Zauns! who art thou?” “I am surgeon’s
first mate on board of this ship,” replied Morgan: “and I most
vehemently desire and beseech you, with all submission, to be pleased
to condescend and vouchsafe to inquire into my character, and my
pehaviour, and my deserts, which, under Cot, I hope, will entitle me to
the vacancy of surgeon.” As he proceeded in his speech, he continued
advancing towards the captain, whose nostrils were no sooner saluted
with the aromatic flavour that exhaled from him, than he cried with
great emotion, “Heaven preserve me! I am suffocated! Fellow, fellow,
away with thee! Curse thee, fellow! Get thee gone! I shall be stunk to
death!” At the noise of his outcries, his servants ran into his
apartment, and he accosted them thus: “Villains! cut-throats! traitors!
I am betrayed! I am sacrificed! Will you not carry that monster away?
or must I be stifled with the stench of him? oh, oh!” With these
interjections he sank down upon his settee in a fit: his
valet-de-chambre plied him with a smelling-bottle, one footman chafed
his temples with Hungary water, another sprinkled the floor with
spirits of lavender, a third pushed Morgan out of the cabin; who coming
to the place where I was, sat down with a demure countenance and,
according to his custom, when he received any indignity which he durst
not revenge, began to sing a Welsh ditty.

I guessed he was under some agitation of spirits and desired to know
the cause; but, instead of answering me directly, he asked with great
emotion, if I thought him a monster and a stinkard? “A monster and a
stinkard!” said I, with some surprise: “did anybody call you so?” “Cot
is my judge,” replied be, “Captain Fifle did call me both; ay, and all
the waters in the Tawy will not wash it out of my remembrance. I do
affirm and avouch, and maintain, with my soul, and my pody, and my
plood, look you, that I have no smells apout me, but such as a
Christian ought to have, except the effluvia of tobacco, which is a
cephalic, odoriferous, aromatic herb; and he is a son of a mountain
goat who says otherwise. As for my being a minister, let that be as it
is: I am as Cot was pleased to create me, which, peradventure, is more
than I shall ever aver of him who gave me that title; for I will
proclaim it before the world, that he is disguised, and transfigured,
and transmogrified, with affectation and whimseys; and that he is more
like a papoon than of the human race.”




CHAPTER XXXV


Captain Whiffle sends for me—his situation described—his surgeon
arrives, prescribes for him, and puts him to bed—a bed is put up for
Mr. Simper contiguous to the state room, which, with other parts of the
captains behaviour, gives the ship’s company a very unfavourable idea
of their commander—I am detained in the West Indies by the admiral, and
go on board of the Lizard sloop of war in quality of surgeon’s mate,
where I make myself known to the surgeon, who treats me very kindly—I
go on shore, sell my ticket, purchase necessaries, and, at my return on
board, am surprised at the sight of Crampley, who is appointed
lieutenant of the sloop—we sail on a cruise—take a prize in which I
arrive at Port Morant under the command of my messmate, with whom I
live in great harmony


He was going on with an eulogium upon the captain, when I received a
message to clean myself, and go up to the great cabin: and with this
command I instantly complied, sweetening myself with rosewater from the
medicine chest. When I entered the room, I was ordered to stand by the
door, until Captain Whiffle had reconnoitered me at a distance with a
spy-glass. He, having consulted one sense in this manner, bade me
advance gradually, that his nose might have intelligence before it
could be much offended: I therefore approached with great caution and
success, and he was pleased to say, “Ay, this creature is tolerable.” I
found him lolling on his couch with a languishing air, his head
supported by his valet-de-chambre, who from time to time applied a
smelling-bottle to his nose. “Vergette,” said he in a squeaking tone,
“dost think this wretch (meaning me) will do me no injury? May I
venture to submit my arm to him?” “Pon my word,” replied the valet, “I
do tink dat dere be great occasion for your honour losing a small
quantite of blodt; and the young man ave quelque chose of de bonne
mine.” “Well, then,” said his master, “I think I must venture.” Then,
addressing himself to me, “Hast thou ever blooded anybody but brutes?
But I need not ask thee, for thou wilt tell me a most d—able lie,”
“Brutes, sir!” answered I, pulling down his glove, in order to feel his
pulse, “I never meddle with brutes.” “What the devil art thou about?”
cried he, “dost thou intend to twist off my hand? Gad’s curse! my arm
is benumbed up to the very shoulder! Heaven have mercy upon me! must I
perish under the hands of savages? What an unfortunate dog was I to
come on board without my own surgeon, Mr. Simper.” I craved pardon for
having handled him so roughly, and, with the utmost care, and
tenderness, tied up his arm with a fillet of silk. While I was feeling
for the vein, he desired to know how much blood I intended to take from
him, and, when I answered, “not above twelve ounces,” started up with a
look full of horror, and bade me be gone, swearing I had a design upon
his life. Vergette appeased him with difficulty, and, opening a bureau,
took out a pair of scales, in one of which was placed a small cup; and
putting them into my hand, told me, the captain never lost above an
ounce and three drams at one time.

While I prepared for this important evacuation, there came into the
cabin a young man gaily dressed, of a very delicate complexion with a
kind of languid smile on his face: which seemed to have been rendered
habitual by a long course of affectation. The captain no sooner
perceived him, than, rising hastily, he flew into his arms, crying, “O,
my dear Simper, I am excessively disordered! I have been betrayed,
frighted, murdered, by the negligence of my servants, who suffered a
beast, a mule, a bear, to surprise me, and stink me into convulsions
with the fumes of tobacco.” Simper, who by this time, I found, was
obliged to act for the clearness of his complexion, assumed an air of
softness and sympathy, and lamented with many tender expressions of
sorrow, the sad accident that had thrown him into that condition; then,
feeling his patient’s pulse on the outside of his glove, gave it as his
opinion, that his disorder was entirely nervous, and that some drops of
tincture of castor, and liquid laudanum, would be of more service to
him than bleeding, by bridling the inordinate sallies of his spirits,
and composing the fermentation of his bile. I was therefore sent to
prepare this prescription, which was administered in a glass of sack
posset, after the captain had been put to bed, and orders sent to the
officers on the quarter-deck, to let nobody walk on that side under
which he lay.

While the captain enjoyed his repose the doctor watched over him, and
indeed became so necessary, that a cabin was made for him contiguous to
the state room where Whiffle slept, that he might be at hand in case of
accidents in the night. Next day, our commander being happily
recovered, gave orders that none of the lieutenants should appear upon
deck without a wig, sword, and ruffles; nor any midshipman, or other
petty officer, be seen with a check shirt or dirty linen. He also
prohibited any person whatever, except Simper and his own servants,
from coming into the great cabin without first sending in to obtain
leave. These singular regulations did not prepossess the ship’s company
in his favour: but, on the contrary, gave scandal an opportunity to be
very busy with his character, and accuse him of maintaining a
correspondence with his surgeon not fit to be named.

In a few weeks, our ship being under sailing orders, I was in hope of
revisiting my native country, in a very short time, when the admiral’s
surgeon came on board, and, sending for Morgan and me to the
quarter-deck, gave us to understand there was a great scarcity of
surgeons in the West Indies; that he was commanded to detain one mate
out of every great ship that was bound for England; and desired us to
agree between ourselves, before the next day at that hour, which of us
should stay behind. We were thunderstruck at this proposal, and stared
at one another some time without speaking; at length the Welshman broke
silence, and offered to remain in the West Indies, provided the admiral
would give him a surgeon’s warrant immediately; but he was told there
was no want of chief surgeons, and that he must be contented with the
station of mate, till he should be further provided for in due course.
Whereupon Morgan flatly refused to quit the ship for which the
commissioners of the navy had appointed him; and the other told him as
plainly, that if we could not determine the affair by ourselves before
to-morrow morning, he must cast lots, and abide by his chance.

When I recalled to my remembrance the miseries I had undergone in
England, where I had not one friend to promote my interest, or favour
my advancement in the navy, and the same time reflected on the present
dearth of surgeons in the West Indies, and the unhealthiness of the
climate, which every day almost reduced the number, I could not help
thinking my success would be much more certain and expeditious by my
staying where I was, than by returning to Europe. I therefore resolved
to comply with a good grace, and next day, when we were ordered to
throw dice, told Morgan he needed not trouble himself, for I would
voluntarily submit to the admiral’s pleasure. This frank declaration
was commended by the gentleman, who assured me, it should not fare the
worse with me for my resignation. Indeed he was as good as his word,
and that very afternoon procured a warrant, appointing me surgeon’s
mate of the Lizard sloop-of-war, which put me on a footing with every
first mate in the service.

My ticket being made out, I put my chest and bedding on board a canoe
that lay alongside, and, having shook hands with my trusty friend the
sergeant, and honest Jack Rattlin, who was bound for Greenwich
Hospital, I took my leave of Morgan with many tears, after we had
exchanged our sleeve buttons as remembrances of each other. Having
presented my new warrant to the captain of the Lizard, I inquired for
the doctor, whom I no sooner saw than I recollected him to be one of
those young fellows with whom I had been committed to the round-house,
during our frolic with Jackson, as I have related before. He received
me with a good deal of courtesy, and, when I put him in mind of our
former acquaintance, expressed great joy at seeing me again, and
recommended me to an exceeding good mess, composed of the gunner and
master’s mate. As there was not one sick person in the ship, I got
leave to go ashore next day with the gunner, who recommended me to a
Jew, that bought my ticket at the rate of forty per cent discount; and,
having furnished myself with the necessaries I wanted, returned on
board in the evening, and, to my surprise, found my old antagonist
Crampley walking upon deck. Though I did not fear his enmity, I was
shocked at his appearance, and communicated my sentiments on that
subject to Mr. Tomlins the surgeon, who told me that Crampley, by dint
of some friends about the admiral, had procured a commission,
constituting him lieutenant on board the Lizard; and advised me, now he
was my superior officer, to behave with some respect towards him, or
else he would find a thousand opportunities of using me ill. This
advice was a bitter potion to me, whom pride and resentment had
rendered utterly incapable of the least submission to, or even of a
reconciliation with, the wretch who had, on many occasions, treated me
so inhumanly: however, I resolved to have as little connection as
possible with him, and to ingratiate myself as much as I could with the
rest of the officers, whose friendship might be a bulwark to defend me
from the attempts of his malice.

In less than a week we sailed on a cruise, and having weathered the
east end of the island, had the good fortune to take a Spanish
barcolongo, with her prize, which was an English ship bound for
Bristol, that sailed from Jamaica a fortnight before, without convoy.
All the prisoners who were well, we put onshore on the north side of
the island; the prizes were manned with Englishmen, and the command of
the barcolongo given to my friend the master’s mate, with orders to
carry them into Port Morant, and there to remain until the Lizard’s
cruise should be ended, at which time she would touch at the same place
in her way to Port Royal. With him I was sent to attend the wounded
Spaniards as well as Englishmen, who amounted to sixteen, and to take
care of them on shore in a house that was to be hired as an hospital.
This destination gave me a great deal of pleasure, as I should, for
some time, be freed from the arrogance of Crampley, whose inveteracy
against me had already broken out on two or three occasions since he
was become a lieutenant. My messmate, who very much resembled my uncle,
both in figure and disposition, treated me on board of the prize with
the utmost civility and confidence: and, among other favours, made me a
present of a silver-hilted hanger, and a pair of pistols mounted with
the same metal, which fell to his share in plundering the enemy. We
arrived safely at Morant, and, going on shore, pitched upon an empty
storehouse; which we hired for the reception of the wounded, who were
brought to it next day, with beds and other necessaries; and four of
the ship’s company appointed to attend them and obey me.




CHAPTER XXXVI


A strange adventure—in consequence of which I am extremely
happy—Crampley does me in offices with the Captain; but his malice is
defeated by the good-nature and friendship of the surgeon—we return to
Port Royal—our Captain gets the command of a larger ship, and is
succeeded by an old man—Brayl is provided for—we receive orders to sail
for England


When my patients were all in a fair way, my companion and commander,
whose name was Brayl, carried me up the country to the house of a rich
planter, with whom he was acquainted, where we were sumptuously
entertained, and in the evening set out on our return to the ship. When
we had walked about a mile by moonlight, we perceived a horseman behind
us, who coming up, wished us good even, and asked which way we went?
His voice, which was quite familiar to me, no sooner struck my ear,
than in spite of all my resolution and reflection, my hair bristled up,
and I was seized with a violent fit of trembling, which Brayl
misinterpreting, bade me be under no concern. I told him he was
mistaken in the cause of my disorder; and, addressing myself to the
person on horseback said, “I could have sworn by your voice, that you
were a dear friend of mine, if I had not been certain of his death.” To
this address, after some pause, he replied, “There are many voices as
well as faces that resemble one another; but, pray, what was your
friend’s name.” I satisfied him in that particular, and gave a short
detail of the melancholy fate of Thompson, not without many sighs and
some tears. A silence ensued, which lasted some minutes, and then the
conversation turned on different subjects, till we arrived at a house
on the road, where the horseman alighted, and begged with so much
earnestness that we would go in and drink a bowl of punch with him,
that we could not resist. But, if I was alarmed at his voice, what must
my amazement be, when I discovered by the light the very person of my
lamented friend! Perceiving my confusion, which was extreme, he clasped
me in his arms, and bedewed my face with tears. It was some time ere I
recovered the use of my reason, overpowered with this event, and longer
still before I could speak. So that all I was capable of was to return
his embraces, and to mingle the overflowings of my joy with his; whilst
honest Brayl, affected with the scene, wept as fast as either of us,
and signified his participation of our happiness by hugging us both,
and capering about the room like a madman. At length, I retrieved the
use of my tongue, and cried, “Is it possible! you can be my friend
Thompson? No certainly, alas! he was drowned; and I am now under the
deception of a dream!” He was at great pains to convince me of his
being the individual person whom I regretted, and bidding me sit down
and compose myself, promised to explain his sudden disappearance from
the Thunder, and to account for his being at present in the land of the
living. This task he acquitted himself of, after I had drunk a glass of
punch, and recollected my spirits, by informing us, that with a
determination to rid himself of a miserable existence, he had gone in
the night-time to the head, while the ship was on her way, from whence
he slipped down as softly as he could, by the bows into the sea, where,
after he was heartily ducked, he began to repent of his precipitation;
and, as he could swim very well, kept himself above water, in hopes of
being taken up by some of the ships astern; that, in this situation, he
hailed a large vessel, and begged to be taken in, but was answered that
she was a heavy sailer, and therefore they did not choose to lose time
by bringing to; however, they threw an old chest overboard for his
convenience, and told him, that some of the ships astern would
certainly save him; that no other vessel came within sight or cry of
him for the space of three hours, during which time he had the
mortification to find himself in the middle of the ocean alone, without
other support or resting-place, but what a few crazy boards afforded;
till at last he discerned a small sloop steering towards him, upon
which he set up his throat, and had the good fortune to be heard and
rescued from the dreary waste by their boat, which was hoisted out on
purpose.

“I was no sooner brought on board,” continued he, “than I fainted, and,
when I recovered my senses, found myself in bed, regaled with a most
noisome smell of onions and cheese, which made me think at first that I
was in my own hammock, alongside of honest Morgan, and that all which
had passed was no more than a dream. Upon inquiry, I understood that I
was on board of a schooner belonging to Rhode Island, bound for
Jamaica, with a cargo of geese, pigs, onions, and cheese, and that the
master’s name was Robertson, by birth a North Briton, whom I knew at
first sight to be an old school-fellow of mine. When I discovered
myself to him, he was transported with surprise and joy, and begged to
know the occasion of my misfortune, which I did not think fit to
disclose, because I knew his notions with regard to religion were very
severe and confined; therefore contented myself with telling him I fell
overboard by accident; but made no scruple of explaining the nature of
my disagreeable station, and of acquainting him with my determined
purpose never to return to the Thunder man-of-war. Although he was not
of my opinion in that particular, knowing that I must lose my clothes
and what pay was due to me, unless I went back to my duty; yet, when I
described the circumstances of the hellish life I led under the
tyrannic sway of Oakum and Mackshane; and, among other grievances,
hinted a dissatisfaction at the irreligious deportment of my shipmates,
and the want of the true presbyterian gospel doctrine; he changed his
sentiments, and conjured me with great vehemence and zeal to lay aside
all thought of rising in the navy; and, that he might show how much he
had my interest at heart, undertook to provide for me in some shape or
other, before he should leave Jamaica. This promise he performed to my
heart’s desire, by recommending me to a gentleman of fortune, with whom
I have lived ever since in quality of surgeon and overseer to his
plantations. He and his lady are now at Kingston, so that I am, for the
present, master of this house, to which, from my soul, I bid you
welcome, and hope you will favour me with your company during the
remaining part of the night.”

I needed not a second invitation; but Mr. Brayl, who was a diligent and
excellent officer, could not be persuaded to sleep out of the ship;
however, he supped with us, and, after having drank a cheerful glass,
set out for the vessel, which was not above three miles from the place,
escorted by a couple of stout negroes, whom Mr. Thompson ordered to
conduct him. Never were two friends more happy in the conversation of
each other than we, for the time it lasted. I related to him the
particulars of our attempt upon Carthagena, of which he had heard but
an imperfect account; and he gratified me with a narration of every
little incident of his life since we parted. He assured me, it was with
the utmost difficulty he could resist his inclination of coming down to
Port Royal, to see Morgan and me, of whom he had heard no tidings since
the day of our separation: but that he was restrained by the fear of
being detained as a deserter. He told me that, when he heard my voice
in the dark, he was almost as much surprised as I was at seeing him
afterwards: and, in the confidence of friendship, disclosed a passion
he entertained for the only daughter of the gentleman with whom he
lived, who, by his description, was a very amiable young lady, and did
not disdain his addresses; that he was very much favoured by her
parents; and did not despair of obtaining their consent to the match,
which would at once render him independent of the world. I
congratulated him on his good fortune, which he protested should never
make him forget his friends; and, towards morning, we betook ourselves
to rest.

Next day he accompanied me to the ship, where Mr. Brayl entertained him
at dinner, and we having spent the afternoon together, he took his
leave of us in the evening, after he had forced upon me ten pistoles,
as a small token of his affection. In short, while he stayed here, we
saw one another every day, and generally ate at the same table, which
was plentifully supplied by him with all kinds of poultry, butcher’s
meat, oranges, limes, lemons, pine-apples, Madeira wine, and excellent
rum; so that this small interval of ten days was by far the most
agreeable period of my life.

At length the Lizard arrived; and my patients being all fit for duty,
they and I were ordered on board of her, where I understood from Mr.
Tomlins that there was a shyness between the lieutenant and him on my
account; the rancorous villain having taken the opportunity of my
absence to fill the captain’s ears with a thousand scandalous stories
to my prejudice; among other things affirming, that I had been once
transported for theft, and that when I was in the Thunder man-of-war, I
had been whipped for the same crime. The surgeon, on the other hand,
having heard my whole story from my own mouth, defended me strenuously,
and in the course of that good-natured office recounted all the
instances of Crampley’s malice against me while I remained on board of
that ship; which declaration, while it satisfied the captain of my
innocence, made the lieutenant as much my defender’s enemy as mine. The
infernal behaviour of Crampley, with regard to me, added such fuel to
his former resentment, that, at certain times, I was quite beside
myself with the desire of revenge, and was even tempted to pistol him
on the quarter-deck, though an infamous death must inevitably have been
my reward. But the surgeon, who was my confidant, argued against such a
desperate action so effectually, that I stifled the flame which
consumed me for the present, and resolved to wait for a more convenient
opportunity. In the meantime, that Mr. Tomlins might be the more
convinced of the wrongs I suffered by this fellow’s slander, I begged
he would go and visit Mr. Thompson, whose wonderful escape I had made
him acquainted with, and inquire of him into the particulars of my
conduct, while he was my fellow-mate.

This request the surgeon complied with, more through curiosity to see a
person whose fate had been so extraordinary, than to confirm his good
opinion of me, which he assured me was already firmly established. He
therefore set out for the dwelling-place of my friend, with a letter of
introduction from me; and being received with all the civility and
kindness I expected, returned to the ship, not only satisfied with my
character beyond the power of doubt or insinuation, but also charmed
with the affability and conversation of Thompson, who loaded him and me
with presents of fresh stock, liquors, and fruit. As he would not
venture to come and see us on board, lest Cramplay should know and
detain him; when the time of our departure approached, I obtained leave
to go and bid him farewell. After we had vowed an everlasting
friendship, he pressed upon me a purse, with four doubloons, which I
refused as long as I could without giving umbrage; and, having
cordially embraced each other, I returned on board, where I found a
small box, with a letter directed for me, to the care of Mr. Tomlins.
Knowing the superscription to be of Thompson’s handwriting, I opened it
with some surprise, and learned that this generous friend, not content
with loading me with the presents already mentioned, had sent, for my
use and acceptance, half a dozen fine shirts, and as many linen
waistcoats and caps, with twelve pair of new thread stockings. Being
thus provided with money and all necessaries for the comfort of life, I
began to look upon myself as a gentleman of some consequence, and felt
my pride dilate a pace.

Next day we sailed for Port Royal, where we arrived safely with our
prizes; and, as there was nothing to do on board, I went ashore, and
having purchased a laced waistcoat, with some other clothes, at a sale,
made a swaggering figure for some days among the taverns, where I
ventured to play a little at hazard, and came off with fifty pistoles
in my pocket. Meanwhile our captain was promoted to a ship of twenty
guns, and the command of the Lizard given to a man turned of fourscore,
who had been lieutenant since the reign of King William, and,
notwithstanding his long service, would have probably died in that
station, had he not applied some prize-money he had lately received, to
make interest with his superiors. My friend Brayl was also made an
officer about the same time, after he had served in quality of a
midshipman and mate for five and twenty years. Soon after these
alterations, the admiral pitched upon our ship to carry home dispatches
for the ministry; and we set sail for England, having first scrubbed
her bottom, and taken in provision and water for the occasion.




CHAPTER XXXVII


We depart for Europe—a misunderstanding arises between the Captain and
the Surgeon, through the scandalous aspersions of Crampley—the Captain
dies—Crampley tyrannises over the surgeon, who falls a Victim for his
Cruelty—I am also ill-used—the Ship strikes—the behaviour of Crampley
and the Seamen on that occasion—-I get on shore, challenge the Captain
to single combat—am treacherously knocked down, wounded, and robbed


Now that I could return to my native country in a creditable way, I
felt excessive pleasure in finding myself out of sight of that fatal
island, which has been the grave of so many Europeans: and, as I was
accommodated with everything to make the passage agreeable, I resolved
to enjoy myself as much as the insolence of Crampley would permit. This
insidious slanderer had found means already to cause a misunderstanding
between the surgeon and captain, who, by his age and infirmities, was
rendered intolerably peevish, his disposition having also been soured
by a long course of disappointments. He had a particular aversion to
all young men, especially to surgeons, whom he considered unnecessary
animals on board of a ship; and, in consequence of these sentiments,
never consulted the doctor, notwithstanding his being seized with a
violent fit of the gout and gravel, but applied to a cask of Holland
gin, which was his sovereign prescription against all distempers:
whether he was at this time too sparing, or took an overdose of his
cordial, certain it is, he departed in the night, without any ceremony,
which indeed was a thing he always despised, and was found stiff next
morning, to the no small satisfaction of Crampley, who succeeded to the
command of the vessel. For that very reason, Mr. Tomlins and I had no
cause to rejoice at this event, fearing that the tyranny of our new
commander would now be as unlimited as his power. The first day of his
command justified our apprehensions: for, on pretence that the decks
were too much crowded, he ordered the surgeon’s hencoops, with all his
fowls, to be thrown overboard; and at the same time prohibited him and
me from walking on the quarter-deck.

Mr. Tomlins could not help complaining of these injuries, and in the
course of his expostulation dropped some hasty words, of which Crampley
taking hold, confined him to his cabin, where, in a few days, for want
of air he was attacked by a fever, which soon put an end to his life,
after he had made his will, by which he bequeathed all his estate,
personal and real, to his sister, and left to me his watch and
instruments as memorials of his friendship. I was penetrated with grief
on this melancholy occasion; the more because there was nobody on board
to whom I could communicate my sorrows, or of whom I could receive the
least consolation or advice. Crampley was so far from discovering the
least remorse for his barbarity, at the news of the surgeon’s death,
that he insulted his memory in the most abusive manner, and affirmed he
had poisoned himself out of pure fear, dreading to be brought to a
court-martial for mutiny; for which reason he would not suffer the
service of the dead to be read over his body before it was thrown
overboard.

Nothing but a speedy deliverance could have supported me under the
brutal sway of this bashaw, who, to render my life more irksome,
signified to my messmates a desire that I should be expelled from their
society. This was no sooner hinted, than they granted his request; and
I was fain to eat in a solitary manner by myself during the rest of the
passage, which, however, soon drew to a period.

We had been seven weeks at sea, when the gunner told the captain that,
by his reckoning, we must be in soundings, and desired he would order
the lead to be heaved. Crampley swore he did not know how to keep the
ship’s way, for we were not within a hundred leagues of soundings, and
therefore he would not give himself the trouble to cast the lead.
Accordingly we continued our course all that afternoon and night,
without shortening sail, although the gunner pretended to discover
Scilly light; and next morning protested in form against the captain’s
conduct, for which he was put in confinement, We discovered no land all
that day, and Crampley was still so infatuated as to neglect sounding;
but at three o’clock in the morning the ship struck, and remained fast
on a sand-bank. This accident alarmed the whole crew; the boat was
immediately hoisted out, but as we could not discern which way the
shore lay, we were obliged to wait for daylight. In the meantime, the
wind increased, and the waves beat against the sloop with such
violence, that we expected she would have gone to pieces. The gunner
was released and consulted: he advised the captain to cut away the
mast, in order to lighten her; this expedient was performed without
success: the sailors, seeing things in a desperate situation, according
to custom, broke up the chests belonging to the officers, dressed
themselves in their clothes, drank their liquors without ceremony, and
drunkenness, tumult, and confusion ensued.

In the midst of this uproar, I went below to secure my own effects, and
found the carpenter’s mate hewing down the purser’s cabin with his
hatchet, whistling all the while with great composure. When I asked his
intention in so doing, he replied, very calmly, “I only want to taste
the purser’s rum, that’s all, master.” At that instant the purser
coming down, and seeing his effects going to wreck, complained bitterly
of the injustice done to him, and asked the fellow what occasion he had
for liquor when, in all likelihood, he would be in eternity in a few
minutes. “All’s one for that,” said plunderer, “let us live while we
can.” “Miserable wretch that thou art!” cried the purser, “what must be
thy lot in another world, if thou diest in the commission of robbery?”
“Why, hell, I suppose,” replied the other, with great deliberation,
while the purser fell on his knees, and begged of Heaven that we might
not all perish for the sake of Jonas.

During this dialogue I clothed myself in my bed apparel, girded on my
hanger, stuck my pistols, loaded, in my belt, disposed of all my
valuable moveables about my person, and came upon deck with a
resolution of taking the first opportunity to get on shore, which, when
the day broke, appeared at the distance of three miles ahead. Crampley,
finding his efforts to get the ship off ineffectual, determined to
consult his own safety, by going into the boat, which he had no sooner
done, than the ship’s company followed so fast, that she would have
sunk alongside, had not some one wiser than the rest cut the rope and
put off. But before this happened, I had made several attempts to get
in, and was always balked by the captain, who was so eager in excluding
me, that he did not mind the endeavours of any other body. Enraged at
this inhuman partiality, and seeing the rope cut, I pulled one of my
pistols from my belt, and cocking it, swore I would shoot any man who
would presume to obstruct my entrance. So saying, I leaped with my full
exertion, and got on board of the boat with the loss of the skin of my
shins. I chanced in my descent to overturn Crampley, who no sooner got
up than he struck at me several times with a cutlass, and ordered the
men to throw me overboard; but they were too anxious about their own
safety to mind what he said. Though the boat was very deeply loaded,
and the sea terribly high, we made shift to get upon dry land in less
than an hour after we parted from the sloop. As soon as I set my foot
on terra firma, my indignation, which had boiled so long within me,
broke out against Crampley, whom I immediately challenged to single
combat, presenting my pistols, that he might take his choice: he took
one without hesitation, and, before I could cock the other, fired in my
face, throwing the pistol after the shot. I felt myself stunned, and
imagining the bullet had entered my brain, discharged mine as quick as
possible, that I might not die unrevenged: then flying upon my
antagonist, knocked out several of his fore-teeth with the butt-end of
the piece, and would certainly have made an end of him with that
instrument, had he not disengaged himself, and seized his cutlass,
which he had given to his servant when he received the pistol. Seeing
him armed in this manner, I drew my hanger, and, having flung my pistol
at his head, closed with him in a transport of fury, and thrust my
weapon into his mouth, which it enlarged on one side to his ear.
Whether the smart of this wound disconcerted him, or the unevenness of
the ground made him reel, I know not, but he staggered some paces back:
I followed close, and with one stroke cut the tendons of the back of
his hand, Upon which his cutlass dropped, and he remained defenceless.
I know not with what cruelty my rage might have inspired me, if I had
not at that instant been felled to the ground by a blow on the back
part of my head, which deprived me of all sensation. In this deplorable
situation, exposed to the rage of an incensed barbarian, and the rapine
of an inhuman crew, I remained for some time; and whether any disputes
arose among them during the state of my annihilation, I cannot pretend
to determine; but in one particular they seemed to have been unanimous,
and acted with equal dexterity and dispatch; for when I recovered the
use of my understanding, I found myself alone in a desolate place,
stripped of my clothes, money, watch, buckles, and everything but my
shoes, stockings, breeches and shirt. What a discovery must this have
been to me, who, but an hour before, was worth sixty guineas in cash! I
cursed the hour of my birth, the parents that gave me being, the sea
that did not swallow me up, the poniard of the enemy, which could not
find the way to my heart, the villainy of those who had left me in that
miserable condition; and in the ecstacy of despair resolved to be still
where I was, and perish.




CHAPTER XXXVIII


I get up and crawl into a barn, where I am in danger of perishing,
through the fear of the country people—their inhumanity—I am succoured
by a reputed witch—her story—her advice—she recommends me as a valet to
a single lady, whose character she explains


But as I lay ruminating, my passion insensibly abated; I considered my
situation in quite another light, from that in which it appeared to me
at first, and the result of my deliberation was to rise if I could, and
crawl to the next inhabited place for assistance. With some difficulty
I got upon my legs, and having examined my body, found I had received
no other injury than two large contused wounds, one on the fore and
another on the hinder part of my head, which seemed to be occasioned by
the same weapon, namely, the butt-end of a pistol. I looked towards the
sea, but could discern no remains of the ship; so that I concluded she
was gone to pieces, and that those who remained in her had perished:
but, as I afterwards learned, the gunner, who had more sagacity than
Crampley, observing that it was flood when he left her, and that she
would probably float at high water, made no noise about getting on
shore, but continued on deck, in hopes of bringing her safe into some
harbour, after her commander should have deserted her, for which piece
of service he expected, no doubt, to be handsomely rewarded. This
scheme he accordingly executed, and was promised great things by the
Admiralty for saving his Majesty’s ship: but I never heard he reaped
the fruits of his expectation. As for my own part, I directed my course
towards a small cottage I perceived, and in the road picked up a
seaman’s old jacket, which I suppose the thief who dressed himself in
my clothes had thrown away: this was a very comfortable acquisition to
me, who was almost stiff with cold: I therefore put it on; and, as my
natural heat revived, my wounds, which had left off bleeding, burst out
afresh; so that, finding myself excessively exhausted, I was about to
lie down in the fields, when I discovered a barn on my left hand,
within a few yards of me; thither I made shift to stagger, and finding
the door open, went in, but saw nobody; however, I threw myself upon a
truss of straw, hoping to be soon relieved by some person or other. I
had not lain here many minutes, when I saw a countryman come in with a
pitchfork in his hand, which he was upon the point of thrusting into
the straw that concealed me, and in all probability would have done my
business, had I not uttered a dreadful groan, after having essayed in
vain to speak. This melancholy note alarmed the clown, who started
back, and discovering a body all besmeared with blood, stood trembling,
with the pitchfork extended before him, his hair bristling up, his eyes
staring, his nostrils dilated, and his mouth wide open. At another time
I should have been much diverted by this figure, which preserved the
same attitude very near ten minutes, during which time I made many
unsuccessful efforts to implore his compassion and assistance; but my
tongue failed me, and my language was only a repetition of groans. At
length an old man arrived, who, seeing the other in such a posture,
cried, “Mercy upon en! the leaad’s bewitched! why, Dick, beest thou
besayd thyself!” Dick, without moving his eyes from the object that
terrified him, replied, “O vather! vather! here be either the devil or
a dead mon: I doant know which o’en, but a groans woundily.” The
father, whose eyesight was none of the best, pulled out his spectacles,
and, having applied them to his nose reconnoitered me over his son’s
shoulder: but no sooner did he behold me, than he was seized with a fit
of shaking, even more violent than Dick’s, and, with a broken accent,
addressed me thus: “In the name of the Vather, Zun, and Holy Ghost, I
charge you, an you been Satan, to be gone to the Red Zen; but an you be
a moordered mon, speak, that you may have a Christom burial.”

As I was not in a condition to satisfy him in this particular, he
repeated his conjuration to no purpose, and they continued a good while
in the agonies of fear. At length the father proposed that the son
should draw nearer, and take a more distinct view of the apparition;
but Dick was of opinion that his father should advance first, he being
an old man past his labour and, if he received any mischief, the loss
would be the smaller; whereas he himself might escape, and be useful,
in his generation. This prudential reason had no effect upon the
senior, who still kept Dick between me and him. In the meantime I
endeavoured to raise one hand as a signal of distress, but had only
strength sufficient to produce a rustling among the straw, which
discomposed the young peasant so much, that he sprang out at the door,
and overthrew his father in his flight. The old gentleman would not
spend time in getting up, but crawled backwards like a crab, with great
speed, till he had got over the threshold, mumbling exorcisms all the
way. I was exceedingly mortified to find myself in danger of perishing
through the ignorance and cowardice of these clowns; and felt my
spirits decay apace, when an old woman entered the barn, followed by
the two fugitives and with great intrepidity advanced to the place
where I lay, saying, “If it be the devil I fearen not, and for a dead
mon a can do us no harm.” When she saw my condition, she cried, “Here
be no devil, but in your en fool’s head. Here be a poor miserable
wretch bleeding to death, and if a dies, we must be at the charge of
burying him; therefore, Dick, go vetch the old wheelbarrow and put en
in, and carry en to goodman Hodge’s backdoor; he is more able than we
to pay out money upon poor vagrants.” Her advice was taken, and
immediately put in execution; I was rolled to the other farmer’s door,
where I was tumbled out like a heap of dung; and should certainly have
fallen a prey to the hogs, if my groans had not disturbed the family,
and brought some of them out to view my situation. But Hodge resembled
the Jew more than the good Samaritan, and ordered me to be carried to
the house of the parson, whose business it was to practise as well as
to preach charity; observing that it was sufficient for him to pay his
quota towards the maintenance of the poor belonging to his own parish.
When I was set down at the vicar’s gate, he fell into a mighty passion,
and threatened to excommunicate him who sent, as well as those who
brought me, unless they would move me immediately to another place.
About this time I fainted with the fatigue I had undergone, and
afterwards understood that I was bandied from door to door through a
whole village, nobody having humanity enough to administer the least
relief to me, Until an old woman, who was suspected of witchcraft by
the neighbourhood, hearing of my distress, received me into her house,
and, having dressed my wounds, brought me to myself with cordials of
her own preparing. I was treated with great care and tenderness by this
grave matron, who, after I had recovered some strength, desired to know
the particulars of my last disaster. This piece of satisfaction I could
not refuse to one who had saved my life, therefore related all my
adventures without exaggeration or reserve. She seemed surprised at the
vicissitudes I had undergone, and drew a happy presage of my future
life from my past suffering, then launched out into the praise of
adversity, with so much ardour and good sense, that I concluded she was
a person who had seen better days, and conceived a longing desire to
hear her story. She perceived my drift by some words I dropped, and
smiling told me, there was nothing either entertaining or extraordinary
in the course of her fortune; but, however, she would communicate it to
me, in consideration of the confidence I had reposed in her. “It is of
little consequence,” said she, “to tell the names of my parents, who
are dead many years ago; let it suffice to assure you, they were
wealthy, and had no other child than me; so that I was looked upon as
heiress to a considerable estate, and teased with addresses on that
account. Among the number of my admirers, there was a young gentleman
of no fortune, whose sole dependence was on his promotion in the army,
in which, at that time, he bore a lieutenant’s commission. I conceived
an affection for this amiable officer, which, in a short time,
increased to a violent passion, and without entering into minute
circumstances, married him privately. We had not enjoyed one another
long in stolen interviews, when he was ordered with his regiment to
Flanders; but, before he set out, it was agreed between us, that we
should declare our marriage to my father by letter, and implore his
pardon for the step we had taken without his approbation. This
discovery was made while I was abroad visiting, and just as I was about
to return home, I received a letter from my father, importing that,
since I had acted so undutifully and meanly as to marry a beggar,
without his privity or consent, to the disgrace of his family as well
as the disappointment of his hopes, he renounced me to the miserable
fate I had entailed upon myself, and charged me never to set foot
within his doors again. This rigid sentence was confirmed by my mother,
who, in a postscript, gave me to understand that her sentiments were
exactly conformable to those of my father, and that I might save myself
the trouble of making any applications, for her resolutions were
unalterable. Thunderstruck with my evil fortune I called a coach, and
drove to my husband’s lodgings, where I found him waiting the event of
his letter. Though he could easily divine by my looks the issue of his
declaration, he read with great steadiness the epistle I had received;
and with a smile full of tenderness, which I shall never forget,
embraced me, saying, “I believe the good lady your mother might have
spared herself the trouble of the last part of her postscript. Well, my
dear Betty, you must lay aside all thoughts of a coach, till I can
procure the command of a regiment.” This unconcerned behaviour, while
it enabled me to support my reverse of fortune, at the same time
endeared him to me the more, by convincing me of his disinterested
views in espousing me. I was next day boarded in company with the wife
of another officer, who had long been the friend and confidant of my
husband, at a village not far from London, where they parted with us in
the most melting manner, went to Flanders, and were killed in sight of
one another at the battle of the Wood.

“Why should I tire you with a description of our unutterable sorrow at
the fatal news of this event, the remembrance of which now fills my
aged eyes with tears! When our grief subsided a little, and reflection
came to our aid, we found ourselves deserted by the whole world, and in
danger of perishing by want; whereupon we made application for the
pension, and were put upon the list. Then, vowing eternal friendship,
sold our jewels and superfluous clothes, retired to this place (which
is in the county of Sussex) bought this little house, where we lived
many years in a solitary manner, indulging our mutual sorrow, till it
pleased Heaven to call away my companion two years ago; since which
time I have lingered out an unhappy being, in hopes of a speedy
dissolution, when I promise myself the eternal reward of all my cares.
In the meantime,” continued she, “I must inform you of the character I
bear among my neighbours. My conversation being different from that of
the inhabitants of the village, my recluse way of life, my skill in
curing distempers, which I acquired from books since I settled here,
and lastly, my age having made the common people look upon me as
something preternatural, and I am actually, at this hour, believed to
be a witch. The parson of the parish, whose acquaintance I have not
been at much pains to cultivate, taking umbrage at my supposed
disrespect, has contributed not a little towards the confirmation of
this opinion, by dropping certain hints to my prejudice among the
vulgar, who are also very much scandalised at my entertaining this poor
tabby cat with the collar about her neck, which was a favourite of my
deceased companion.”

The whole behaviour of this venerable person was so primitive,
innocent, sensible, and humane, that I contracted a filial respect for
her, and begged her advice with regard to my future conduct, as soon as
I was in a condition to act for myself. She dissuaded me from a design
I had formed of travelling to Louder, in hopes of retrieving my clothes
and pay, by returning to my ship, which by this time I read in the
newspaper was safely arrived in the River Thames: “because,” said she,
“you run the hazard of being treated not only as a deserter in quitting
the sloop, but also as a mutineer, in assaulting your commanding
officer, to the malice of whose revenge you will moreover be exposed.”
She then promised to recommend me, as servant to a single lady of her
acquaintance, who lived in the neighbourhood with her nephew, who was a
young foxhunter of great fortune, where I might be very happy, provided
I could bear with the disposition and manners of my mistress, which
were somewhat whimsical and particular. But, above all things, she
counselled me to conceal my story, the knowledge of which would
effectually poison my entertainment; for it was a maxim, among most
people of condition, that no gentleman ought to be admitted into a
family as a domestic, lest he become lazy, and insolent. I was fain to
embrace this humble proposal, because my affairs were desperate; and in
a few days was hired by this lady, to serve in quality of her footman,
having been represented by my hostess as a young man who was bred up to
the sea by his relations against his will, and had suffered shipwreck,
which had increased his disgust to that way of life so much, that he
rather chose to go to service on shore, than enter himself on board of
any other ship. Before I took possession of my new place, she gave me a
sketch of my mistress’s character, that I might know better how to
regulate my conduct.

“Your lady,” said she, “is a maiden of forty years, not so remarkable
for her beauty as her learning and taste, which is famous all over the
country. Indeed, she is a perfect female virtuoso, and so eager after
the pursuit of knowledge that she neglects her person even to a degree
of sluttishness; this negligence, together with her contempt of the
male part of the creation, gives her nephew no great concern, as by
these means he will probably keep her fortune, which is considerable in
the family. He therefore permits her to live in her own way, which is
something extraordinary, and gratifies her in all her whimsical
desires. Her apartment is at some distance from the other inhabited
parts of the house; and consists of a dining-room, bedchamber, and
study; she keeps a cook maid, a waiting-woman, and footman, of her own,
and seldom eats or converses with any of the family but her niece, who
is a very lovely creature, and humours her aunt often to the prejudice
of her own health by sitting up with her whole nights together; for
your mistress is too much of a philosopher to be swayed by the custom
of the world, and never sleeps nor eats like other people. Among other
odd notions, she professes the principles of Rosicrucius, and believes
the earth, air, and sea, are inhabited by invisible beings, with whom
it is possible for the human species to entertain correspondence and
intimacy, on the easy condition of living chaste. As she hopes one day
to be admitted into an acquaintance of this kind, she no sooner heard
of me and my cat, than she paid me a visit, with a view, as she has
since owned, to be introduced to my familiar; and was greatly mortified
to find herself disappointed in her expectation. Being by this
visionary turn of mind abstracted as it were from the world, she cannot
advert to the common occurrences of life; and therefore is frequently
so absent as to commit very strange mistakes and extravagancies, which
you will do well to rectify and repair, as your prudence shall
suggest.”




CHAPTER XXXIX


My Reception by that Lady—I become enamoured of Narcissa—recount the
particulars of my last misfortune—acquire the good opinion of my
Mistress—an Account of the young Squire—I am made acquainted with more
particulars of Narcissa’s Situation—conceive a mortal hatred against
Sir Timothy—examine my Lady’s library and performances—her extravagant
behaviour


Fraught with these useful instructions, I repaired to the place of her
habitation, and was introduced by the waiting-woman to the presence of
my lady, who had not before seen me. She sat in her study, with one
foot on the ground, and the other upon a high stool at some distance
from her seat; her sandy locks hung down, in a disorder I cannot call
beautiful, from her head, which was deprived of its coif, for the
benefit of scratching with one hand, while she held the stump of a pen
in the other. Her forehead was high and wrinkled; her eyes were large,
gray, and prominent; her nose was long, and aquiline: her mouth of vast
capacity, her visage meagre and freckled, and her chin peaked like a
shoemaker’s paring knife; her upper lip contained a large quantity of
plain Spanish, which, by continual falling, had embroidered her neck,
that was not naturally very white, and the breast of her gown, that
flowed loose about her with a negligence that was truly poetic,
discovering linen that was very fine, and, to all appearance, never
washed but in Castalian streams. Around her lay heaps of books, globes,
quadrants, telescopes, and other learned apparatus; her snuff-box stood
at her right hand: at her left hand lay her handkerchief, sufficiently
used, and a convenience to spit in appeared on one side of her chair.
She being in a reverie when we entered, the maid did not think proper
to disturb her; so that we waited some minutes unobserved, during which
time she bit the quill several times, altered her position, made many
wry faces, and, at length, with an air of triumph, repeated aloud:

“Nor dare th’immortal gods my rage oppose!”


Having committed her success to paper, she turned towards the door, and
perceiving us, cried, “What’s the matter?” “Here’s the young man,”
replied my conductress, “whom Mrs. Sagely recommended as a footman to
your ladyship.” On this information she stared in my face for a
considerable time, and then asked my name, which I thought proper to
conceal under that of John Brown. After having surveyed me with a
curious eye, she broke out into, “O! ay, thou wast shipwrecked, I
remember. Whether didst thou come on shore on the back of a whale or a
dolphin?” To this I answered, I had swam ashore without any assistance.
Then she demanded to know if I had ever been at the Hellespont, and
swam from Sestos to Abydos. I replied in the negative; upon which she
bade the maid order a suit of new livery for me, and instruct me in the
articles of my duty: so she spit in her snuff-box, and wiped her nose
with her cap, which lay on the table, instead of a handkerchief.

We returned to the kitchen, where I was regaled by the maids, who
seemed to vie with each other in expressing their regard for me; and
from them I understood, that my business consisted in cleaning knives
and forks, laying the cloth, waiting at table, carrying messages, and
attending my lady when she went abroad. There was a very good suit of
livery in the house, which had belonged to my predecessor deceased, and
it fitted me exactly; so that there was no occasion for employing a
tailor on my account. I had not been long equipped in this manner, when
my lady’s bell rung; upon which, I ran up stairs, and found her
stalking about the room in her shift and under petticoat only; I would
immediately have retired as became me, but she bade me come in, and air
a clean shift for her; which operation I having performed with some
backwardness, she put it on before me without any ceremony, and I
verily believe was ignorant of my sex all that time, as being quite
absorbed in contemplation. About four o’clock in the afternoon I was
ordered to lay the cloth, and place two covers, which I understood were
for my mistress and her niece, whom I had not as yet seen. Though I was
not very dexterous at this work, I performed it pretty well for a
beginner, and, when dinner was upon the table, saw my mistress
approach, accompanied by the young lady, whose name for the present
shall be Narcissa. So much sweetness appeared in the countenance and
carriage of this amiable apparition, that my heart was captivated at
first sight, and while dinner lasted, I gazed upon her without
intermission. Her age seemed to be seventeen, her stature tall, her
shape unexceptionable, her hair, that fell down upon her ivory neck in
ringlets, black as jet; her arched eyebrows of the same colour; her
eyes piercing, yet tender; her lips of the consistence and hue of
cherries; her complexion clear, delicate and healthy; her aspect noble,
ingenuous, and humane; and the whole person so ravishingly delightful,
that it was impossible for any creature endued with sensibility, to see
without admiring, and admire without loving her to excess. I began to
curse the servile station that placed me so far beneath the regard of
this idol of my adoration! and yet I blessed my fate, that enabled me
to enjoy daily the sight of so much perfection! When she spoke I
listened with pleasure; but when she spoke to me, my soul was thrilled
with an extacy of tumultuous joy. I was even so happy as to be the
subject of their conversation; for Narcissa, having observed me, said
to her aunt, “I see your new footman is come.” Then addressing herself
to me, asked, with ineffable complacency, if I was the person who had
been so cruelly used by robbers? When I had satisfied her in this; she
expressed a desire of knowing the other particulars of my fortune, both
before and since my being shipwrecked: hereupon (as Mrs. Sagely had
counselled me) I told her that I had been bound apprentice to the
master of a ship, contrary to my inclination, which ship had foundered
at sea; that I and four more, who chanced to be on deck when she went
down, made shift to swim to the shore, when my companions, after having
overpowered me, stripped me to the shirt, and left me, as they
imagined, dead of the wounds I received in my own defence. Then I
related the circumstances of being found in a barn, with the inhuman
treatment I met with from the country people and parson; the
description of which, I perceived, drew tears from the charming
creature’s eyes. When I had finished my recital, my mistress, said, “Ma
foi! le garçon est bien fait!” To which opinion Narcissa assented, with
a compliment to my understanding, in the same language, that flattered
my vanity extremely.

The conversation, among other subjects, turned upon the young squire,
whom my lady inquired after under the title of the Savage; and was
informed by her niece that he was still in bed, repairing the fatigue
of last night’s debauch, and recruiting strength and spirits to undergo
a fox chase to-morrow morning, in company with Sir Timothy Thicket,
Squire Bumper, and a great many other gentlemen of the same stamp, whom
he had invited on that occasion! so that by daybreak the whole house
would be in an uproar. This was a very disagreeable piece of news to
the virtuoso, who protested she would stuff her ears with cotton when
she went to bed, and take a dose of opium to make her sleep the more
sound, that she might not be disturbed and distracted by the clamour of
the brutes.

When their dinner was over, I and my fellow servants sat down to ours
in the kitchen, where I understood that Sir Timothy Thicket was a
wealthy knight in the neighbourhood, between whom and Narcissa a match
had been projected by her brother, who promised at the same time to
espouse Sir Timothy’s sister; by which means, as their fortunes were
pretty equal, the young ladies would be provided for, and their
brothers be never the poorer; but that the ladies did not concur in the
scheme, each of them entertaining a hearty contempt for the person
allotted to her for a husband by this agreement. This information begat
in me a mortal aversion to Sir Timothy, whom I looked upon as my rival,
and cursed in my heart for his presumption.

Next morning, by daybreak, being awakened by the noise of the hunters
and hounds, I rose to view the cavalcade, and had a sight of my
competitor, whose accomplishments (the estate excluded) did not seem
brilliant enough to give me much uneasiness with respect to Narcissa,
who, I flattered myself, was not to be won by such qualifications as he
was master of, either as to person or mind. My mistress,
notwithstanding her precaution, was so much disturbed by her nephew’s
company, that she did not rise till five o’clock in the afternoon; so
that I had an opportunity of examining her study at leisure, to which
examination I was strongly prompted by my curiosity. Here I found a
thousand scraps of her own poetry, consisting of three, four, ten,
twelve, and twenty lines, on an infinity of subjects, which, as whim
inspired, she had begun, without constancy or capacity to bring to any
degree of composition: but, what was very extraordinary in a female
poet, there was not the least mention made of love in any of her
performances. I counted fragments of five tragedies, the titles of
which were “The Stern Philosopher,” “The Double,” “The Sacrilegious
Traitor,” “The Fall of Lucifer,” and “The Last Day.” From whence I
gathered, that her disposition was gloomy, and her imagination
delighted with objects of horror. Her library was composed of the best
English historians, poets, and philosophers; of all the French critics
and poets, and of a few books in Italian, chiefly poetry, at the head
of which were Tasso and Ariosto, pretty much used. Besides these,
translations of the classics into French, but not one book in Greek or
Latin; a circumstance that discovered her ignorance in these languages.

After having taken a full view of this collection, I retired, and at
the usual time was preparing to lay the cloth, when I was told by the
maid that her mistress was still in bed, and had been so affected with
the notes of the hounds in the morning, that she actually believed
herself a hare beset by the hunters, and begged a few greens to munch
for breakfast. When I expressed my surprise in this unaccountable
imagination she gave me to understand that her lady was very much
subject to whims of this nature; sometimes fancying herself an animal,
sometimes a piece of furniture, during which conceited transformations
it was very dangerous to come near her, especially when she represented
a beast; for that lately, in the character of a cat, she had flown at
her, and scratched her face in a terrible manner: that some months ago,
she prophesied the general conflagration was at hand, and nothing would
be able to quench it but her water, which therefore she kept so long,
that her life was in danger, and she must needs have died of the
retention, had they not found an expedient to make her evacuate, by
kindling a bonfire under her chamber window and persuading her that the
house was in flames: upon which, with great deliberation, she bade them
bring all the tubs and vessels they could find to be filled for the
preservation of the house, into one of which she immediately discharged
the cause of her distemper. I was also informed that nothing
contributed so much to the recovery of her reason as music, which was
always administered on those occasions by Narcissa, who played
perfectly well on the harpsichord, and to whom she (the maid) was just
then going to intimate her aunt’s disorder.

She was no sooner gone than I was summoned by the bell to my lady’s
chamber, where I found her sitting squat on her hands on the floor, in
the manner of puss when she listens to the outcries of her pursuers.
When I appeared, she started up with an alarmed look, and sprang to the
other side of the room to avoid me, whom, without doubt, she mistook
for a beagle thirsting after her life. Perceiving her extreme
confusion, I retired, and on the staircase met the adorable Narcissa
coming up, to whom I imparted the situation of my mistress; she said
not a word, but smiling with unspeakable grace, went into her aunt’s
apartment, and in a little time my ears were ravished with the efforts
of her skill. She accompanied the instrument with a voice so sweet and
melodious, that I did not wonder at the surprising change it produced
on the spirits of my mistress which composed to peace and sober
reflection.

About seven o’clock, the hunters arrived with the skins of two foxes
and one badger, carried before them as trophies of their success; and
when they were about to sit down to dinner (or supper) Sir Timothy
Thicket desired that Narcissa would honour the table with her presence;
but this request, notwithstanding her brother’s threats and entreaties,
she refused, on pretence of attending her aunt, who was indisposed; so
I enjoyed the satisfaction of seeing my rival mortified: but this
disappointment made no great impression on him, who consoled himself
with the bottle, of which the whole company became so enamoured that,
after a most horrid uproar of laughing, singing, swearing, and
fighting, they were all carried to bed in a state of utter oblivion. My
duty being altogether detached from the squire and his family, I led a
pretty easy and comfortable life, drinking daily intoxicating draughts
of love from the charms of Narcissa, which brightened on my
contemplation every day more and more. Inglorious as my station was, I
became blind to my own unworthiness, and even conceived hopes of one
day enjoying this amiable creature, whose, affability greatly
encouraged these presumptuous thoughts.




CHAPTER XL


My mistress is surprised at my learning—communicates her performances
to me—I impart some of mine to her—am mortified at her faint
praise—Narcissa approves of my conduct—I gain an involuntary conquest
over the cookwench and dairymaid—their mutual resentment and
insinuations—the jealousy of their lovers


During this season of love and tranquillity, my muse, which had lain
dormant so long, awoke, and produced several small performances on the
subject of my flame. But as it concerned me nearly to remain
undiscovered in my character and sentiments, I was under a necessity of
mortifying my desire of praise, by confining my works to my own perusal
and applause. In the meantime I strove to insinuate myself into the
good opinion of both ladies; and succeeded so well, by my diligence and
dutiful behaviour, that in a little time I was at least a favourite
servant; and frequently enjoyed the satisfaction of hearing myself
mentioned in French and Italian, with some degree of warmth and
surprise by the dear object of all my wishes, as a person who had so
much of the gentleman in my appearance and discourse, that she could
not for her soul treat me like a common lacquey. My prudence and
modesty were not long proof against these bewitching compliments. One
day, while I waited at dinner, the conversation turned upon a knotty
passage of Tasso’s Gierusalem, which, it seems, had puzzled them both:
after a great many unsatisfactory conjectures, my mistress, taking the
book out of her pocket, turned up the place in question, and read the
sentence over and over without success; at length, despairing of
finding the author’s meaning, she turned to me, saying, “Come hither,
Bruno; let us see what fortune will do for us: I will interpret to thee
what goes before, and what follows this obscure paragraph, the
particular words of which I will also explain, that thou mayst, by
comparing one with another, guess the sense of that which perplexes
us.” I was too vain to let slip this opportunity of displaying my
talents; therefore, without hesitation, read and explained the whole of
that which had disconcerted them, to the utter astonishment of both.
Narcissa’s face and lovely neck were overspread with blushes, from
which I drew a favourable opinion, while her aunt, after having stared
at me a good while with a look of amazement, exclaimed, “In the name of
heaven who art thou?” I told her I had picked up a smattering of
Italian, during a voyage up the Straits. At this explanation she shook
her head, and observed that no smatterer could read as I had done. She
then desired to know if I understood French. To which question I
answered in the affirmative. She asked if I was acquainted with the
Latin and Greek? I replied, “A little.” “Oho!” continued she, “and with
philosophy and mathematics, I suppose?” I owned I knew something of
each. Then she repeated her stare and interrogation. I began to repent
of my vanity, and in order to repair the fault I committed, said, it
was not to be wondered at if I had a tolerable education, for learning
was so cheap in my country, that every peasant was a scholar; but, I
hoped her Ladyship would think my understanding no exception to my
character. “No, no, God forbid.” But during the rest of the time they
sat at table, they behaved with remarkable reserve.

This alteration gave me great uneasiness; and I passed the night
without sleep, in melancholy reflections on the vanity of young men,
which prompts them to commit so many foolish actions, contrary to their
own sober judgment. Next day, however, instead of profiting by this
self-condemnation, I yielded still more to the dictates of the
principle I had endeavoured to chastise, and if fortune had not
befriended me more than prudence could expect, I should have been
treated with the contempt it deserved. After breakfast my lady, who was
a true author, bade me follow her into the study, where she expressed
herself thus: “Since you are so learned, you cannot be void of taste;
therefore I am to desire your opinion of a small performance in poetry,
which I lately composed. You must know that I have planned a tragedy,
the subject of which shall be, the murder of a prince before the altar,
where he is busy at his devotions. After the deed is perpetrated, the
regicide will harangue the people with the bloody dagger in his hand;
and I have already composed a speech, which, I think, will suit the
character extremely. Here it is.” Then, taking up a scrap of paper, she
read, with violent emphasis and gesture, as follows:—

“Thus have I sent the simple King to hell,
Without or coffin, shroud, or passing bell:
To me what are divine and human laws?
I court no sanction but my own applause!
Rapes, robberies, treasons, yield my soul delight,
And human carnage gratifies my sight:
I drag the parent by the hoary hair,
And toss the sprawling infant on the spear,
While the fond mother’s cries regale my ear.
I fight, I vanquish, murder friends and foes;
Nor dare the immortal gods my rage oppose.”


Though I did great violence to my understanding in praising this
unnatural rhapsody, I nevertheless extolled it as a production that of
itself deserved immortal fame; and besought her ladyship to bless the
world with the fruits of those uncommon talents Heaven had bestowed
upon her. She smiled with a look of self-complacency, and encouraged by
the incense I had offered, communicated all her poetical works which I
applauded, one by one, with as little candour as I had shown at first.
Satiated with my flattery, which I hope my situation justified, she
could not in conscience refuse me an opportunity of shining in my turn:
and, therefore, after a compliment to my nice discernment and taste,
observed, that doubtless I must have produced something in that way
myself, which she desired to see. This was temptation I could by no
means resist. I owned that while I was at college I wrote some detached
pieces, at the desire of a friend who was in love; and at her request
repeated the following verses, which indeed my love for Narcissa had
inspired:—

On Celia,

Playing on the harpsichord and singing.

When Sappho struck the quivering wire,
The throbbing breast was all on fire:
And when she raised the vocal lay,
The captive soul was charm’d away.

But had the nymph possessed with these
Thy softer, chaster, power to please;
Thy beauteous air of sprightly youth,
Thy native smiles of artless truth;

The worm of grief had never preyed
On the forsaken love-sick maid:
Nor had she mourn’d a hapless flame,
Nor dash’d on rocks her tender frame.


My mistress paid me a cold compliment on the versification, which, she
said, was elegant enough, but, the subject beneath the pen of a true
poet. I was extremely nettled at her indifference, and looked at
Narcissa, who by this time had joined us, for her approbation; but she
declined giving her opinion, protesting she was no judge of these
matters; so that I was forced to retire very much balked in my
expectation, which was generally a little too sanguine. In the
afternoon, however, the waiting-maid assured me that Narcissa had
expressed her approbation of my performance with great warmth, and
desired her to procure a copy of it as for herself, that she (Narcissa)
might have an opportunity to peruse it at pleasure. I was elated to an
extravagant pitch at this intelligence, and immediately transcribed a
fair copy of my Ode, which was carried to the dear charmer, together
with another on the same subject, as follows:—

Thy fatal shaft unerring move;
I bow before thine altar, Love!
I feel thou soft resistless flame
Glide swift through all my vital frame!

For while I gaze my bosom glows,
My blood in tides impetuous flows;
Hope, fear, and joy alternate roll,
And floods of transports ’whelm my soul!

My faltering tongue attempts in vain
In soothing murmurs to complain;
My tongue some secret magic ties,
My murmurs sink in broken sighs.

Condemn’d to nurse eternal care,
And ever drop the silent tear,
Unheard I mourn, unknown I sigh,
Unfriended live, unpitied die!


Whether or not Narcissa discovered my passion, I could not learn from
her behaviour, which, though always benevolent to me was henceforth
more reserved and less cheerful. While my thoughts aspired to a sphere
so far above me, I had unwittingly made a conquest of the cookwench and
dairymaid, who became so jealous of each other that, if their
sentiments had been refined by education, it is probable one or other
of them would have had recourse to poison or steel to be avenged of her
rival; but, as their minds were happily adapted to their humble
station, their mutual enmity was confined to scolding and fistcuffs, in
which exercise they were both well skilled. My good fortune did not
long remain a secret; for it was disclosed by the frequent broils of
these heroines, who kept no decorum in their encounters. The coachman
and gardener, who paid their devoirs to my admirers, each to his
respective choice, alarmed at my success, laid their heads together, in
order to concert a plan of revenge; and the former, having been
educated at the academy at Tottenham Court, undertook to challenge me
to single combat. He accordingly, with many opprobrious invectives,
bade me defiance, and offered to box me for twenty guineas. I told him
that, although I believed myself a match for him even at that work I
would not descend so far below the dignity of a gentleman as to fight
like a porter; but if he had anything to say to me, I was his man at
blunderbuss, musket, pistol, sword, hatchet, spit, cleaver, fork, or
needle; nay, I swore, that should he give his tongue any more saucy
liberties at my expense, I would crop his ears without any ceremony.
This rhodomontade, delivered with a stern countenance and resolute
tone, had the desired effect upon my antagonist, who, with some
confusion, sneaked off, and gave his friend an account of his
reception.

The story, taking air among the servants, procured for me the title of
Gentleman John, with which I was sometimes honoured, even by my
mistress and Narcissa, who had been informed of the whole affair by the
chambermaid. In the meantime, the rival queens expressed their passion
by all the ways in their power: the cook entertained me with choice
bits, the dairymaid with strokings: the first would often encourage me
to declare myself, by complimenting me upon my courage and learning,
and observing, that if she had a husband like me, to maintain order and
keep accounts, she could make a great deal of money, by setting up an
eating-house in London for gentlemen’s servants on board wages. The
other courted my affection by showing her own importance, and telling
me that many a substantial farmer in the neighbourhood would be glad to
marry her, but she was resolved to please her eye, if she should plague
her heart. Then she would launch out into the praise of my proper
person, and say, she was sure I would make a good husband, for I was
very good-natured. I began to be uneasy at the importunities of these
inamoratas, whom, at another time perhaps, I might have pleased without
the disagreeable sauce of matrimony, but, at present, my whole soul was
engrossed by Narcissa; and I could not bear the thoughts of doing
anything derogatory to the passion I entertained for her.




CHAPTER XLI


Narcissa being in danger from the brutality of Sir Timothy, is rescued
by me, who revenge myself on my rival—I declare my passion, and retreat
to the seaside—am surrounded by smugglers, and carried to Boulogne—find
my Uncle Lieutenant Bowling in great distress, and relieve him—our
conversation


At certain intervals my ambition would revive; I would despise myself
for my tame resignation to my sordid fate, and revolve a hundred
schemes for assuming the character of a gentleman, to which I thought
myself entitled by birth and education. In these fruitless suggestions
time stole away unperceived, and I had already remained eight months in
the station of a footman, when an accident happened that put an end to
my servitude, and, for the present, banished all hopes of succeeding in
my love.

Narcissa went one day to visit Miss Thicket, who lived with her brother
within less than a mile of our house, and was persuaded to walk home in
the cool of the evening, accompanied by Sir Timothy, who, having a good
deal of the brute in him, was instigated to use some unbecoming
familiarities with her, encouraged by the solitariness of a field
through which they passed. The lovely creature was incensed at his rude
behaviour for which she reproached him in such a manner that he lost
all regard to decency, and actually offered violence to this pattern of
innocence and beauty. But Heaven would not suffer so much goodness to
be violated, and sent me, who, passing by accident near the place, was
alarmed with her cries, for her succour. What were the emotions of my
soul, when I beheld Narcissa almost sinking beneath the brutal force of
this satyr! I flew like lightning to her rescue, and he, perceiving me,
quitted his prey, and drew his hanger to chastise my presumption. My
indignation was too high to admit one thought of fear, so that, rushing
upon him, I struck his weapon out of his hand, and used my cudgel so
successfully that he fell to the ground, and lay, to all appearance,
without sense. Then I turned to Narcissa, who had swooned, and sitting
down by her, gently raised her head, and supported it on my bosom,
while, with my hand around her waist, I kept her in that position. My
soul was thrilled with tumultuous joy, at feeling the object of my
dearest wishes within my arms; and, while she lay insensible, I could
not refrain from applying my cheeks to hers, and ravishing a kiss. In a
little time the blood began to revisit her face, she opened her
enchanting eyes, and, having recollected her late situation, said, with
a look full of tender acknowledgment, “Dear John, I am eternally
obliged to you!” So saying she made an effort to rise, in which I
assisted her, and she proceeded to the house, leaning upon me all the
way. I was a thousand times tempted by this opportunity to declare my
passion, but the dread of disobliging her restrained my tongue. We had
not moved a hundred paces from the scene of her distress, when I
perceived Sir Timothy rise and walk homeward—a circumstance which,
though it gave me some satisfaction, inasmuch as I thereby knew I had
not killed him, filled me with just apprehension of his resentment,
which I found myself in no condition to withstand; especially when I
considered his intimacy with our squire, to whom I knew he could
justify himself for what he had done, by imputing it to his love, and
desiring his brother Bruin to take the same liberty with his sister,
without any fear of offence.

When we arrived at the house, Narcissa assured me she would exert all
her influence in protecting me from the revenge of Thicket, and
likewise engage her aunt in my favour. At the same time, pulling out
her purse, offered it as a small consideration for the service I had
done her. But I stood too much upon the punctilios of love to incur the
least suspicion of being mercenary, and refused the present, by saying
I had merited nothing by barely doing my duty. She seemed astonished at
my disinterestedness, and blushed: I felt the same suffusion, and, with
a downcast eye and broken accent, told her I had one request to make,
which, if her generosity would grant, I should think myself fully
recompensed, for an age of misery. She changed colour at this preamble,
and, with great confusion, replied, she hoped my good sense would
hinder me from asking anything she was bound in honour to refuse, and
therefore bade me signify my desire. Upon which I kneeled, and engaged
to kiss her hand. She immediately, with an averted look, stretched it
out: I imprinted on it an ardent kiss, and, bathing it with my tears,
cried, “Dear Madam, I am an unfortunate gentleman, and love you to
distraction, but would have died a thousand deaths rather than make
this declaration under such a servile appearance, were I not determined
to yield to the rigour of my fate, to fly from your bewitching
presence, and bury my presumptuous passion in eternal silence.” With
these words I rose, and went away before she could recover her spirits
so far as to make any reply.

My first care was to go and consult Mrs. Sagely, with whom I had
entertained a friendly correspondence ever since I left her house. When
she understood my situation, the good woman, with real concern,
condoled with me on my unhappy fate, and approved of my resolution to
leave the country, as being perfectly well acquainted with the
barbarous disposition of my rival, “who, by this time,” said she, “has
no doubt meditated a scheme of revenge. Indeed, I cannot see how you
will be able to elude his vengeance; being himself in the commission,
he will immediately grant warrants for apprehending you; and, as almost
all the people in this country are dependent on him or his friend, it
will be impossible for you to find shelter among them. If you should be
apprehended, he will commit you to jail, where you may possibly in
great misery languish till the next assizes, and then be transported
for assaulting a magistrate.”

While she thus warned me of my danger, we heard a knocking at the door,
which threw us both into great consternation, as in all probability, it
was occasioned by my pursuers; whereupon this generous old lady,
putting two guineas into my hand, with tears in her eyes, bade me, for
God’s sake, get out at the back-door and consult my safety as
Providence should direct me. There was no time for deliberation. I
followed her advice, and escaped by the benefit of a dark night to the
seaside, where, while I ruminated on my next excursion, I was all of a
sudden surrounded by armed men, who, having bound my hands and feet,
bade me make no noise on pain of being shot, and carried me on board of
a vessel, which I soon perceived to be a smuggling cutter. This
discovery gave me some satisfaction at first, because I concluded
myself safe from the resentment of Sir Timothy; but, when I found
myself in the hands of ruffians, who threatened to execute me for a
spy, I would have thought myself happily quit for a year’s
imprisonment, or even transportation. It was in vain for me to protest
my innocence: I could not persuade them that I had taken a solitary
walk to their haunt, at such an hour, merely for my own amusement; and
I did not think it my interest to disclose the true cause of my
retreat, because I was afraid they would have made their peace with
justice by surrendering me to the penalty of the law. What confirmed
their suspicion was, the appearance of a custom-house yacht, which gave
them chase, and had well nigh made a prize of their vessel; when they
were delivered from their fears by a thick fog, which effectually
screened them, and favoured their arrival at Boulogne. But, before they
got out of sight of their pursuer, they held a council of war about me,
and some of the most ferocious among them would have thrown me
overboard as a traitor who had betrayed them to their enemies; but
others, more considerate, alleged, that if they put me to death, and
should afterwards be taken, they could expect no mercy from the
legislature, which would never pardon outlawry aggravated by murder. It
was therefore determined by a plurality of votes, that I should be set
on shore in France, and left to find my way back to England, as I
should think proper, this being punishment sufficient for the bare
suspicion of a crime in itself not capital.

Although this favourable determination gave me great pleasure, the
apprehension of being robbed would not suffer me to be perfectly at
ease. To prevent this calamity, as soon as I was untied, in consequence
of the aforesaid decision, I tore a small hole in one of my stockings,
into which I dropped six guineas, reserving half a piece and some
silver in my pocket, that, finding something, they might not be tempted
to make any further inquiry. This was a very necessary precaution, for,
when we came within sight of the French shore, one of the smugglers
told me, I must pay for my passage. To this declaration I replied, that
my passage was none of my own seeking; therefore they could not expect
a reward from me for transporting me into a strange country by force.
“D—me!” said the outlaw, “none of your palaver; but let me see what
money you have got.” So saying, he thrust his hand into my pocket
without any ceremony, and emptied it of the contents; then, casting an
eye at my hat and wig, which captivated his fancy, he took them off,
clapping his own on my head, declared, that a fair exchange was no
robbery. I was fain to put up with this bargain, which was by no means
favourable to me; and a little while after we went all on shore
together.

I resolved to take my leave of those desperadoes without much ceremony,
when one of them cautioned me against appearing to their prejudice if
ever I returned to England, unless I had a mind to be murdered; for
which service, he assured me, the gang never wanted agents. I promised
to observe his advice, and departed for the Upper Town, where I
inquired for a cabaret, or public-house, into which I went, with an
intention of taking some refreshment. In the kitchen, five Dutch
sailors sat at breakfast with a large loaf, a firkin of butter, and a
keg of brandy, the bung of which they often applied to their mouths
with great perseverance and satisfaction. At some distance from them I
perceived another person in the same garb, sitting in a pensive
solitary manner, entertaining himself with a whiff of tobacco, from the
stump of a pipe as black as jet. The appearance of distress never
failed to attract my regard and compassion. I approached this forlorn
tar with a view to offer him my assistance, and, notwithstanding the
alteration of dress and disguise of a long beard, I discovered in him
my long lost and lamented uncle and benefactor, Lieutenant Bowling!
Good Heaven! what were the agitations of my soul, between the joy of
finding again such a valuable friend, and the sorrow of seeing him in
such a low condition! The tears gushed down my cheeks; I stood
motionless and silent for some time. At length, recovering the use of
speech, I exclaimed, “Gracious God! Mr. Bowling!” My uncle no sooner
heard his name mentioned, than he started up, crying, with some
surprise, “Holla!” and, after having looked at me steadfastly, without
being able to recollect me, said, “Did you call me, brother,” I told
him I had something extraordinary to communicate, and desired him to
give me the hearing for a few minutes in another room; but he would by
no means consent to this proposal, saying, “Avast there, friend: none
of your tricks upon travellers;—if you have anything to say to me, do
it above board;—you need not be afraid of being overheard;—here are
none who understand our lingo.” Though I was loth to discover myself
before company, I could no longer refrain from telling him I was his
own nephew, Roderick Random. On this information, he considered me with
great earnestness and astonishment, and, recalling my features, which,
though enlarged, were not entirely altered since he had seen me, came
up, and shook me by the hand very cordially, protesting he was glad to
see me well. After some pause, he went on thus; “And yet, my lad, I am
sorry to see you under such colours; the more so, as it is not in my
power, at present, to change them for the better, times being very hard
with me,” With these words I could perceive a tear trickle down his
furrowed cheek, which affected me so much that I wept bitterly.

Imagining my sorrow was the effect of my own misfortunes, he comforted
me with observing, that life was a voyage in which we must expect to
meet with all weathers; sometimes was calm, sometimes rough; that a
fair gale often succeeded a storm; that the wind did not always sit one
way, and that despair signified nothing; that resolution and skill were
better than a stout vessel: for why? because they require no carpenter,
and grow stronger the more labour they undergo. I dried up my tears,
which I assured him were not shed for my own distress, but for his, and
begged leave to accompany him into another room, where we could
converse more at our ease. There I recounted to him the ungenerous
usage I had met with from Potion; at which relation he started up,
stalked across the room three or four times in a great hurry, and,
grasping his cudgel, cried, “I would I were alongside of him—that’s
all—I would I were alongside of him!” I then gave him a detail of my
adventures and sufferings, which affected him more than I could have
imagined; and concluded with telling him that Captain Oakun was still
alive, and that he might return to England when he would to solicit his
affairs, without danger or molestation. He was wonderfully pleased with
this piece of information, of which, however, he said he could not at
present avail himself, for want of money to pay for his passage to
London. This objection I soon removed, by putting five guineas into his
hand, and telling him I thought myself extremely happy in having an
opportunity of manifesting my gratitude to him in his necessity. But it
was with the utmost difficulty I could prevail upon him to accept of
two, which he affirmed were more than sufficient to defray the
necessary expense.

After this friendly contest was over, he proposed we should have a mess
of something; “For,” said he, “it has been banyan day with me a great
while. You must know I was shipwrecked, five days ago, near a place
called Lisieux, in company with those Dutchmen who are now drinking
below; and having but little money when I came ashore, it was soon
spent, because I let them have share and share while it lasted.
Howsomever, I should have remembered the old saying, every hog his own
apple; for when they found my hold unstowed, they went all hands to
shooling and begging; and, because I would not take a spell at the same
duty, refused to give me the least assistance; so that I have not broke
bread these two days.” I was shocked at the extremity of his distress,
and ordered some bread, cheese, and wine, to be brought immediately, to
allay his hunger, until a fricassee of chickens could be prepared. When
he had recruited his spirits with this homely fare, I desired to know
the particulars of his peregrination since the accident at Cape
Tiberoon, which were briefly these: The money he had about him being
all spent at Port Louis, the civility and hospitality of the French
cooled to such a degree, that he was obliged to list on board one of
their king’s ships as a common foremast man, to prevent himself from
starving on shore. In this situation he continued two years, during
which time he had acquired some knowledge of their language, and the
reputation of a good seaman; the ship he belonged to was ordered home
to France, where she was laid up as unfit for service, and he was
received on board one of Monsieur D’Antin’s squadron, in quality of
quartermaster; which office he performed in a voyage to the West
Indies, where he engaged with our ship, as before related; but his
conscience upbraiding him for serving the one enemies of his country,
he quitted the ship at the same place where he first listed, and got to
Curacoa in a Dutch vessel; there he bargained with a skipper, bound to
Europe, to work for his passage to Holland, from whence he was in hopes
of hearing from his friends in England; but was cast away, as he
mentioned before, on the French coast, and must have been reduced to
the necessity of travelling on foot to Holland, and begging for his
subsistence on the road, or of entering on board of another French
man-of-war, at the hazard of being treated as a deserter, if Providence
had not sent me to his succour. “And now, my lad,” continued he, “I
think I shall steer my course directly to London, where I do not doubt
of being replaced, and of having the R taken off me by the Lords of the
Admiralty, to whom I intend to write a petition, setting forth my case;
if I succeed, I shall have wherewithal to give you some assistance,
because, when I left the ship, I had two years’ pay due to me,
therefore I desire to know whither you are bound: and besides, perhaps,
I may have interest enough to procure a warrant appointing you
surgeon’s mate of the ship to which I shall belong—for the beadle of
the Admiralty is my good friend: and he and one of the under clerks are
sworn brothers, and that under clerk has a good deal to say with one of
the upper clerks, who is very well known to the under secretary, who,
upon his recommendation, I hope, will recommend my affair to the first
secretary; and he again will speak to one of the lords in my behalf; so
that you see I do not want friends to assist me on occasion. As for the
fellow Crampley, tho’f I know him not, I am sure he is neither seaman
nor officer, by what you have told me, or else he could never be so
much mistaken in his reckoning, as to run the ship on shore on the
coast of Sussex before he believed himself in soundings; neither, when
that accident happened, would he have left the ship until she had been
stove to pieces, especially when the tide was making; wherefore, by
this time, I do suppose, he has been tried by a court-martial, and
executed for his cowardice and misconduct.”

I could not help smiling at the description of my uncle’s ladder, by
which he proposed to climb to the attention of the board of admiralty;
and, though I knew the world too well to confide in such dependence
myself, I would not discourage him with doubts, but asked if he had no
friend in London, who would advance a small sum of money to enable him
to appear as he ought, and make a small present to the under secretary,
who might possibly dispatch his business the sooner on that account. He
scratched his head, and after some recollection, replied, “Why, yes, I
believe Daniel Whipcord, the ship-chandler in Wapping, would not refuse
me such a small matter. I know I can have what credit I want for
lodging, liquor, and clothes; but as to money, I won’t be positive. Had
honest Block been living, I should not have been at loss.” I was
heartily sorry to find a worthy man so destitute of friends, when he
had such need of them, and looked upon my own situation as less
miserable than his, because I was better acquainted with the
selfishness and roguery of mankind, consequently less liable to
disappointment and imposition.




CHAPTER XLII


He takes his passage in a cutter for Deal—we are accosted by a Priest,
who proves to be a Scotchman—his profession on friendship—he is
affronted by the Lieutenant, who afterwards appeases him by
submission—my uncle embarks—I am introduced by a Priest to a Capuchin,
in whose company I set out for Paris—the character of my fellow
traveller—on adventure on the road—I am shocked at his behaviour


When our repast was ended, we walked down to the harbour, where we
found a cutter that was to sail for Deal in the evening, and Mr.
Bowling agreed for his passage. In the meantime, we sauntered about the
town to satisfy our curiosity, our conversation turning on the subject
of my designs, which were not as yet fixed: neither can it be supposed
that my mind was at ease, when I found myself reduced almost to extreme
poverty, in the midst of foreigners, among whom I had not one
acquaintance to advise or befriend me. My uncle was sensible of my
forlorn condition, and pressed me to accompany him to England, where he
did not doubt of finding some sort of provision for me; but besides the
other reasons I had for avoiding that kingdom, I looked upon it, at
this time, as the worst country in the universe for a poor honest man
to live in; and therefore determined to remain in France, at all
events.

I was confirmed in this resolution by a reverend priest, who, passing
by at this time, and overhearing us speak English, accosted us in the
same language, telling us he was our countryman, and wishing it might
be in his power to do us any service. We thanked this grave person for
his courteous offer, and invited him to drink a glass with us, which he
did not think proper to refuse, and we went altogether into a tavern of
his recommending. After having drunk to our healths in a bumper of good
Burgundy, he began to inquire into our situation, particularly the
place of our nativity, which we no sooner named than he started up,
and, wringing our hands with great fervour, shed a flood of tears,
crying, “I come from the same part of the country! perhaps you are my
own relations.” I was on my guard against his caresses, which I
suspected very much, when I remembered the adventure of the
money-dropper; but, without any appearance of diffidence, observed,
that, as he was born in that part of the country, he must certainly
know our families, which (howsoever mean our present appearance might
be) were none of the most obscure or inconsiderable. Then I discovered
our names, to which I found he was no stranger; he had known my
grandfather personally; and, notwithstanding an absence of fifty years
from Scotland, recounted so many particulars of the families in the
neighbourhood, that my scruples were entirely removed, and I thought
myself happy in his acquaintance. In the course of our conversation, I
disclosed my condition without reserve, and displayed my talents to
such advantage, that the old father looked upon me with admiration, and
assured me, that, if I stayed in France, and listened to reason, I
could not fail of making my fortune, to which he would contribute all
in his power.

My uncle began to be jealous of the Priest’s insinuation, and very
abruptly declared, that if ever I should renounce my religion, he would
break off all connection and correspondence with me; for it was his
opinion, that no honest man would swerve from his principles in which
he was bred, whether Turkish, Protestant, or Roman. The father,
affronted at this declaration, with great vehemence began a long
discourse, setting forth the danger of obstinacy, and shutting one’s
eyes against the light. He said, that ignorance would be no plea
towards justification, when we had opportunities of being better
informed; and, that, if the minds of people had not been open to
conviction, the Christian religion could not have been propagated in
the world, and we should now be in a state of Pagan darkness and
barbarity: he endeavoured to prove, by some texts of Scripture and many
quotations from the Fathers, that the Pope was the successor of St.
Peter, and vicar of Jesus Christ; that the church of Rome was the true,
holy, catholic church; and that the Protestant faith was an impious
heresy and damnable schism, by which many millions of souls would
suffer everlasting perdition. When he had finished his sermon, which I
thought he pronounced with more zeal than discretion, he addressed
himself to my uncle, desired to know his objections to what had been
said. The lieutenant, whose attention had been wholly engrossed by his
own affairs, took the pipe out of his mouth, and replied, “As for me,
friend, d’ye see, I have no objection to what you say; it may be either
truth or false, for what I know; I meddle with nobody’s affairs but my
own; the gunner to his linstock, and the steersman to the helm, as the
saying is. I trust to no creed but the compass, and do unto every man
as I would be done by; so that I defy the Pope, the Devil, and the
Pretender; and hope to be saved as well as another.” This association
of persons gave great offence to the friar, who protested, in a mighty
passion, that if Mr. Bowling had not been his countryman, he would have
caused him to be imprisoned for his insolence; I ventured to disapprove
of my uncle’s rashness, and appeased the old gentleman, by assuring him
there was no offence intended by my kinsman, who, by this time sensible
of his error, shook the injured party by the hand, and asked pardon for
the freedom he had taken. Matters being amicably compromised, he
invited us to come and see him in the afternoon at the convent to which
he belonged, and took his leave for the present; when my uncle
recommended it strongly to me to persevere in the religion of my
forefathers, whatever advantages might propose to myself by a change,
which could not fail of disgracing myself, and dishonouring my family.
I assured him no consideration would induce me to forfeit his
friendship and good opinion on that score; at which assurance he
discovered great satisfaction, and put me in mind of dinner, which we
immediately bespoke, and when it was ready, ate together.

I imagined my acquaintance with the Scottish priest if properly
managed, might turn out to my advantage, and therefore resolved to
cultivate it as much as I could. With this view we visited him at his
convent, according to his invitation, where he treated us with wine and
sweetmeats, and showed us everything that was remarkable in the
monastery. Having been thus entertained, we took our leave, though not
before I had promised to see him next day, and the time fixed for my
uncle’s embarking being come, I accompanied him to the harbour, and saw
him on board. We parted not without tears, after we had embraced and
wished one another all manner of prosperity: and he entreated me to
write to him often, directing to Lieutenant Bowling, at the sign of the
Union Flag, near the Hermitage, London.

I returned to the house in which we had met, where I passed the night
in a very solitary manner, reflecting on the severity of my fate, and
endeavouring to project some likely scheme of life for the future; but
my invention failed me; I saw nothing but insurmountable difficulties
in my way, and was ready to despair at the miserable prospect! That I
might not, however, neglect any probable reason, I got up in the
morning, and went directly to the father, whose advice and assistance I
implored. He received me very kindly, and gave me to understand, that
there was one way of life in which a person of my talents could not
fail of making a great figure. I guessed his meaning, and told him,
once for all, I was fully determined against any alteration in point of
religion; therefore if his proposal regarded the church, he might save
himself the trouble of explaining it. He shook his head and sighed,
saying, “Ah! son, son, what a glorious prospect is here spoiled by your
stubborn prejudice! Suffer yourself to be persuaded by reason, and
consult your temporal welfare, as well as the concerns of your eternal
soul. I can, by my interest procure your admission as a noviciate to
this convent, where I will superintend and direct you with a truly
paternal affection.” Then he launched out into the praises of a
monastic life, which no noise disturbs, no cares molest, and no danger
invades—where the heart is weaned from carnal attachments, the grosser
appetite subdued and chastised, and the soul wafted to divine regions
of philosophy and truth, on the wing of studious contemplation. But his
eloquence was lost upon me, whom two considerations enabled to
withstand his temptation; namely, my promise to my uncle, and my
aversion to an ecclesiastical life; for as to the difference of
religion, I looked upon it as a thing of too small moment to come in
competition with a man’s fortune. Finding me immovable on this head, he
told me, he was more sorry than offended at my noncompliance, and still
ready to employ his good offices in my behalf. “The same erroneous
maxims,” said he, “that obstruct your promotion in the church, will
infallibly prevent your advancement in the army; but, if you can brook
the condition of a servant, I am acquainted with some people of rank at
Versailles, to whom I can give you letters of recommendation, that you
may be entertained by some one of them in quality of maitre d’hotel;
and I do not doubt that your qualifications will soon entitle you to a
better provision.” I embraced his offer with great eagerness, and he
appointed me to come back in the afternoon, when he would not only give
me letters, but likewise introduce me to a capuchin of his
acquaintance, who intended to set out for Paris next morning in whose
company I might travel, without being at the expense of one livre
during the whole journey. This piece of good news gave me infinite
pleasure; I acknowledged my obligation to the benevolent father in the
most grateful expressions; and he performed his promise to a tittle, in
delivering the letters, and making me acquainted with the capuchin,
with whom I departed next morning by break of day.

It was not long before I discovered my fellow traveller to be a merry
facetious fellow, who, notwithstanding his profession and appearance of
mortification, loved good eating and drinking better than his rosary,
and paid more adoration to a pretty girl than to the Virgin Mary, or
St. Genevieve. He was a thick brawny young man, with red eyebrows, a
hook nose, a face covered with freckles; and his name was Frere
Balthazar. His order did not permit him to wear linen, so that, having
little occasion to undress himself, he was none of the cleanliest
animals in the world; and his constitution was naturally so strongly
scented that I always thought it convenient to keep to the windward of
him in our march. As he was perfectly well known on the road, we fared
sumptuously without any cost, and the fatigue of our journey was much
alleviated by the good humour of my companion, who sang an infinite
number of catches on the subjects of love and wine. We took up our
lodging the first night at a peasant’s house not far from Abbeville,
where we were entertained with an excellent ragout, cooked by our
landlord’s daughters, one of whom was very handsome. After having eaten
heartily and drank a sufficient quantity of small wine, we were
conducted to a barn, where we found a couple of carpets spread upon
clean straw for our reception. We had not lain in this situation above
half-an-hour, when we heard somebody knock softly at the door, upon
which Balthazar got up, and let in our host’s two daughters, who wanted
to have some private conversation with him in the dark. When they had
whispered together some time, the capuchin came to me, and asked if I
was insensible to love, and so hard-hearted as to refuse a share of my
bed to a pretty maid who had a tendre for me? I must own to my shame,
that I suffered myself to be overcome by my passion, and with great
eagerness seized the occasion, when I understood that the amiable
Nanette was to be my bedfellow. In vain did my reason suggest the
respect that I owed to my dear mistress Narcissa; the idea of that
lovely charmer rather increased than allayed the ferment of my spirits;
and the young paysanne had no reason to complain of my remembrance.
Early in the morning, the kind creatures left us to our repose, which
lasted till eight o’clock when we got up, and were treated at breakfast
with chocolate and l’eau-de-vie by our paramours, of whom we took a
tender leave, after my companion had confessed and given them
absolution.

While we proceeded on our journey, the conversation turned upon the
night’s adventure, being introduced by the capuchin, who asked me how I
liked my lodging; I declared my satisfaction, and talked in rapture of
the agreeable Nanette, at which he shook his head, and smiling said,
she was a morceau pour la bonne bouche. “I never valued myself,”
continued he, “upon anything so much as the conquest of Nanette; and,
vanity apart, I have been pretty fortunate in my amours.” This
information shocked me not a little, as I was well convinced of his
intimacy with her sister; and though I did not care to tax him with
downright incest, I professed my astonishment at his last night’s
choice, when, I supposed, the other was at his devotion. To this hint
he answered that, besides his natural complaisance to the sex, he had
another reason to distribute his favours equally between them, namely,
to preserve peace in the family, which could not otherwise be
maintained; that, moreover, Nanette had conceived an affection for me,
and he loved her too well to balk her inclination; more especially,
when he had an opportunity of obliging his friend at the same time. I
thanked him for this instance of his friendship, though I was extremely
disgusted at his want of delicacy, and cursed the occasion that threw
me in his way. Libertine as I was, I could not bear to see a man behave
so wide of the character he assumed. I looked upon him as a person of
very little worth or honesty, and should even have kept a wary eye upon
my pocket, if I had thought he could have had any temptation to steal.
But I could not conceive the use of money to a capuchin, who is
obliged, by the rules of his order, to appear like a beggar, and enjoy
all other necessaries of life gratis; besides, my fellow traveller
seemed to be of a complexion too careless and sanguine to give me any
apprehension on that score; so that I proceeded with great confidence,
in expectation of being soon at my journey’s end.




CHAPTER XLIII


We lodge at a House near Amiens, where I am robbed by the Capuchin, who
escapes while I am asleep—I go to Noyons in search of him, but without
Success—make my Condition known to several People, but find no
Relief—grow desperate—find a Company of Soldiers—Enlist in the Regiment
of Picardy—we are ordered into Germany—I find the Fatigues of the March
almost intolerable—Quarrel with my Comrade in a dispute about
Politics—he challenges me to the Field—wounds and disarms me


The third night of our pilgrimage we passed at a house near Amiens,
where being unknown, we supped upon indifferent fare and sour wine, and
were fain to be in a garret upon an old mattress, which, I believe had
been in the possession of ten thousand myriads of fleas time out of
mind. We did not invade their territory with impunity; in less than a
minute we were attacked by stings innumerable, in spite of which,
however, I fell fast asleep, being excessively fatigued with our day’s
march, and did not wake till nine next morning, when, seeing myself
alone, I started up in a terrible fright, and, examining my pockets,
found my presaging fear too true! My companion had made free with my
cash, and left me to seek my way to Paris by myself! I ran down stairs
immediately; and, with a look full of grief and amazement, inquired for
the mendicant, who, they gave me to understand, had set out four hours
before, after having told them I was a little indisposed, and desired I
might not be disturbed, but be informed when I should wake, that he had
taken the road to Noyons, where he would wait for my coming, at the Coq
d’Or. I spoke not a word, but with a heavy heart directed my course to
that place, at which I arrived in the afternoon, fainting with
weariness and hunger; but learned to my utter confusion, that no such
person had been there! It was happy for me that I had a good deal of
resentment in my constitution, which animated me on such occasions
against the villainy of mankind, and enabled me to bear misfortunes,
otherwise intolerable. Boiling with indignation, I discovered to the
host my deplorable condition, and inveighed with great bitterness
against the treachery of Balthazar; at which he shrugged up his
shoulders, and with a peculiar grimace on his countenance, said, he was
sorry for my misfortune, but there was no remedy like patience. At that
instant some guests arrived, to whom he hastened to offer his service,
leaving me mortified at his indifference, and fully persuaded that an
innkeeper is the same sordid animal all the world over.

While I stood in the porch forlorn and undetermined, venting
ejaculations of curses against the thief who had robbed me, and the old
priest who recommended him to my friendship, a young gentleman richly
dressed, attended by a valet de chambre and two servants in livery,
arrived at the inn. I thought I perceived a great deal of sweetness and
good-nature in his countenance; therefore he had no sooner alighted
than I accosted him, and, in a few words, explained my situation: he
listened with great politeness, and, when I made an end of my story,
said, “Well, monsieur, what would you have me to do?” I was effectually
abashed at this interrogation, which, I believe, no man of common sense
or generosity could make, and made no other compliment than a low bow:
he returned the compliment still lower, and tripped into an apartment,
while the landlord let me know that my standing there to interrupt
company gave offence, and might do him infinite prejudice. He had no
occasion to repeat his insinuation; I moved from the place immediately,
and was so much transported with grief, anger, and disdain, that a
torrent of blood gushed from my nostrils. In this ecstacy, I quitted
Noyons, and betook myself to the fields, where I wandered about like
one distracted, till my spirits were quite exhausted, and I was obliged
to throw myself down at the root of a tree, to rest my wearied limbs.
Here my rage forsook me: I began to feel the importunate cravings of
nature, and relapsed into silent sorrow and melancholy reflection. I
revolved all the crimes I had been guilty of and found them too few and
venial, that I could not comprehend the justice of that Providence,
which, after having exposed me to so much wretchedness and danger, left
me a prey to famine at last in a foreign country, where I had not one
friend or acquaintance to close my eyes, and do the last offices of
humanity to my miserable carcass. A thousand times I wished myself a
bear, that I might retreat to woods and deserts, far from the
inhospitable haunts of man, where I could live by my own talents,
independent of treacherous friends and supercilious scorn.

As I lay in this manner, groaning over my hapless fate, I heard the
sound of a violin, and raising my head, perceived a company of men and
women dancing on the grass at some distance from me. I looked upon this
to be a favourable season for distress to attract compassion, when
every selfish thought is banished, and the heart dilated with mirth and
social joy; wherefore I got up, and approached those happy people, whom
I soon discovered to be a party of soldiers, with their wives and
children, unbending and diverting themselves at this rate, after the
fatigue of a march. I had never before seen such a parcel of scarecrows
together, neither could I reconcile their meagre and gaunt looks, their
squalid and ragged attire, and every other external symptom of extreme
woe, with this appearance of festivity. I saluted them, however, and
was received with great politeness; after which they formed a ring, and
danced around me. This jollity had a wonderful effect upon my spirits.
I was infected with their gaiety, and in spite of my dismal situation,
forgot my cares, and joined in their extravagance. When we had
recreated ourselves a good while at this diversion, the ladies spread
their manteaus on the ground, upon which they emptied their knapsacks
of some onions, coarse bread, and a few flasks of poor wine: being
invited to a share of the banquet, I sat down with the rest, and, in
the whole course of my life, never made a more comfortable meal. When
our repast was ended, we got up again to dance, and, now that I found
myself refreshed I behaved to the admiration of everybody; I was loaded
with a thousand compliments and professions of friendship: the men
commended my person and agility, and the women were loud in the praise
of my bonne grace; the sergeant in particular expressed so much regard
for me, and described the pleasures of a soldier’s life to me with so
much art, that I began to listen to his proposal of enlisting me in the
service; and the more I considered my own condition, the more I was
convinced of the necessity I was under to come to a speedy
determination.

Having, therefore, maturely weighed the circumstances pro and con I
signified my consent, and was admitted into the regiment of Picardy,
said to be the oldest corps in Europe. The company to which this
commander belonged was quartered at a village not far off, whither we
marched next day, and I was presented to my captain, who seemed very
well pleased with my appearance, gave me a crown to drink, and ordered
me to be accommodated with clothes, arms, and accoutrements. Then I
sold my livery suit, purchased linen, and, as I was at great pains to
learn the exercise, in a very short time became a complete soldier.

It was not long before we received orders to join several more
regiments, and march with all expedition into Germany, in order to
reinforce Mareschal Duc de Noailles, who was then encamped with his
army on the side of the river Mayne, to watch the motions of the
English, Hanoverians, Austrians, and Hessians, under the command of the
Earl of Stair. We began our march accordingly, and then I became
acquainted with that part of a soldier’s life to which I had been
hitherto a stranger. It is impossible to describe the hunger and thirst
I sustained, and the fatigue I underwent in a march of so many hundred
miles; during which, I was so much chafed with the heat and motion of
my limbs, that in a very short time the inside of my thighs and legs
were deprived of skin, and I proceeded in the utmost torture. This
misfortune I owed to the plumpness of my constitution, which I cursed,
and envied the withered condition of my comrades, whose bodies could
not spare juice enough to supply a common issue, and were indeed proof
against all manner of friction. The continual pain I felt made me
fretful, and my peevishness was increased by the mortification of my
pride in seeing those miserable wretches, whom a hard gale of wind
would have scattered through the air like chaff, bear those toils with
alacrity under which I was ready to sink.

One day, while we enjoyed a halt, and the soldiers with their wives had
gone out to dance, according to custom, my comrade stayed at home with
me on pretence of friendship, and insulted me with his pity and
consolation! He told me that, though I was young and tender at present,
I should soon be seasoned to the service; and he did not doubt but I
should have the honour to contribute in some measure to the glory of
the king. “Have courage, therefore, my child,” said he, “and pray to
the good God, that you may be as happy as I am, who have had the honour
of serving Louis the Great, and of receiving many wounds, in helping to
establish his glory.” When I looked upon the contemptible object that
pronounced these words, I was amazed at the infatuation that possessed
him; and could not help expressing my astonishment at the absurdity of
a rational who thinks himself highly honoured, in being permitted to
encounter abject poverty, oppression, famine, disease, mutilation, and
evident death merely to gratify the vicious ambition of a prince, by
whom his sufferings were disregarded, and his name utterly unknown. I
observed that, if his situation were the consequence of compulsion, I
would praise his patience and fortitude in bearing his lot: if he had
taken up arms in defence of his injured country, he was to be applauded
for his patriotism: or if he had fled to this way of life as a refuge
from a greater evil, he was justifiable in his own conscience (though I
could have no notion of misery more extreme than he suffered); but to
put his condition on the footing of conducing to the glory of his
prince, was no more than professing himself a desperate slave, who
voluntarily underwent the utmost wretchedness and peril, and committed
the most flagrant crimes, to soothe the barbarous pride of a
fellow-creature, his superior in nothing but the power he derived from
the submission of such wretches as him. The soldier was very much
affronted at the liberty I took with his king, which, he said, nothing
but my ignorance could excuse: he affirmed that the characters of
princes were sacred, and ought not to be profaned by the censure of
their subjects, who were bound by their allegiance to obey their
commands, of what nature soever, without scruple or repining; and
advised me to correct the rebellious principles I had imbibed among the
English, who, for their insolence to their kings, were notorious all
over the world, even to a proverb.

In vindication of my countrymen, I repeated all the arguments commonly
used to prove that every man has a natural right to liberty; that
allegiance and protection are reciprocal; that, when the mutual tie is
broken by the tyranny of the king, he is accountable to the people for
his breach of contract, and subject to the penalties of the law; and
that those insurrections of the English, which are branded with the
name of rebellion by the slaves of arbitrary power, were no other than
glorious efforts to rescue that independence which was their
birthright, from the ravenous claws of usurping ambition. The
Frenchman, provoked at the little deference I paid to the kingly name,
lost all patience, and reproached me in such a manner that my temper
forsook me, I clenched my fist, with an intention to give him a hearty
box on the ear. Perceiving my design, he started back and demanded a
parley; upon which I checked my indignation, and he gave me to
understand that a Frenchman never forgave a blow; therefore, if I were
not weary of my life, I would do well to spare him that mortification,
and do him the honour of measuring his sword with mine, like a
gentleman. I took his advice and followed him to a field hard by, where
indeed I was ashamed at the pitiful figure of my antagonist, who was a
poor little shivering creature, decrepit with age, and blind of one
eye. But I soon found the folly of judging from appearances; being at
the second pass wounded in the sword hand, and immediately disarmed
with such a jerk, that I thought the joint was dislocated. I was no
less confounded than enraged at this event, especially as my adversary
did not bear his success with all the moderation that might have been
expected; for he insisted upon my asking pardon for affronting his king
and him. This proposal I would by no means comply with, but told him,
it was a mean condescension, which no gentleman in his circumstances
ought to propose, nor any in my situation ought to perform; and that,
if he persisted in his ungenerous demand, I would in my turn claim
satisfaction with my musket, when we should be more upon a par than
with the sword, of which he seemed so much master.




CHAPTER XLIV


In order to be revenged, I learn the Science of Defence—we join
Mareschal Duc de Noailles, are engaged with the Allies of Dettingen,
and put to flight—the behaviour of the French soldiers on that
occasion—I industriously seek another combat with the old Gascon, and
vanquish him in my turn—our regiment is put into Winter Quarters at
Rheims, where I find my friend Strap—our Recognition—he supplies me
with Money, and procures my Discharge—we take a trip to Paris; from
whence, by the way of Flanders, we set out for London; where we safely
arrive


He was disconcerted at this declaration, to which he made no reply, but
repaired to the dancers, among whom he recounted his victory with many
exaggerations and gasconades; while I, taking up my sword, went to my
quarters, and examined my wound, which I found was of no consequence.
The same day an Irish drummer, having heard of my misfortune, visited
me, and after having condoled me on the chance of war, gave me to
understand, that he was master of the sword, and would in a very short
time instruct me so thoroughly in that noble science, that I should be
able to chastise the old Gascon for his insolent boasting at my
expense. This friendly office he proffered on pretence of the regard he
had for his countrymen; but I afterwards learned the true motive was no
other than a jealousy he entertained of a correspondence between the
Frenchman and his wife, which he did not think proper to resent in
person. Be this as it will, I accepted his offer and practised his
lessons with such application, that I soon believed myself a match for
my conqueror. In the meantime we continued our march, and arrived at
the Camp of Mareschal Noailles the night before the battle at
Dettingen: notwithstanding the fatigue we had undergone, our regiment
was one of those that were ordered next day to cross the river, under
the command of the Duc de Grammont, to take possession of a narrow
defile, through which the allies must of necessity have passed at a
great disadvantage, or remain where they were, and perish for want of
provision, if they would not condescend to surrender at discretion. How
they suffered themselves to be pent up in this manner it is not my
province to relate; I shall only observe that, when we had taken
possession of our ground, I heard an old officer in conversation with
another express a surprise at the conduct of Lord Stair, who had the
reputation of a good general. But it seems, at this time, that nobleman
was overruled, and only acted in an inferior character; so that no part
of the blame could be imputed to him, who declared his disapprobation
of the step, in consequence of which the whole army was in the utmost
danger; but Providence or destiny acted miracles in their behalf, by
disposing the Duc de Grammont to quit his advantageous post, pass the
defile, and attack the English, who were drawn up in order of battle on
the plain, and who handled us so roughly that, after having lost a
great number of men, we turned our backs without ceremony, and fled
with such precipitation that many hundreds perished in the river
through pure fear and confusion: for the enemy were so generous that
they did not pursue us one inch of ground; and, if our consternation
would have permitted, we might have retreated with great order and
deliberation. But, notwithstanding the royal clemency of the king of
Great Britain, who headed the allies in person, and, no doubt, put a
stop to the carnage, our loss amounted to five thousand men, among whom
were many officers of distinction. Our miscarriage opened a passage for
the foe to Haynau, whither they immediately marched, leaving their sick
and wounded to the care of the French, who next day took possession of
the field of battle, buried the dead, and treated the living with
humanity.

This circumstance was a great consolation to us, who thence took
occasion to claim the victory; and the genius of the French nation
never appeared more conspicuous than now, in the rhodomontades they
uttered on the subject of their generosity and courage. Every man (by
his own account) performed feats that eclipsed all the heroes of
antiquity. One compared himself to a lion retiring at leisure from his
cowardly pursuers, who keep at a wary distance, and gall him with their
darts. Another likened himself to a bear that retreats with his face to
the enemy, who dare not assail him; and the third assumed the character
of a desperate stag, that turns upon the hounds and keeps them at bay.
There was not a private soldier engaged who had not by the prowess of
his single arm demolished a whole platoon, or put a squadron of horse
to flight; and, among others, the meagre Gascon extolled his exploits
above those of Hercules or Charlemagne. As I still retained my
resentment for the disgrace I suffered in my last rencontre with him,
and, now that I thought myself qualified, longed for an opportunity to
retrieve my honour, I magnified the valour of the English with all the
hyperboles I could imagine, and described the pusillanimity of the
French in the same style, comparing them to hares flying before
greyhounds, or mice pursued by cats; and passed an ironical compliment
on the speed he exerted in his flight, which, considering his age and
infirmities I said was surprising. He was stung to the quick by this
sarcasm, and, with an air of threatening disdain, bade me know myself
better, and remember the correction I had already received from him for
my insolence; for he might not always be in the humour of sparing a
wretch who abused his goodness. To this inuendo I made no reply but by
a kick on the breech, which overturned him in an instant. He started up
with wonderful agility, and, drawing his sword, attacked me with great
fury. Several people interposed, but, when he informed them of its
being an affair of honour, they retired, and left us to decide the
battle by ourselves. I sustained his onset with little damage, having
only received a small scratch on my right shoulder, and, seeing his
breath and vigour almost exhausted, assaulted him in my turn, closed
with him, and wrested his sword out of his hand in the struggle. Having
thus acquired the victory, I desired him to beg his life; to which
demand he made no answer, but shrugged up his shoulders to his ears,
expanded his hands, elevated the skin on his forehead and eyebrows, and
depressed the corners of his mouth in such a manner, that I could
scarce refrain from laughing aloud at his grotesque appearance. That I
might, however, mortify his vanity, which triumphed without bounds over
my misfortune, I thrust his sword up to the hilt in something (it was
not a tansy), that lay smoking on the plain, and joined the rest of the
soldiers with an air of tranquillity and indifference.

There was nothing more of moment attempted by either of the armies
during the remaining part of the campaign, which being ended, the
English marched back to the Netherlands; part of our army was detached
to French Flanders, and our regiment ordered into winter quarters in
Champagne. It was the fate of the grenadier company, to which I now
belonged, to lie at Rheims, where I found myself in the utmost want of
everything, my pay, which amounted to five sols a day, far from
supplying me with necessaries, being scarce sufficient to procure a
wretched subsistence to keep soul and body together; so that I was, by
hunger and hard duty, brought down to the meagre condition of my
fellow-soldiers, and my linen reduced from three tolerable shirts to
two pair of sleeves and necks, the bodies having been long ago
converted into spatterdaches; and after all, I was better provided than
any private man in the regiment. In this urgency of my affairs, I wrote
to my uncle in England, though my hopes from that quarter were not at
all sanguine, for the reasons I have already explained; and in the
meantime had recourse to my old remedy patience, consoling myself with
the flattering suggestions of a lively imagination, that never
abandoned me in my distress.

One day, while I stood sentinel at the gate of a general officer, a
certain nobleman came to the door, followed by a gentleman in mourning,
to whom, at parting, I heard him say, “You may depend upon my good
offices.” This assurance was answered by a low bow of the person in
black, who, turning to go away, discovered to me the individual
countenance of my old friend and adherent Strap. I was so much
astonished at the sight, that I lost the power of utterance, and,
before I could recollect myself, he was gone without taking any notice
of me. Indeed, had he stayed, I scarcely should have ventured to accost
him; because, though I was perfectly well acquainted with the features
of his face, I could not be positively certain as to the rest of his
person, which was very much altered for the better since he left me at
London, neither could I conceive by which means he was enabled to
appear in the sphere of a gentleman, to which, while I knew him, he had
not even the ambition to aspire. But I was too much concerned in the
affair to neglect further information, and therefore took the first
opportunity of asking the porter if he knew the gentleman to whom the
marquis spoke. The Swiss told me his name was Monsieur d’Estrapes, that
he had been valet-de-chambre to an English gentleman lately deceased,
and that he was very much regarded by the marquis for his fidelity to
his master, between whom and that nobleman a very intimate friendship
had subsisted. Nothing could be more agreeable to me than this piece of
intelligence, which banished all doubt of its being my friend, who had
found means to frenchify his name as well as his behaviour since we
parted. As soon, therefore, as I was relieved, I went to his lodging,
according to a direction given me by the Swiss, and had the good
fortune to find him at home. That I might surprise him the more, I
concealed my name and business, and only desired the servant of the
house to tell Monsieur d’Estrapes that I begged the honour of
half-an-hour’s conversation with him. He was confounded and dismayed at
this message, when he understood it was sent by a soldier; though he
was conscious to himself of no crime, all that he had heard of the
Bastille appeared to his imagination with aggravated horror, but it was
not before I had waited a considerable time that he had resolution
enough to bid the servant show me up-stairs.

When I entered his chamber, he returned my bow with great civility, and
endeavoured, with forced complaisance, to disguise his fear, which
appeared in the paleness of his face, the wildness of his looks, and
the shaking of his limbs. I was diverted at his consternation, which
redoubled, when I told him in French, I had business for his private
ear and demanded a particular audience. The valet being withdrawn, I
asked in the same language if his name was d’Estrapes, to which he
answered with a faltering tongue, “The same, at your service.” “Are you
a Frenchman?” Said I. “I have not the honour of being a Frenchman
born,” replied he, “but I have an infinite veneration for the country.”
I then desired he would do me the honour to look at me, which he no
sooner did than, struck with my appearance, he started back, and cried
in English, “O Jesus!—sure it can’t! No ’tis impossible!” I smiled at
his interjections, saying, “I suppose you are too much of a gentleman
to own your friend in adversity.” When he heard me pronounce these
words in our own language, he leaped upon me in a transport of joy,
hung about my neck, kissed me from ear to ear, and blubbered like a
great schoolboy who had been whipped. Then, observing my dress, he set
up his throat, crying, “O Lord! O Lord! that ever I should live to see
my dearest friend reduced to the condition of a foot soldier in the
French service! Why did you consent to my leaving you?—but I know the
reason—you thought you had got more creditable friends, and grew
ashamed of my acquaintance. Ah! Lord help us! though I was a little
short-sighted, I was not altogether blind: and though I did not
complain, I was not the less sensible of your unkindness, which was
indeed the only thing that induced me to ramble abroad, the Lord knows
whither; but I must own it has been a lucky ramble for me, and so I
forgive you, and may God forgive you! O Lord! Lord! is it come to
this?” I was nettled at the charge, which, though just, I could not
help thinking unseasonable, and told him with some tartness that,
whether his suspicions were well or ill grounded, he might have chosen
a more convenient opportunity of introducing them; and that the
question now was whether or no he found himself disposed to lend me any
assistance. “Disposed!” replied he with great emotion; “I thought you
had known me so well as to assure yourself without asking, that I, and
all that belongs to me, are at your command. In the meantime you shall
dine with me, and I will tell you something that, perhaps, will not be
displeasing unto you.” Then, wringing my hand, he said, “It makes my
heart bleed to see you in that garb!” I thanked him for his invitation,
which, I observed, could not be unwelcome to a person who had not eaten
a comfortable meal these seven months; but I had another request to
make, which I begged he would grant before dinner, and that was the
loan of a shirt; for although my back had been many weeks a stranger to
any comfort of that kind, my skin was not yet familiarised to the want
of it. He stared in my face, with a woful countenance, at this
declaration, which he could scarce believe, until I explained it by
unbuttoning my coat and disclosing my naked body—a circumstance which
shocked the tender-hearted Strap, who, with tears in his eyes, ran to a
chest of drawers, and taking out some linen, presented to me a very
fine ruffled Holland shirt and cambric neckcloth, assuring me he had
three dozen of the same kind at my service.

I was ravished at this piece of good news and, having accommodated
myself in a moment, hugged my benefactor for his generous offer,
saying, I was overjoyed to find him undebauched by prosperity, which
seldom fails to corrupt the heart. He bespoke for dinner some soup and
bouilli, a couple of pullets roasted, and a dish of asparagus, and in
the interim entertained me with biscuit and Burgundy, after which
repast he entreated me to gratify his longing desire of knowing every
circumstance of my fortune since his departure from London. This
request I complied with, beginning at the adventure of Gawky, and
relating every particular event in which I had been concerned from that
day to the present hour. During the recital, my friend was strongly
affected, according to the various situations described. He stared with
surprise, glowed with indignation, gaped with curiosity, smiled with
pleasure, trembled with fear, and wept with sorrow, as the vicissitudes
of my life inspired these different passions; and, when my story was
ended, signified his amazement on the whole, by lifting up his eyes and
hands and protesting that, though I was a young man, had suffered more
than all the blessed martyrs.

After dinner, I desired in my turn to know the particulars of his
peregrination, and he satisfied me in a few words, by giving me to
understand that he had lived a year at Paris with his master, who, in
that time having acquired the language, as well as the fashionable
exercises to perfection, made a tour of France and Holland, during
which excursion he was so unfortunate as to meet with three of his own
countrymen on their travels, in whose company he committed such
excesses, that his constitution failed, and he fell into a consumption;
that by the advice of physicians, he went to Montpelier for the benefit
of good air, and recovered so well in six weeks, that he returned to
Rheims seemingly in good health, where he had not continued above a
month, when he was seized with a looseness that carried him off in ten
days, to the unspeakable sorrow of all who knew him and especially of
Strap, who had been very happy in his service, and given such
satisfaction, that his master, on his death-bed recommended him to
several persons of distinction for his diligence, sobriety, and
affection, and left him by will his wearing apparel, gold watch, sword,
rings, ready money, and all the moveables he had in France, to the
value of three hundred pounds “which I now,” said he, “in the sight of
God and man, surrender to your absolute disposal: here are my keys;
take them, I beseech you, and God give you joy of the possession.” My
brain was almost turned by this sudden change of fortune, which I could
scarce believe real: however, I positively refused this extravagant
proffer of my friend, and put him in mind of my being a soldier; at
which hint he started, crying, “Odso! that’s true! we must procure your
discharge. I have some interest with a nobleman who is able to do me
that favour.”

We consulted about this affair, and it was determined that Monsieur
d’Estrapes should wait upon the Marquis in the morning, and tell him he
had by accident found his brother, whom he had not seen for many years
before, a private soldier in the regiment of Picardy, and implore that
nobleman’s interest for his discharge. In the meantime, we enjoyed
ourselves over a bottle of good Burgundy, and spent the evening in
concerting schemes for our future conduct, in case I should be so lucky
as to get rid of the army. The business was to make ourselves easy for
life by means of his legacy, a task very difficult, and, in the usual
methods of laying out money, altogether impracticable, so that, after
much canvassing, we could come to no resolution that night, but when we
parted, recommended the matter to the serious attention of each other.
As for my own part, I puzzled my imagination to no purpose. When I
thought of turning merchant, the smallness of our stock, and the risk
of seas, enemies, and markets, deterred me from that scheme. If I
should settle as a surgeon in my own country, I would find the business
already overstocked; or, if I pretended to set up in England, must
labour under want of friends and powerful opposition, obstacles
insurmountable by the most shining merit: neither should I succeed in
my endeavours to rise in the state, inasmuch as I could neither flatter
nor pimp for courtiers, nor prostitute my pen in defence of a wicked
and contemptible administration. Before I could form any feasible
project, I fell asleep, and my fancy was blest with the image of the
dear Narcissa, who seemed to smile upon my passion, and offer her hand
as a reward for all my toils.

Early in the morning, I went to the lodgings of my friend, whom I found
exulting over his happy invention! for I no sooner entered his
apartment, than he addressed himself to me in these words, with a smile
of self-applause: “Well, Mr. Random, a lucky thought may come into a
fool’s head sometimes. I have hit it—I’ll hold you a button my plan is
better than yours, for all your learning. But you shall have the
preference in this as in all other things; therefore proceed, and let
us know the effects of your meditation; and then I will impart my own
simple excogitations.” I told him, that not one thought had occurred to
me which deserved the least notice, and signified my impatience to be
acquainted with the fruits of his reflection. “As we have not,” said
he, “money sufficient to maintain us during a tedious expectation, it
is my opinion that a bold push must be made; and I see none so likely
to succeed as your appearing in the character of a gentleman (which is
your due), and making your addresses to some lady of fortune, who can
render you independent at once. Nay, don’t stare—I affirm that this
scheme is both prudent and honourable; for I would not have you throw
yourself away upon an old toothless wheezing dame, whose breath would
stink you into a consumption in less than three months, neither would I
advise you to assume the character of a wealthy squire, as your common
fortune-hunters do, by which means many a poor lady is cheated into
matrimony, and instead of enjoying the pomp and grandeur that was
promised, sees her dowry seized by her husband’s rapacious creditors,
and herself reduced to misery and despair. No, I know you have a soul
that disdains such imposition; and are master of qualifications, both
of mind and body, which alone entitle you to a match that will set you
above the world. I have clothes in my possession that a duke need not
be ashamed to wear. I believe they will fit you as they are, if not
there are plenty of tailors in France. Let us take a short trip to
Paris, and provide ourselves with all other necessaries, then set out
for England, where I intend to do myself the honour of attending you in
quality of a valet. This expedient will save you the expense of a
servant, shaving, and dressing; and I doubt not but, by the blessing of
God, we shall bring matters to a speedy and fortunate issue.”
Extravagant as this proposal was, I listened to it with pleasure,
because it flattered my vanity, and indulged a ridiculous hope I began
to entertain of inspiring Narcissa with a mutual flame.

After breakfast, Monsieur d’Estrapes went to pay his devoirs to the
marquis, and was so successful in his application, that I obtained a
discharge in a few days, upon which we set out for Paris. Here I had
time to reflect and congratulate myself upon this sudden transition of
fate, which to bear with moderation required some degree of philosophy
and self-denial. This truth will be more obvious, if I give a detail of
the particulars, to the quiet possession of which I was raised in an
instant, from the most abject misery and contempt. My wardrobe
consisted of five fashionable coats full mounted, two of which were
plain, one of cut velvet, one trimmed with gold, and another with
silver lace, two frocks, one of white drab, with large plate buttons,
the other of blue with gold binding; one waistcoat of gold brocade; one
of blue satin, embroidered with silver; one of green silk, trimmed with
figured broad gold lace; one of black silk, with fringes; one of white
satin, one of black cloth, and one of scarlet; six pair of cloth
breeches; one pair of crimson, and another of black velvet; twelve pair
of white silk stockings, as many of black silk, and the same number of
white cotton; one hat, laced with gold point d’Espagne, another with
silver lace scolloped, a third with gold binding, and a fourth plain;
three dozen of fine ruffled shirts, as many neckcloths; one dozen of
cambric handkerchiefs, and the like number of silk. The other
moveables, which I possessed by the generosity and friendship of Strap,
were a gold watch with a chased case, two valuable diamond rings, two
mourning swords, one with a silver handle, and a fourth cut steel
inlaid with gold, a diamond stock buckle, and a set of stone buckles
for the knees and shoes; a pair of silver-mounted pistols with rich
housings; a gold-headed cane, and a snuff-box of tortoiseshell, mounted
with gold, having the picture of a lady in the top. The gentleman left
many other things of value, which my friend had converted into cash
before I met with him; so that, over and above these particulars, our
stock in ready money amounted to something more than two hundred
pounds.

Thus equipped, I put on the gentleman of figure, and, attended by my
honest friend, who was contented with the station of my valet, visited
the Louvre, examined the gallery of Luxembourg, and appeared at
Versailles, where I had the honour of seeing his Most Christian Majesty
eat a considerable quantity of olives. During the month I spent at
Paris, I went several times to court, the Italian comedy, opera, and
playhouse, danced at a masquerade, and, in short, saw everything
remarkable in and about that capital. Then we set out for England by
the way of Flanders, passed through Brussels, Ghent, and Bruges, and
took shipping at Ostend, from whence, in fourteen hours, we arrived at
Deal, hired a postchaise, and in twelve hours more got safe to London,
having disposed of our heavy baggage in the waggon.




CHAPTER XLV


I inquire for my Uncle, and understand he is gone to sea—take Lodgings
at Charing Cross—go to the Play, where I meet with an adventure—Dine at
an ordinary—the Guests described—become acquainted with Medlar and
Doctor Wagtail


As soon as we alighted at the inn, I dispatched Strap to inquire for my
uncle at the Union Flag in Wapping; and he returned in a little time,
with an account of Mr. Bowling’s having gone to sea, mate of a merchant
ship, after a long and unsuccessful application attendance at the
Admiralty; where, it seems, the interest he depended upon was not
sufficient to reinstate him, or recover the pay that was due to him
when he quitted the Thunder.

Next day I hired very handsome lodgings not far from Charing Cross; and
in the evening dressed myself in a plain suit of the true Paris cut,
and appeared in a front box at the play, where I saw a good deal of
company, and was vain enough to believe that I was observed with an
uncommon degree of attention and applause. This silly conceit
intoxicated me so much, that I was guilty of a thousand ridiculous
coquetries; and I dare say, how favourable soever the thoughts of the
company might be at my first appearance, they were soon changed by my
absurd behaviour into pity or contempt. I rose and sat down, covered
and uncovered my head twenty times between the acts; pulled out my
watch, clapped it to my ear, wound it up, set it, gave it the hearing
again; displayed my snuff-box, affected to take snuff, that I might
have all opportunity of showing my brilliant, and wiped my nose with
perfumed handkerchief; then dangled my cane, and adjusted my
sword-knot, and acted many more fooleries of the same kind, in hopes of
obtaining the character of a pretty fellow, in the acquiring of which I
found two considerable obstructions in my disposition—namely, a natural
reserve and jealous sensibility. Fain would I have entered into
conversation with the people around me: but I was restrained by the
fear of being censured for my assurance, as well as by reflecting that
I was more entitled to a compliment of this kind from them, than they
to such condescension from a stranger like me. How often did I redden
at the frequent whispers and loud laughter of my fellow beaux, which I
imagined were excited by me; and how often did I envy the happy
indifference of those choice spirits, who behold the distress of the
scene without discovering the least symptom of approbation or concern.
My attention was engaged in spite of myself, and I could not help
weeping with the heroine of the stage, though I practised a great many
shifs to conceal this piece of unpolite weakness.

When the play was ended, I sat waiting for an opportunity of handing
some lady to her coach; but everyone was attended by such a number of
officious gallants, that for a long time I was balked in my
expectation. At length, however, I perceived a very handsome creature,
genteelly dressed, sitting by herself in a box, at some distance from
me; upon which I went up to her, and offered my service. She seemed to
be in some confusion, thanked me for my complaisance, and with a tender
look declined giving me the trouble: looking at her watch, and
testifying her surprise at the negligence of her footman whom she had
ordered to have a chair ready for her at that hour. I repeated my
entreaty with all the eloquence and compliment I was master of; and, in
the event, she was prevailed upon to accept of a proposal I made, to
send my servant for a chair or coach: accordingly, Strap was detached
for that purpose, and returned without success. By this time the
playhouse was quite empty, and we were obliged to retire. As I led her
through the passage, I observed five or six young fellows of fashion
standing in a corner, one of whom, as I thought, tipped my charmer the
wink, and when we were passed, I heard a loud laugh. This note aroused
my attention, and I was resolved to be fully satisfied of this lady’s
character, before I should have any nearer connection with her. As no
convenience appeared, I proposed to conduct her to a tavern, where we
might stay a few minutes, until my servant could fetch a coach from the
Strand. She seemed particularly shy of trusting herself in a tavern
with a stranger, but at last yielded to my pathetic remonstrances,
rather than endanger her health by remaining in a cold, damp
thoroughfare. Having thus far succeeded, I begged to know what wine she
would be pleased to drink a glass of; but she professed the greatest
aversion to all sorts of strong liquors, and it was with much
difficulty that I could persuade her to eat a jelly.

In the meantime, I endeavoured to alleviate the uneasiness she
discovered, by saying all the agreeable things I could think of; at
which she would often sigh, and regard me with a languishing look, that
seemed, however, too near akin to the lewd leer of a courtesan. This
discovery added to my former suspicion, while it put me upon my guard
against her arts, divested me of reserve, and enabled me to entertain
her with gaiety and freedom. In the course of our conversation, I
pressed her to allow me the honour of waiting upon her next day at her
lodgings, a request which she, with many apologues, refused, lest it
should give umbrage to Sir John, who was of a disposition apt to be
fretted with trifles. This information, by which I was to understand
that her husband was a knight, did not check my addresses, which became
more and more importunate, and I was even hardy enough to ravish a
kiss. But, O heavens! instead of banqueting on the ambrosial flavour,
that her delicacy of complexion promised, I was almost suffocated with
the steams of Geneva! An exhalation of this kind, from a mouth which
had just before declared an utter abhorrence of all spirituous liquors,
not only changed my doubts into certainty, but my raptures into
loathing; and it would have been impossible for me to have preserved
common complaisance five minutes longer, when my servant returned with
a coach. I took the advantage of this occasion, and presented my hand
to the lady, who put in practice against me the whole artillery of her
charms, ogling, languishing, sighing, and squeezing, with so little
reserve that Strap perceived her tenderness, and rubbed his hands with
joy as he followed us to the door; but I was proof against all her
endearments, and handed her into the coach with an intention to take my
leave immediately. She guessed my design, and invited me to her house,
whispering, that now Sir John was gone to bed, she could have the
pleasure of my conversation for half-an-hour without interruption. I
told her there was no mortification I would not undergo, rather than
endanger the repose of her ladyship; and, bidding the coachman drive
on, wished her a good night. She lost all temper at my indifference,
and, stopping the coach, at the distance of about twenty yards from me,
popped out her head, and howled with the lungs of a fishwoman, “D—n
you, you dog, won’t you pay the coach-hire?” As I made no answer, she
held forth against me with an eloquence peculiar to herself; calling me
pitifull fellow, scoundrel, and a hundred such appellations; concluding
with an oath, that, for all my appearance, she believed I had got no
money in my pocket.

Having thus vented her indignation, she ordered her coachman to
proceed, and I returned to the tavern, where I bespoke something for
supper, very well pleased at the issue of this adventure. I dispensed
with the attendance of the waiter at table, on pretence that my own
servant was present, and, when we were alone, said to Strap, “Well,
Monsieur d’Estrapes, what d’ye think of this lady?” My friend, who had
not opened his mouth since her departure, could make no other reply
than the monosyllable “Think!” which he pronounced with a note of fear
and astonishment. Surprised at this emphasis, I surveyed my valet, and,
perceiving a wildness in his looks, asked if he had seen his
grandfather’s ghost? “Ghost!” said he, “I am sure I have seen a devil
incarnate! Who would have thought that so much devilish malice and
Billingsgate could lurk under so much sweetness of countenance and
modesty of behaviour? Ah! God help us! Fronti nulla fides—nimium ne
crede colori—but we ought to down on our knees, and bless God for
delivering us from the jaws of that painted sepulchre!” I was pretty
much of Strap’s opinion, and, though I did not believe myself in any
danger from the allurements of that sisterhood, I determined to act
with great circumspection for the future, and shun all commerce of that
kind, as equally prejudicial to my purse and constitution.

My next care was to introduce myself into a set of good acquaintance:
for which purpose I frequented a certain coffee-house, noted for the
resort of good company, English as well as foreigners, where my
appearance procured all the civilities and advances I could desire. As
there was an ordinary in the same house, I went upstairs to dinner with
the other guests, and found myself at a table with thirteen people, the
greatest part of whom were better dressed than myself. The
conversation, which was mostly carried on in French, turned chiefly on
politics; and I soon found the whole company were in the French
interest, myself excepted, and a testy old gentleman, who contradicted
everything that was advanced in favour of his Most Christian Majesty,
with a surliness truly English. But this trusty patriot, who had never
been out of his own country, and drew all his maxims and notions from
prejudice and hearsay, was very unequal to his antagonists, who were
superior to him in learning and experience, and often took the liberty
of travellers in asserting things which were not strictly true, because
they thought themselves in no danger of being detected by him. The
claim of the Queen Of Spain to the Austrian dominions in Italy was
fully explained and vindicated, by a person who sat opposite to me,
and, by the solemnity of his manner and the richness of his apparel,
seemed to be a foreign ambassador. This dissertation produced another
on the Pragmatic Sanction, handled with great warmth by a young
gentleman at my right hand, dressed in a green frock, trimmed with
gold, who justified the French king for his breach of that contract;
and affirmed that he could not have observed it without injuring his
own glory. Although I was not at all convinced by this gentleman’s
arguments, I could not help admiring his vivacity which, I imagined,
must be the effect of his illustrious birth and noble education, and
accordingly rated him, in my conjecture, as a young prince on his
travels. The discourse was afterwards shifted by an old gentleman, of a
very martial appearance, to the last campaign, when the battle of
Dettingen was fought over again, with so many circumstances to the
honour of the French and disadvantages if the Allies, that I began to
entertain some doubts of my having been there in person, and took the
liberty to mention some objections to what he advanced. This freedom
introduced a dispute, which lasted a good while, to the mortification
of all present; and was at last referred to the determination of a
grave person, whom they styled Doctor, and who, under a show of great
moderation, decided it against me, with so little regard to truth, that
I taxed him with partiality in pretty severe terms, to the no small
entertainment of the true English politician, who rejoiced at my
defence of a cause he had so often espoused without success.

My opponent, pleased with the victory he had gained, affected a great
deal of candour, and told me, he should not have been so positive, if
he had not been at great pains to inform himself of each particular.
“Indeed,” said he, “I am convinced that the previous steps considered,
things could not happen otherwise; for we generals who have seen
service, though we may not be on the spot ourselves, know by the least
sketch of the disposition what must be the event.” He then censured,
with great freedom, every circumstance of the conduct of those who
commanded the Allies; from thence made a transition to the ministry,
which he honoured with many invectives for employing people who had
neither experience nor capacity, to the prejudice of old officers, who
had been distinguished for both; dropped many hints of his own
importance, and concluded with observing, that the French and Spaniards
knew better how to value generals of merit; the good effects of which
are seen in the conquests they gain, and the discipline of their
troops, which are at the same time better clothed and paid than any
soldiers in the universe. These remarks furnished the green knight with
an opportunity of launching out in the praise of the French government
in general, civil as well as military; on which occasion he made many
odious comparisons to the disadvantage of the English. Everybody,
almost, assented to the observations he made, and the doctor gave his
sanction, by saying, the people of France were undoubtedly the happiest
subjects in the world. I was so much astonished and confounded at their
infatuation and effrontery, that I had not power to utter one word in
opposition to their assertions; but my morose associate could not put
up with the indignity that was offered to Old England, and therefore
with a satirical grin addressed himself to the general in these words:
“Sir, sir, I have often heard it said, She’s a villainous bird that
befouls her own nest. As for what those people who are foreigners say,
I don’t mind it; they know no better; but you who were bred and born,
and have got your bread, under the English government, should have more
regard to gratitude, as well as truth in censuring your native country.
If the ministry have thought fit to lay you aside, I suppose they have
their own reasons for so doing; and you ought to remember, that you
still live on the bounty of this nation. As for these gentlemen
(meaning the prince and ambassador), who make so free with our
constitution, laws, and genius of our people, I think they might show a
little more respect for their benefactors, who, I must own, are to
blame in harbouring and protecting, and encouraging such ungrateful
vagrants as they are.” At these words, the chevalier in green started
up in a great passion, and laying his hand on the hilt of his hanger,
exclaimed, “Ah! foutre!” The Englishman on the other hand, grasping his
cane cried, “Don’t foutre me, sirrah, or by G—d I’ll knock you down.”
The company interposed, the Frenchman sat down again, and his
antagonist proceeded—“Lookey, Monsieur, you know very well that had you
dared to speak so freely of the administration of your own country in
Paris as you have done of ours in London, you would have been sent to
the Bastille without ceremony, where you might have rotted in a
dungeon, and never seen the light of the sun again. Now, sir, take my
word for it, although our constitution screens us from such oppression,
we want not laws to chastise the authors of seditious discourse, and if
I hear another syllable out of your mouth in contempt or prejudice of
this kingdom, I will give you a convincing proof of what I advance, and
have you laid by the heels for your presumption.” This declaration had
an effect on the company as sudden as surprising. The young prince
became as supple as a spaniel, the ambassador trembled, the general sat
silent and abashed, and the doctor, who it seems, had felt the rod of
power, grew pale as death, and assured us all, that he had no intention
to affront any person or people. “Your principles, doctor,” resumed the
old gentleman, “are no secret—I have nothing to say upon that head; but
am very much surprised, that a man who despises us so much, should
notwithstanding live among us, when he has no visible motive for so
doing. Why don’t you take up your habitation in your beloved France,
where you may rail at England without censure?” To this remonstrance
the doctor thought proper to make no reply, and an unsocial silence
ensued; which I perceiving, took notice, that it was pity such idle
disputes, maintained very often through whim or diversion, should
create any misunderstanding among gentlemen of good sense, and proposed
to drink down all animosity in another bottle.

This motion was applauded by the whole company. The wine was brought,
and the English champion, declaring he had no spleen against any man
for differing in opinion from him, any more than for difference of
complexion, drank to the good health of all present; the compliment was
returned, and the conversation once more became unreserved though more
general than before. Among other topics, the subject of war was
introduced, on which the general declaimed with great eloquence,
recounting many of his own exploits by way of illustration. In the
course of his harangue he happened to mention the word epaulement, upon
which the testy gentleman asked the meaning, of that term. “I’ll tell
you what an epaulement is,” replied he, “I never saw an epaulement but
once, and that was at the siege of Namur. In a council of war, Monsieur
Cohorn, the famous engineer, affirmed that the place could not be
taken.” “Yes,” said the Prince of Vandemont, “it may be taken by an
epaulement.” “This was immediately put into execution, and in
twenty-four hours Mareschal Boufflers was fain to capitulate.” Here he
made a full stop, and the old gentleman repeated the question, “But
pray what is an epaulement?” To this interrogation the officer made no
immediate reply, but rang the bell, and called for the bill, which
being brought, he threw down his proportion of the reckoning, and,
telling the company he would show them an epaulement when his majesty
should think fit to entrust him with the command of our army abroad,
strutted away with great dignity. I could not imagine why he was so shy
of explaining one of the most simple terms of fortification, which I
forthwith described as a side-work composed of earth, gabions, or
fascines; but I was very much surprised when I afterwards understood
that his reserve proceeded from his ignorance.

Having paid our bill, we adjourned to the coffee-room, where my
fellow-labourer insisted on treating me with a dish, giving me to
understand, at the same time, that I had acquired his good opinion,
both with respect to my principles and understanding. I thanked him for
his compliment, and, professing myself an utter stranger in this part
of the world, begged he would have the goodness to inform me of the
quality and characters of the people who dined above. This request was
a real favour to one of his disposition, which was no less
communicative than curious; he therefore complied with great
satisfaction, and told me, to my extreme astonishment, that the
supposed young prince was a dancer at one of the theatres, and the
ambassador no other than a fiddler belonging to the opera. “The
doctor,” said he “is a Roman Catholic priest, who sometimes appears in
the character of an officer, and assumes the name of captain; but more
generally takes the garb, title, and behaviour of a physician, in which
capacity he wheedles himself into the confidence of weak-minded people,
and by arguments no less specious than false, converts them from their
religion and allegiance. He has been in the hands of justice more than
once for such practices, but he is a sly dog, and manages matters with
so much craft, that hitherto he has escaped for a short imprisonment.
As for the general, you may see he has owed his promotion more to his
interest than his capacity; and, now that the eyes of the ministry are
opened, his friends dead or become inconsiderable, he is struck off the
list, and obliged to put up with a yearly pension. In consequence of
this reduction, he is become malcontent, and inveighs against the
government in all companies, with so little discretion, that I am
surprised at the lenity of the administration, in overlooking his
insolence, but the truth of the matter is, he owes his safety to his
weakness and want of importance. He has seen a little, and but a
little, service, and yet, if you will take his word to it, there has
not been a great action performed in the field since the Revolution, in
which he was not principally concerned. When a story is told of any
great general, he immediately matches it with one of himself, though he
is often unhappy in his invention, and commits such gross blunders in
the detail, that everybody is in pain for him. Caesar, Pompey, and
Alexander the Great, are continually in his mouth; and, as he reads a
good deal without any judgment to digest it, his ideas are confused,
and his harangues as unintelligible as infinite; for, if once he begin,
there is no chance of his leaving off speaking while one person remains
to yield attention; therefore the only expedient I know, for putting a
stop to his loquacity, is to lay hold of some incongruity he has
uttered, and demand an explanation; or ask the meaning of some
difficult term that he knows by name; this method will effectually put
him to silence, if not to flight, as it happened when I inquired about
an epaulement. Had he been acquainted with the signification of that
word, his triumph would have been intolerable, and we must have quitted
the field first, or been worried with impertinence.”

Having thus gratified my curiosity, the old gentleman began to discover
his own, in questions relating to myself, to which I thought proper to
return ambiguous answers. “I presume, Sir,” said he, “you have
travelled.” I answered, “Yes.” “I dare say you have found it very
expensive,” said he. I replied, “To be sure, one cannot travel without
money.” “That I know by experience,” said he, “for I myself take a trip
to Bath or Tunbridge every season; and one must pay sauce for what he
has on the road, as well in other countries as in this. That’s a pretty
stone in your ring—give me leave, sir—the French have attained to a
wonderful skill in making compositions of this kind. Why, now, this
looks almost as well as a diamond.” “Almost as well, Sir!” said I, “Why
not altogether? I am sure if you understand anything of jewels, you
must perceive, at first sight, that this stone is a real diamond, and
that of a very fine water. Take it in your hand and examine it.” He did
so with some confusion, and returned it, saying, “I ask your pardon; I
see it is a true brilliant of immense value.” I imagined his respect to
me increased after this inquiry; therefore to captivate his esteem the
more, I told him, I would show him a seal of composition, engraved
after a very valuable antique; upon which I pulled out my watch with a
rich gold chain, adorned with three seals set in gold, and an opal
ring. He viewed each of them with great eagerness, handled the chain,
admired the chased case, and observed that the whole must have cost me
a vast sum of money. I affected indifference, and replied in a careless
manner, “Some trifle of sixty or seventy guineas.” He stared in my face
for some time, and then asked if I was an Englishman? I answered in the
negative. “You are from Ireland then, Sir, I presume,” said he. I made
the same reply. “Oh! perhaps,” said he “you were born in one of our
settlements abroad.” I still answered No. He seemed very much
surprised, and said, he was sure I was not a foreigner. I made no
reply, but left him upon the tenter-hooks of impatient uncertainty. He
could not contain his anxiety, but asked pardon for the liberties he
had taken and, to encourage me the more to disclose my situation,
displayed his own without reserve. “I am,” said he, “a single man, have
a considerable annuity, on which I live according to my inclination,
and make the ends of the year meet very comfortably. As I have no
estate to leave behind, I am not troubled with the importunate
officiousness of relations or legacy hunters, and I consider the world
as made for me, not me for the world. It is my maxim, therefore, to
enjoy it while I can, and let futurity shift for itself.”

While he thus indulged his own talkative vein, and at the same time, no
doubt, expected retaliation from me, a young man entered, dressed in
black velvet and an enormous tie-wig, with an air in which natural
levity and affected solemnity were so jumbled together, that on the
whole he appeared a burlesque on all decorum. This ridiculous oddity
danced up to the table at which we sat, and, after a thousand grimaces,
asked my friend by the name of Mr. Medlar, if we were not engaged upon
business. My companion put on a surly countenance, and replied “No
great business, doctor—but however—” “Oh! then,” cried the physician;
“I must beg your indulgence a little; pray pardon me, gentlemen.”
“Sir,” said he, addressing himself to me, “your most humble servant. I
hope you will forgive me, sir—I must beg the favour to sit—sir—sir—I
have something of consequence to impart to my friend Mr. Medlar—sir, I
hope you will excuse my freedom in whispering, sir,” Before I had time
to give this complaisant person my permission, Mr. Medlar cried, “I’ll
have no whispering—if you have anything to say to me, speak with an
audible voice.” The doctor seemed a little disconcerted at this
exclamation, and, turning again to me, made a thousand apologies for
pretending to make a mystery of anything, a piece of caution which he
said was owing to his ignorance of my connection with Mr. Medlar; but
now he understood I was a friend, and would communicate what he had to
say in my hearing. He then began, after two or three hems, in this
manner: “You must know, sir, I am just come from dinner at my Lady
Flareit’s (then addressing himself to me), a lady of quality, sir, at
whose table I have the honour of dining sometimes. There was Lady
Stately and my Lady Larum, and Mrs. Dainty, and Miss Biddy Giggler,
upon my word, a very good-natured young lady, with a very pretty
fortune sir. There was also my Lord Straddle. Sir John Shrug, and
Master Billy Chatter, who is actually a very facetious young gentleman.
So, sir, her ladyship seeing me excessively fatigued, for she was the
last of fifteen patients (people of distinction, sir) whom I had
visited this forenoon, insisted upon my staying dinner, though upon my
word I protest I had no appetite; however, in compliance with her
ladyship’s request, sir, I sat down, and the conversation turning on
different subjects, among other things, Mr Chatter asked very earnestly
when I saw Mr. Medlar. I told him I had not had the pleasure of seeing
you these nineteen hours and a half; for you may remember, sir, it was
nearly about that time; I won’t be positive as to a minute.” “No,” says
he, “then I desire you will go to his lodgings immediately after
dinner, and see what’s the matter with him, for he must certainly be
very bad from having eaten last night such a vast quantity of raw
oysters.” The crusty gentleman, who, from the solemnity of his
delivery, expected something extraordinary, no sooner heard his
conclusion, than he started up in a testy humour, crying, “Pshaw,
pshaw! D—n your oysters!” and walked away, after a short compliment of,
“Your servant sir,” to me. The doctor got up also, saying, “I vow and
protest, upon my word, I am actually amazed;” and followed Mr. Medlar
to the bar, which was hard by, where he was paying for his coffee:
there he whispered so loud that I could overhear, “Pray who is this
gentleman?” His friend replied hastily, “I might have known that before
now, if it had not been for your impertinent intrusion,”—and walked off
very much disappointed. The ceremonious physician returned immediately
and sat down by me, asking a thousand pardons for leaving me alone: and
giving me to understand that what he had communicated to Mr. Medlar at
the bar, was an affair of the last importance, that would admit of no
delay. He then called for some coffee, and launched out into the
virtues of that berry, which, he said, in cold phlegmatic
constitutions, like his, dried up the superfluous moisture, and braced
the relaxed nerves. He told me it was utterly unknown to the ancients;
and derived its name from an Arabian word, which I might easily
perceive by the sound and termination. From this topic he transferred
his disquisitions to the verb drink, which he affirmed was improperly
applied to the taking of coffee, inasmuch as people did not drink, but
sip or sipple that liquor; that the genuine meaning of drinking is to
quench one’s thirst, or commit a debauch by swallowing wine; that the
Latin word, which conveyed the same idea, was bibere or potare, and
that of the Greeks pinein or poteein, though he was apt to believe they
were differently used on different occasions: for example—to drink a
vast quantity, or, as the vulgar express it, to drink an ocean of
liquor, was in Latin potare, and in Greek poteein; and, on the other
hand, to use it moderately, was bibere and pinein;—that this was only a
conjecture of his, which, however, seemed to be supported by the word
bibulous, which is particularly applied to the pores of the skin, and
can only drink a very small quantity of the circumambient moisture, by
reason of the smallness of their diameters;—whereas, from the verb
poteein is derived the substantive potamos, which signifies a river, or
vast quantity of liquor. I could not help smiling at this learned and
important investigation; and, to recommend myself the more to my new
acquaintance, whose disposition I was by this time well informed of, I
observed that, what he alleged, did not, to the best of my remembrance,
appear in the writings of the ancients; for Horace uses the words poto
and bibo indifferently for the same purpose, as in the twentieth Ode of
his first Book.

“Vile potabis modicis sabinum cantharis—
—Et prœlo domitam caleno tu bibes uvam.”


That I had never heard of the verb _poteein_, but that _potamos,
potema_, and _potos_, were derived from _pino, poso, pepoka_, in
consequence of which, the Greek poets never use any other word for
festal drinking. Homer describes Nestor at his cups in these words,

“Nestora d’ouk elathen iache _pinonta_ perempes.”


And Anacreon mentions it on the same occasion always in every page.

“_Pinonti_ de oinon hedun.
Otan _pino_ ton oinon.
Opliz’ ego de _pino_.”


And in a thousand other places. The doctor who doubtless intended by
his criticism to give me a high idea of his erudition, was infinitely
surprised to find himself schooled by one of my appearance; and after a
considerable pause cried, “Upon my word, you are in the right, sir—I
find I have not considered this affair with my usual accuracy.” Then,
accosting me in Latin, which he spoke very well, the conversation was
maintained full two hours, on a variety of subjects, in that language;
and indeed he spoke so judiciously, that I was convinced,
notwithstanding his whimsical appearance and attention to trifles, that
he was a man of extensive knowledge, especially in books; he looked
upon me, as I afterwards understood from Mr. Medlar, as a prodigy in
learning, and proposed that very night, if I were not engaged, to
introduce me to several young gentlemen of fortune and fashion, with
whom I had an appointment at the Bedford coffee house.




CHAPTER XLVI


Wagtail introduces me to a set of fine Gentlemen with whom I spend the
Evening at a Tavern—our Conversation—the Characters of my new
Companions—the Doctor is roasted—our Issue of our Debauch


I accepted his offer with pleasure, and we went thither in a hackney
coach where I saw a great number of gay figures fluttering about, most
of whom spoke to the doctor with great familiarity. Among the rest
stood a group of them round the fire whom I immediately knew to be the
very persons who had the night before, by their laughing, alarmed my
suspicion of the lady who had put herself under my protection. They no
sooner perceived me enter with Dr. Wagtail (for that was my companion’s
name) than they tittered and whispered one to another, and I was not a
little surprised to find that they were the gentlemen to whose
acquaintance he designed to recommend me; for, when he observed them
together, he told me who they were, and desired to know by what name he
should introduce me. I satisfied him in that particular, and he
advanced with great gravity, saying, “Gentlemen, your most obedient
servant:—give me leave to introduce my friend Mr. Random to your
society.” Then, turning to me, “Mr. Random, this is Mr. Bragwell—Mr.
Banter, sir—Mr. Chatter—my friend Mr. Slyboot, and Mr. Ranter sir.” I
saluted each of then in order, and when I came to take Mr. Slyboot by
the hand, I perceived him thrust his tongue in his cheek, to the no
small entertainment of the company; but I did not think proper to take
any notice of it on this occasion. Mr. Ranter too (who I afterwards
learned was a player) displayed his talents, by mimicking my air,
features, and voice, while he returned my compliment: this feat I
should not have been so sensible of, had I not seen him behave in the
same manner to my friend Wagtail, when he made up to them at first. But
for once I let him enjoy the fruits of his dexterity without question
or control, resolved however to chastise his insolence at a more
convenient opportunity. Mr. Slyboot, guessing I was a stranger, asked
if I had been lately in France? and when I answered in the affirmative,
inquired if I had seen the Luxembourg Gallery? I told him I had
considered it more than once with great attention: upon this a
conversion ensued, in which I discovered him to be a painter.

While we were discoursing upon the particulars of this famous
performance, I overheard Banter ask Dr. Wagtail, where he had picked up
this Mr. Random. To which question the physician answered, “Upon my
word, a mighty pretty sort of a gentleman—a man of fortune, sir—he has
made the grand tour, and seen the best company in Europe, air.” “What,
he told you so, I suppose?” said the other: “I take him to be neither
more nor less than a French valet-de-chambre.” “O barbarous,
barbarous!” cried the doctor; “this is actually, upon my word,
altogether unaccountable. I know all his family perfectly well, sir; he
is of the Randoms of the north—a very ancient house sir, and a distant
relation of mine.” I was extremely nettled at the conjecture of Mr.
Banter, and began to entertain a very indifferent opinion of my company
in general; but, as I might possibly by their means acquire a more
extensive and agreeable acquaintance, I determined to bear these little
mortifications as long as I could without injuring the dignity of my
character. After having talked for some time on the weather, plays,
politics, and other coffee-house subjects, it was proposed that we
should spend the evening at a noted tavern in the neighbourhood,
whither we repaired in a body.

Having taken possession of a room, called for French wine, and bespoke
supper, the glass went about pretty freely, and the characters of my
associates opened upon me more and more. It soon appeared that the
doctor was entertained as butt for the painter and player to exercise
their wit upon, for the diversion of the company. Mr. Ranter began the
game by asking him what was good for a hoarseness, lowness of spirits,
and in digestion, for he was troubled with all these complaints to a
very great degree. Wagtail immediately undertook to explain the nature
of his case, and in a very prolix manner harangued upon prognostics,
diagnostics, symptomatics, therapeutics, inanition, and repletion; then
calculated the force of the stomach and lungs in their respective
operations; ascribed the player’s malady to a disorder in these organs,
proceeding from hard drinkings and vociferations, and prescribed a
course of stomachics, with abstinence from venery, wine, loud speaking,
laughing, singing, coughing, sneezing, or hallooing. “Pah, pah!” cried
Ranter, interrupting him, “the remedy is worse than the disease—I wish
I knew where to find some tinder water.” “Tinder water!” said the
doctor; “Upon my word, I don’t apprehend you, Mr. Ranter.” “Water
extracted from tinder,” replied the other, “a universal specific for
all distempers incident to man. It was invented by a learned German
monk, who, for a valuable consideration, imparted the secret to
Paracelsus.” “Pardon me,” cried the painter, “it was first used by
Solomon, as appears by a Greek manuscript in his civil handwriting,
lately found at the foot of Mount Lebanon, by a peasant who was digging
for potatoes—” “Well,” said Wagtail, “in all my vast reading, I never
met with such a preparation! neither did I know till this minute, that
Solomon understood Greek, or that potatoes grew in Palestine.”

Here Banter interposed, saying, he was surprised that Dr. Wagtail
should make the least doubt of Solomon’s understanding Greek, when he
is represented to us as the wisest and best-educated prince in the
world; and as for potatoes, they were transplanted thither from
Ireland, in the time of the Crusade, by some knights of that country.
“I profess,” said the doctor, “there is nothing more likely. I would
actually give a vast sum for a sight of that manuscript, which must be
inestimable; and, if I understood the process, would set about it
immediately.” The player assured him the process was very simple—that
he must cram a hundred-weight of dry tinder into a glass retort, and,
distilling it by the force of animal heat, it would yield half a
scruple of insipid water, one drop of which is a full dose. “Upon my
integrity!” exclaimed the incredulous doctor, “this is very amazing and
extraordinary! that a caput mortuum should yield any water at all. I
must own I have always been an enemy to specifics which I thought
inconsistent with the nature of the animal economy; but certainly the
authority of Solomon is not to be questioned. I wonder where I shall
find a glass retort large enough to contain such a vast quantity of
tinder, the consumption of which must, undoubtedly, raise the price of
paper, or where shall I find animal heat sufficient even to warm such a
mass?” Slyboot informed him, that he might have a retort blown for him
as big as a church: and, that the easiest method of raising the vapour
by animal heat, would be to place it in the middle of an infirmary for
feverish patients, who might be upon mattresses around and in contact
with it. He had he sooner pronounced these words, than Wagtail
exclaimed in a rapture, “An admirable expedient, as I hope to be saved!
I will positively put it in practice.”

This simplicity of the physician furnished excellent diversion for the
company, who, in their turns, sneered at him in ironical compliments,
which his vanity swallowed as the genuine sentiments of their hearts.
Mr. Chatter, impatient of so long a silence, now broke out and
entertained us with a catalogue of all the people who danced at the
last Hampstead assembly, with a most circumstantial account of the
dress and ornaments of each, from the lappets of the ladies to the
shoe-buckles of the men; concluding with telling Bragwell, that his
mistress Melinda was there, and seemed to miss him: and soliciting his
company at the next occasion of that kind.

“No, d—mm,” said Bragwell, “I have something else to mind than dangling
after a parcel of giddy-headed girls; besides, you know my temper is so
unruly, that I am apt to involve myself in scrapes when a woman is
concerned. The last time I was there, I had an affair with Tom
Trippit.” “Oh! I remember that!” cried Banter; “You lugged out before
the ladies; and I commend you for so doing, because you had an
opportunity of showing your manhood without running any risk.” “Risk!”
said the other with a fierce countenance, “d—n my blood! I fear no
risks. I an’t afraid of lugging out against any man that wears a head,
d—me! ’Tis well known that I have drawn blood more than once, and lost
some too; but what does that signify?” The player begged this champion
to employ him as his second the next time he intended to kill, for he
wanted to see a man die of a stab, that he might know how to act such
an art the more naturally on the stage. “Die!” replied the hero: “No,
by G—! I know better things than to incur the verdict of a Middlesex
jury—I should look upon my fencing-master to be an ignorant son of a
b—h, if he had not taught me to prick any of my antagonist’s body that
I please to disable.” “Oho!” cried Slyboot, “if that be the case, I
have a favour to ask. You must know I am employed to paint a Jesus on
the cross; and my purpose is to represent him at that point of time
when the spear is thrust into his side. Now I should be glad if you
would, in my presence, pink some impertinent fellow into convulsions,
without endangering his life, that I may have an opportunity of taking
a good clever agony from nature: the doctor will direct you where to
enter and how far to go, but pray let it be as near the left side as
possible.” Wagtail, who took this proposal seriously, observed, that it
would be a very difficult matter to penetrate into the left side of the
thorax without hurting the heart, and in consequence killing the
patient; but he believed it was possible for a man of a very nice hand
and exact knowledge of anatomy, to wound the diaphragma somewhere about
the skirts, which might induce a singultus, without being attended with
death: that he was ready to demonstrate the insertion of that muscle to
Mr. Bragwell; but desired to have no concern with the experiment, which
might essentially prejudice his reputation, in case of a miscarriage.
Bragwell was as much imposed upon by the painter’s waggery as the
doctor, and declined engaging in the affair, saying he held a very
great regard for Mr. Slyboot, but had laid it down as a maxim, never to
fight except when his honour was engaged. A thousand jokes of this kind
were uttered; the wine circulated, supper was served in, we ate
heartily, returned to the bottle, Bragwell became noisy and
troublesome, Banter grew more and more severe, Ranter rehearsed,
Slyboot made faces at the whole company, I sang French catches, and
Chatter kissed me with great affection; while the doctor, with a wofull
countenance, sat silent like a disciple of Pythagoras. At length, it
was proposed by Bragwell, that we should scour the hundreds, sweat the
constable, maul the watch, and then reel soberly to bed.

While we deliberated upon this expedition, the waiter came into the
room, and asked for Doctor Wagtail: when he understood he was present,
he told him there was a lady below to inquire for him, at which message
the physician started from his melancholy contemplation, and, with a
look of extreme confusion, assured the company he could not possibly be
the person wanted, for he had no connection with any lady whatever, and
bade the drawer tell her so. “For shame!” cried Banter; “would you be
so impolite as to refuse a lady a hearing? perhaps she comes for a
consultation. It must be some extraordinary affair that brings a lady
to a tavern at this time of night. Mr. Ranter, pray do the doctor’s
base-mains to the lady, and squire her hither.” The player immediately
staggered out, and returned, leading in with much ceremony, a tall
strapping wench, whose appearance proclaimed her occupation. We
received her with the utmost solemnity, and with a good deal of
entreaty she was persuaded to sit, when a profound silence ensued,
during which she fixed her eyes, with a disconsolate look, upon the
doctor, who was utterly confounded at her behaviour, and returned her
melancholy fourfold; at length, after a good many piteous sighs, she
wiped her eyes, and accosted him thus: “What! not one word of comfort?
Will nothing soften that stony heart of thine? Not all my tears! not
all my affliction! not the inevitable ruin thou hast brought upon me!
Where are thy vows, thou faithless, perjured man? Hast thou no
honour—no conscience—no remorse for thy perfidious conduct towards me?
Answer me, wilt thou at last do me justice, or must I have recourse to
heaven or hell for my revenge?” If poor Wagtail was amazed before she
spoke, what must his confusion be on hearing this address! His natural
paleness changed into a ghastly clay colour, his eyes rolled, his lip
trembled, and he answered in an accent not to be described, “Upon my
word, honour, and salvation, madam, you are actually mistaken in my
person. I have a most particular veneration for your sex, and, am
actually incapable of injuring any lady in the smallest degree, madam;
besides, madam, to the best of my recollection, I never had the honour
of seeing you before, as I hope to be saved, madam!” “How, traitor!”
cried she, “dost thou disown me then? Mistaken! no, too well I know
that fair bewitching face! too well I know that false enchanting
tongue! Alas! gentlemen, since the villain compels me by his
unkindness, to expose myself and him, know that this betrayer, under
the specious pretence of honourable addresses, won my heart, and taking
advantage of his conquest, robbed me of my virgin treasure, and
afterwards abandoned me to my fate! I am now four months gone with
child by him, turned out of doors by my relations, and left a prey to
misery and want! Yes, thou barbarian,” said she, turning to Wagtail,
“thou tiger, thou succubus! too well thou knowest my situation. But I
will tear out thy faithless heart, and deliver the world from such a
monster.” So saying, she sprang forward at the doctor, who with
incredible agility, jumped over the table, and ran behind Bragwell,
while the rest of us endeavoured to appease the furious heroine.
Although everybody in the company affected the utmost surprise, I could
easily perceive it was a scheme concerted among them to produce
diversion at the doctor’s expense, and being under no concern about the
consequence, I entered into the confederacy, and enjoyed the distress
of Wagtail, who with tears in his eyes begged the protection of the
company, declaring himself as innocent of the crime laid to his charge
as the foetus in utero; and hinting at the same time, that nature had
not put it in his power to be guilty of such a trespass. “Nature!”
cried the lady, “there was no nature in the case; he abused me by the
help of charms and spells; else how is it possible that any woman could
have listened to the addresses of such a scarecrow? Were these owlish
eyes made for ogling; that carrion complexion to be admired; or that
mouth, like a horse-shoe, to be kissed? No, no, you owe your success to
your philtres, to your drugs and incantations; and not to your natural
talents, which are, in every respect, mean and contemptible.”

The doctor thought he had got an opportunity of vindicating himself
effectually; and desired the complainant to compose herself but for
half-an-hour, in which he undertook to prove the absurdity of believing
in the power of incantations, which were only idle dreams of ignorance
and superstition. He accordingly pronounced a very learned discourse
upon the nature of ideas, the power and independence of the mind, the
properties of stimulating medicines, the difference between a proneness
to venery, which many simples would create, and a passion limited to
one object, which can only be the result of sense and reflection; and
concluded with a pathetic remonstrance, setting forth his unhappiness
in being persecuted with the resentment of a lady whom he had never
injured, nor even seen before that occasion, and whose faculties were,
in all likelihood, so much impaired by her misfortunes that an innocent
person was in danger of being ruined by her disorder. He had no sooner
finished his harangue, than the forlorn princess renewed her
lamentations, and cautioned the company against his eloquence, which,
she said, was able to bias the most impartial bench in Christendom.
Ranter advised him to espouse her immediately, as the only means to
save his reputation, and offered to accompany him to the Fleet for that
purpose; but Slyboot proposed that a father should be purchased for the
child, and a comfortable alimony settled on the mother. Ranter promised
to adopt the infant gratis. Wagtail was ready to worship him for his
generosity, and, though he persisted in protesting his innocence,
condescended to everything rather than his unblemished character should
be called into question. The lady rejected the proposal, and insisted
on matrimony. Bragwell took up the cudgels for the doctor, and
undertook to rid him of her importunity for half-a-guinea; upon which
Wagtail, with great eagerness, pulled out his purse, and put it into
the hand of his friend, who, taking half a piece out of it, gave it to
the plaintiff, and bade her thank God for her good fortune. When she
had received this bounty, she affected to weep, and begged, since the
physician had renounced her, he would at least vouchsafe her a parting
kiss; this he was prevailed upon to grant with great reluctance, and
went up with his usual solemnity to salute her, when she laid hold of
his cheek with her teeth, and held fast, while he roared with anguish,
to the unspeakable diversion of all present. When she thought proper to
release him, she dropped a low courtesy to the company, and quitted the
room, leaving the doctor in the utmost horror, not so much on account
of the pain, as the apprehension of the consequence of the bite; for,
by this time, he was convinced of her being mad. Banter prescribed the
actual cautery, and put the poker in the fire to be heated, in order to
sear the place. The player was of opinion that Bragwell should scoop
out the part affected with the point of his sword; but the painter
prevented both these dreadful operations by recommending a balsam he
had in his pocket, which never failed to cure the bite of a mad dog; so
saying, he pulled out a small bladder of black paint, with which he
instantly anointed not only the sore, but the greatest part of the
patient’s face, and left it in a frightful condition. In short, the
poor creature was so harassed with fear and vexation, that I pitied him
extremely, and sent him home in a chair, contrary to the inclination of
everybody present.

This freedom of mine gave umbrage to Bragwell, who testified his
displeasure by swearing a few threats, without making any application;
which, being perceived by Slyboot, who sat by me, he, with a view of
promoting a quarrel, whispered to me, that he thought Bragwell used me
very ill, but every man was the best judge of his own affairs. I
answered aloud, that I would neither suffer Mr. Bragwell nor him to use
me ill with impunity; and that I stood in no need of his counsel in
regard to the regulation of my conduct. He thought proper to ask a
thousand pardons, and assure me he meant no offence; while Bragwell
feigned himself asleep, that he might not be obliged to take notice of
what passed. But the player, who had more animal spirits and less
discretion than Slyboot, unwilling to let the affair rest where he had
dropped it, jogged Mr. Bragwell and told him softly that I had called
him names, and threatened to cudgel him. This particular I understood
by his starting, up and crying, “Blood and wounds, you lie! No man
durst treat me so ignominiously. Mr. Random, did you call me names, and
threaten to drub me?” I denied the imputation, and proposed to punish
the scoundrel who endeavoured to foment disturbance in the company.
Bragwell signified his approbation, and drew his sword; I did the same,
and accosted the actor in these words: “Lookee, Mr. Ranter; I know you
possess all the mimicry and mischievous qualities of an ape, because I
have observed you put them all in practice more than once to-night, on
me and others; now I want to see if you resemble one in nimbleness
also; therefore, I desire you leap over this sword without hesitation.”
So saying, I held it parallel to the horizon, at the distance of about
three feet from the floor, and called, “Once-twice-thrice—and away!”
but, instead of complying with my demand, he snatched his hat and
hanger, and, assuming the looks, swagger, and phrase of Pistol, burst
out into the following exclamation, “Ha! must I then perform inglorious
prank of sylvan ape in mountain forest caught! Death rock me asleep,
abridge my doleful days, and lay my head in fury’s lap—Have we not
Hiren here?” This buffoonery did not answer his expectation, for, by
this time, the company was bent on seeing him in a new character. Mr.
Banter desired me to hold my sword a foot or two higher, that he might
have the better opportunity of exerting himself. The painter told him,
if he performed well, he would recommend him as a vaulter to the
proprietors of Sadler’s Wells; and Bragwell crying, “Leap for the
King!” applied the point of his sword to the player’s posteriors with
such success, that he sprang over in a trice, and, finding the door
unguarded, vanished in a twinkling; glad, no doubt, of having paid his
share of the reckoning so easily.

It being now near two o’clock in the morning, we discharged the bill,
and sallied out into the street. The painter slunk away without taking
his leave. Billy Chatter, being unable to speak or stand, was sent to a
bagnio; and Banter and I accompanied Bragwell to Moll King’s
coffee-house, where after he had kicked half a dozen hungry whores, we
left him asleep on a bench, and directed our course towards
Charing-cross, near which place both he and I lodged.

The natural dryness of my companion being overcome by liquor, he
honoured me by the way with many compliments and professions, of
friendship, for which I made suitable acknowledgments, and told him I
thought myself happy in having, by my behaviour, removed the
unfavourable opinion he entertained of me at first sight. He was
surprised at this declaration, and begged me to explain myself; upon
which I mentioned what I had overheard him say of me to Wagtail in the
coffee-house. He laughed, and made an apology for his freedom, assuring
me, that my appearance had very much prepossessed him in my favour; and
what he said was only intended as a joke on the doctor’s solemnity. I
was highly pleased at being undeceived in this particular, and not a
little proud of the good opinion of this wit, who shook me by the hand
at parting, and promised to meet me the next day at the ordinary.




CHAPTER XLVII


Strap communicates to me a conquest he had made of a Chandler’s
Widow—finds himself miserably mistaken—I go to the Opera—admire
Melinda—am cautioned by Banter—go to the Assembly at Hampstead—dance
with that young lady—receive an insolent message from Bragwell, whose
mettle is soon cooled—am in favour with my Mistress, whom I visit next
day, and am bubbled out of eighteen guineas at cards—Strap triumphs at
my success, but is astonished at my expense—Banter comes to my lodging,
is very sarcastic at my expense, and borrows five guineas from me, as a
proof of his friendship


In the morning, before I got up, Strap came into my chamber, and,
finding me awake, hemmed several times, scratched his head, cast his
eyes upon the ground, and, with a very foolish kind of simper upon his
face gave me to understand he had something to communicate. “By your
countenance,” said I, “I expect to hear good tidings.” “Indifferently,”
replied he, tittering, “that is, hereafter as it shall be. You must
know, I have some thoughts of altering my condition.” “What!” cried I,
astonished, “a matrimonial scheme? O rare Strap! thou hast got the
heels of me at last.” “N—no less, I assure you,” said he, bursting into
a laugh of self-approbation: “a tallow chandler’s widow that lives hard
by, has taken a liking to me, a fine jolly dame, as plump as a
partridge. She has a well-furnished house, a brisk trade, and a good
deal of the ready. I may have her for the asking. She told a friend of
mine, a brother footman, that she would take me out of a stinking
clout. But I refused to give my final answer, till I knew your opinion
of the matter.” I congratulated Monsieur d’Estrapes upon his conquest,
and approved of the scheme, provided he could be assured of those
circumstances of her fortune; but advised him to do nothing rashly, and
give me an opportunity of seeing the lady before matters should be
brought to a conclusion. He assured me he would do nothing without my
consent and approbation, and that very morning, while I was at
breakfast, introduce his inamorata to my acquaintance. She was a short
thick woman, about the age of thirty-six, and had a particular
prominence of belly, which I perceived at first sight, not without some
suspicion of foul play. I desired her, however, to sit, and treated her
with a dish of tea; the discourse turning on the good qualities of
Strap, whom I represented as a prodigy of sobriety, industry and
virtue. When she took her leave, he followed her to the door, and
returned licking his lips, and asking if I did not think she was a
luscious creature. I made no mystery of my apprehension, but declared
my sentiments of her without reserve; at which he was not surprised,
telling me he had observed the same symptom, but was informed by his
friend that she was only livergrown and would in few months be as small
in the waist as ever. “Yes,” said I, “a few weeks, I believe, will do
the business. In short, Strap, it is my opinion, that you are
egregiously imposed upon; and that this friend is no other than a
rascal who wants to palm his trull upon you for a wife, that he may at
once deliver himself from the importunities of the mother and the
expense of her bantling; for which reason I would not have you trust
implicitly to the report he makes of her wealth, which is inconsistent
with his behaviour, nor run your head precipitately into a noose, that
you may afterwards wish exchanged for the hangman’s.” He seemed very
much startled at my insinuation, and promised to look twice before he
leaped; saying, with some heat, “Odds, if I find his intention is to
betray me, we shall see which of us is the better man.” My prediction
was verified in less than a fortnight, her great belly producing an
infant, to the unspeakable amazement of Strap, who was before this
happened, inclinable to believe I had refined a little too much in my
penetration. His false friend disappeared; and a few days after an
execution was issued against her goods and household furniture, which
were seized by the creditors.

Meanwhile I met my friend Banter at the ordinary, and in the evening
went to the Opera with him and Mr Chatter, who pointed out Melinda in
one of the boxes, and offered to introduce me to her, observing at the
same time, that she was a reigning toast worth ten thousand pounds.
This piece of information made my heart bound with joy, and I
discovered great eagerness to accept the proposal; upon which he
assured me I should dance with her at the next assembly, if he had any
influence in that quarter: so saying, he went round, spoke to her some
minutes, and, as I imagined, pointed at me; then returning, told me, to
my inexpressible pleasure, that I might depend upon what he had
promised, for she was now engaged as my partner. Banter in a whisper,
gave me to understand that she was an incorrigible coquette, who would
grant the same favour to any young fellow in England of a tolerable
appearance, merely to engage him among the herd of her admirers, that
she might have the pleasure of seeing them daily increase; that she was
of a cold insensible disposition, dead to every passion but vanity, and
so blind to merit, that he would lay any wager the wealthiest fool
would carry her at last. I attributed a good deal of this intelligence
to the satirical turn of my friend, or resentment for having himself
suffered a rebuff from the lady in question, and, at any rate, trusted
so much to my own accomplishments as to believe no woman could resist
the ardour of my addresses.

Full of this confidence I repaired to Hampstead in company with Billy
Chatter, my Lord Hobble, and Doctor Wagtail. There I saw a very
brilliant assembly, before whom I had the honour to walk a minuet with
Melinda, who charmed me with her frank manner and easiness of
behaviour. Before the country dances began, I received a message by a
person I did not know from Bragwell, who was present, importing that
nobody who knew him presumed to dance with Melinda while he was there
in person, that I would do well to relinquish her without noise,
because he had a mind to lead up a country dance with her. This
extraordinary intimation, which was delivered in the lady’s hearing,
did not at all discompose me, who, by this time, was pretty well
acquainted with the character of my rival. I therefore, without the
least symptom of concern bade the gentleman tell Mr. Bragwell, that
since I was so happy as to obtain the lady’s consent, I should not be
solicitous about his; and desired the bearer himself to bring me no
such impertinent messages for the future. Melinda, affected a sort of
confusion, and pretended to wonder that Mr. Bragwell should give
himself such liberties with regard to her, who had no manner of
connection with the fellow. I laid hold of this opportunity to display
my valour, and offered to call him to an account for his insolence, a
proposal which she absolutely refused, under pretence of consulting my
safety; though I could perceive, by the sparkling of her eyes, that she
would not have thought herself affronted by being the subject of a
duel. I was by no means pleased with this discovery of her thoughts,
which not only argued the most unjustifiable vanity, but likewise the
most barbarous indifference; however, I was allured by her fortune, and
resolved to gratify her pride, in making her the occasion of a public
quarrel between me and Bragwell, who, I was pretty certain, would never
drive matters to a dangerous extremity.

While we danced together, I observed this formidable rival at one end
of the room, encircled with a cluster of beaux, to whom he talked with
great vehemence, casting many big looks at me from time to time. I
guessed the subject of his discourse, and as soon as I had handed my
partner to her seat, strutted up to the place where he stood, and,
cocking my hat in his face, demanded aloud, if he had anything to say
to me. He answered with a sullen tone, “Nothing, at present, sir;” and
turned about upon his heel. “Well,” said I, “you know where I am to be
found at any time.” His companions stared at one another, and I
returned to the lady, whose features brightened at my approach, and
immediately a whisper ran through the whole room; after which so many
eyes were turned upon me that I was ready to sink with confusion. When
the ball broke up, I led her to her coach, and, like a true French
gallant, would have got up behind it, in order to protect her from
violence on the road, but she absolutely refused my offer, and
expressed her concern that there was not an empty seat for me within
the vehicle.

Next day, in the afternoon, I waited on her at her lodgings, by
permission, in company with Chatter, and was very civilly received by
her mother, with whom she lived. There were a good many fashionable
people present, chiefly young fellows, and immediately after tea, a
couple of card tables were set, at one of which I had the honour to
play with Melinda, who in less than three hours, made shift to plunder
me of eight guineas. I was well enough content to lose a little money
with a good grace, that I might have an opportunity in the meantime to
say soft things, which are still most welcome when attended with good
luck; but I was by no means satisfied of her fair play, a circumstance
that shocked me not a little, and greatly impaired my opinion of her
disinterestedness and delicacy. However, I was resolved to profit by
this behaviour, and treat her in my turn with less ceremony;
accordingly, I laid close siege to her, and, finding her not at all
disgusted with the gross incense I offered, that very night made a
declaration of love in plain terms. She received my addresses with
great gaiety, and pretended to laugh them off, but at the same time
treated me with such particular complacency that I was persuaded I had
made a conquest of her heart, and concluded myself the happiest man
alive. Elevated with these flattering ideas, I sat down again to cards
after supper, and with great cheerfulness suffered myself to be cheated
of ten guineas more.

It was late before I took my leave, after being favoured with a general
invitation; and, when I got into bed, the adventures of the day
hindered me from sleeping. Sometimes I pleased myself with the hopes of
possessing a fine woman with ten thousand pounds; then I would ruminate
on the character I had heard of her from Banter, and compare it with
the circumstances of her conduct towards me, which seemed to bear too
great a resemblance to the picture he had drawn. This introduced a
melancholy reflection on the expense I had undergone, and the smallness
of my funds to support it, which, by-the-by, were none of my own. In
short, I found myself involved in doubts and perplexities, that kept me
awake the greatest part of the night.

In the morning, Strap, with whom I had not conversed for two days,
presented himself with the utensils for shaving me; upon which, I asked
his opinion of the lady he had seen me conduct to her coach at
Hampstead. “Odds! she’s a delicious creature!” cried he, “and, as I am
informed, a great fortune. I am sorry you did not insist on going home
with her. I dare say, she would not have refused your company; for she
seems to be a good-humoured soul.” “There’s a time for all things,”
said I, “you must know, Strap, I was in company with her till one
o’clock this morning.” I had no sooner pronounced these words than he
began to caper about the room, and snap his fingers, crying in a
transport, “The day’s our own—the day’s our own!” I gave him to
understand that his triumph was a little premature, and that I had more
difficulties to surmount than he was aware of; then I recounted to him
the intelligence I had received from Banter. At which he changed
colour, shook his head, and observed there was no faith in woman. I
told him I was resolved to make a bold push notwithstanding, although I
foresaw it would lead me into a great expense; and bade him guess the
sum I had lost last night at cards. He scratched his chin, and
protested his abhorrence of cards, the very name of which being
mentioned, made him sweat with vexation, as it recalled the
money-dropper to his remembrance. “But, however,” said he, “you have to
do with other guess people now. Why, I suppose, if you had a bad run
last night, you would scarce come off for less than ten or twelve
shilling.” I was mortified at this piece of simplicity, which I
imagined, at that time, was all affected by way of reprimand for my
folly; and asked with some heat if he thought I had spent the evening
in a cellar with chairmen and bunters; giving him to know, at the same
time, that my expense had amounted to eighteen guineas.

It would require the pencil of Hogarth to express the astonishment and
concern of Strap on hearing this piece of news; the basin, in which he
was preparing the lather for my chin, dropped out of his hands, and he
remained some time immovable in that ludicrous attitude, with his mouth
open, and his eyes thrust forward considerably beyond their station;
but, remembering my disposition, which was touchy, and impatient of
control, he smothered his chagrin, and attempted to recollect himself.
With this view he endeavoured to laugh, but in spite if his teeth,
broke out in a whimper, took up his wash-ball and pewter-pot, scrubbed
my beard with the one, and discharged the other upon my face. I took no
notice of this confusion, but after he had fully recovered himself, put
him in mind of his right, and assured him of my readiness to surrender
my effects whenever he should think proper to demand them. He was
nettled at my insinuation, which he thought proceeded from my distrust
of his friendship; and begged I would never talk to him in that strain
again, unless I had a mind to break his heart.

This good creature’s unalterable friendship for me affected me with the
most grateful sentiments, and acted as a spur to my resolution of
acquiring a fortune, that I might have it in my power to manifest my
generosity in my turn. For this purpose, I determined to bring matters
to a speedy conclusion with Melinda; well knowing that a few such
nights as the last would effectually incapacitate me from prosecuting
that or any other advantageous amour.

While my meditation was busied in planning out my future conduct, Mr.
Banter favoured me with a visit, and after breakfast asked how I had
passed the preceding evening. I answered I was very agreeably
entertained at a private house. “Yes,” said he, with a sarcastic smile,
“you deserve something extraordinary for the price you paid.” I was
surprised at this remark, and pretended ignorance of his meaning.
“Come, come, Mr. Random,” continued he, “you need not make a mystery of
it to me; the whole town has it. I wish that foolish affair between you
and Bragwell at Hampstead had been less public. It has set all the
busybodies at work to find out your real character and situation; and
you cannot imagine what conjectures have already circulated at your
expense. One suspects you to be a Jesuit in disguise; another thinks
you are an agent from the Pretender; a third believes you to be an
upstart gamester, because nobody knows anything of your family or
fortune; a fourth is of opinion that you are an Irish fortune-hunter.”
This last hypothesis touched me so nearly that, to conceal my
confusion, I was fain to interrupt his detail, and damn the world for
an envious meddling community, that would not suffer a gentleman to
live without molestation. He took no notice of this apostrophe, but
went on. “For my own part, I neither know nor desire to know who or
what you are. This I am certain of, that few people make a mystery of
their origin or situation, who can boast of anything advantageous in
either; and my own opinion of the matter is that you have raised
yourself, by your industry, from nothing to the appearance you now
maintain, and which you endeavour to support by some matrimonial
scheme.” Here he fixed his eyes steadfastly upon me and perceiving my
face covered with blushes, told me, how he was confirmed in his
opinion. “Look ye, Random,” said he, “I have divined your plan, and am
confident it will never succeed. You are too honest and too ignorant of
the town to practise the necessary cheats of your profession, and
detect the conspiracies that will be formed against you. Besides, you
are downright bashful. What the devil! set up for a fortune hunter
before you have conquered the sense of shame! Perhaps you are entitled
by your merit, and I believe you are, to a richer and a better wife
than Melinda; but take my word for it, she is not to be won at that
rate;—or, if you are so lucky as to carry her, between you and me, you
may say, as Teague said, By my soul, I have gained a loss! She would
take care to spend her fortune in a twinkling, and soon make you sick
of her extravagance.”

I was alarmed by his discourse, while I resented the freedom of it, and
expressed my disgust by telling him, he was mistaken in my intentions,
and desiring he would give me leave to regulate my conduct according to
the dictates of my own reason. He made no apology for the liberty he
had taken, and ascribed it to the warmth of his friendship for me; as
an uncommon instance of which he borrowed five guineas, assuring me
there were very few people in the world whom he would so far favour
with his confidence. I gave him the money, and professed myself so well
convinced of his sincerity, that he had no occasion to put it to such
extraordinary proofs for the future. “I thought,” said he, “to have
asked five pieces more, but hearing you were bubbled of eighteen last
night, I presumed you might be out of cash, and resolved to model my
demand accordingly.” I could not help admiring the cavalier behaviour
of this spark, of whom I desired to know his reason for saying I was
bubbled. He then gave me to understand, that before he came to my
lodgings, he had beat up Tom Tossle, who, being present, informed him
of the particulars, rehearsed all the fine things I said to Melinda,
with which he proposed to entertain the town, and among other
circumstances, assured him my mistress cheated with so little art, that
nobody but a mere novice could be imposed upon.

The thoughts of becoming a subject of raillery for coxcombs, and losing
my money to boot, stung me to the quick; but I made a virtue of my
indignation, and swore that no man should with impunity either asperse
the character of Melinda, or turn my behaviour into ridicule. He
replied in a dry manner, that I would find it a Herculean task to
chastise everybody who should laugh at my expense; and, as for the
character of Melinda, he did not see how it could suffer by what was
laid to her charge; for that cheating at cards, far from being reckoned
a blemish among people of fashion, was looked upon as an honourable
indication of superior genius and address. “But let us waive this
subject,” said he, “and go to the coffee-house, in order to make a
party for dinner.”




CHAPTER XLVIII


We repair to the coffee-house, where we overhear a curious dispute
between Wagtail and Medlar, which is referred to our decision—the
Doctor gives an account of his experiment—Medlar is roasted by Banter
at the ordinary—the old gentleman’s advice to me


Being as willing to drop the theme as he was to propose it, I
accompanied him thither, where we found Mr. Medlar and Dr. Wagtail
disputing upon the word Custard, which the physician affirmed should be
spelt with a G, observing that it was derived from the Latin verb
gustare, “to taste;” but Medlar pleaded custom in behalf of C,
observing, that, by the Doctor’s rule, we ought to change pudding into
budding, because it is derived from the French word boudin; and in that
case why not retain the original orthography and pronunciation of all
the foreign words we have adopted, by which means our language would
become a dissonant jargon without standard or propriety? The
controversy was referred to us; and Banter, notwithstanding his real
opinion to the contrary, decided it in favour of Wagtail; upon which
the peevish annuitant arose, and uttering the monosyllable pish! with
great emphasis, removed to another table.

We then inquired of the doctor, what progress he had made in the
experiment of distilling tinder-water; and he told us he had been at
all the glass-houses about town, but could find nobody who would
undertake to blow a retort large enough to hold the third part of the
quantity prescribed; but he intended to try the process on as much as
would produce five drops, which would be sufficient to prove the
specific, and then he would make it a parliamentary affair; that he had
already purchased a considerable weight of rags, in reducing which to
tinder, he had met with a misfortune, which had obliged him to change
his lodgings; for he had gathered them in a heap on the floor, and set
fire to them with a candle, on the supposition that the boards would
sustain no damage, because it is the nature of flame to ascend; but, by
some very extraordinary accident, the wood was invaded, and began to
blaze with great violence, which disordered him so much, that he had
not the presence of mind enough to call for assistance, and the whole
house must have been consumed with him in the midst of it, had not the
smoke that rolled out of the windows in clouds alarmed the
neighbourhood, and brought people to his succour: that he had lost a
pair of black velvet breeches and a tie-wig in the hurry, besides the
expense of the rags, which were rendered useless by the water used to
quench the flame, and the damage of the floor, which he was compelled
to repair; that his landlord, believing him distracted, had insisted on
his quitting his apartment at a minute’s warning, and he was put to
incredible inconvenience; but now he was settled in a very comfortable
house, and had the use of a large paved yard for preparing his tinder;
so that he hoped in a very short time to reap the fruits of his labour.

After having congratulated the doctor on his prospect, and read the
papers, we repaired to an auction of pictures, where we entertained
ourselves an hour or two; from thence we adjourned to the Mall, and,
after two or three turns, went back to dinner, Banter assuring us, that
he intended to roast Medlar at the ordinary; and, indeed, we were no
sooner set than this cynic began to execute his purpose, by telling the
old gentleman that he looked extremely well, considering the little
sleep he had enjoyed last night. To this compliment Medlar made no
reply, but by a stare, accompanied with a significant grin; and Banter
went on thus; “I don’t know whether most to admire the charity of your
mind, or the vigour of your body. Upon my soul, Mr. Medlar, you do
generous things with the best taste of any man I know! You extend your
compassion to real objects, and exact only such returns as they are
capable of making. You must know, gentlemen,” said he, turning to the
company, “I had been up most part of the night with a friend who is ill
of a fever, and, on my return home this morning, chanced to pass by a
gin shop still open, whence issued a confused sound of mirth and
jollity: upon which, I popped in my head, and perceived Mr. Medlar
dancing bareheaded in the midst of ten or twenty ragged bunters, who
rejoiced at his expense. But indeed, Mr. Medlar, you should not
sacrifice your constitution to your benevolence. Consider, you grow old
apace; and, therefore, have a reverend care of your health, which must
certainly be very much impaired by these nocturnal expeditions.” The
testy senior could no longer contain himself, but cried hastily, “’Tis
well known that your tongue is no slanderer.” “I think,” said the
other, “you might spare that observation, as you are very sensible,
that my tongue has done you signal service on many occasions. You may
remember, that, when you made your addresses to the fat widow who kept
a public-house at Islington, there was a report spread very much to the
prejudice of your manhood, which coming to the ears of your mistress,
you were discarded immediately: and I brought matters to a
reconciliation, by assuring her you had three bastards at nurse in the
country. How you ruined your own affair afterwards, it is neither my
business nor inclination to relate.”

This anecdote, which had no other foundation than in Banter’s own
invention, afforded a good deal of mirth to everybody present, and
provoked Mr. Medlar beyond all sufferance; so that he started up in a
mighty passion, and, forgetting that his mouth was full, bespattered
those who sat next to him, while he discharged his indignation in a
volley of oaths, and called Banter insignificant puppy, impertinent
jackanapes, and a hundred such appellations; telling the company he had
invented these false and malicious aspersions, because he would not
lend him money to squander away upon rooks and whores. “A very likely
story,” said Banter, “that I should attempt to borrow money of a man
who is obliged to practise a thousand shifts to make his weekly
allowance hold out till Saturday night. Sometimes he sleeps
four-and-twenty hours at a stretch, by which means he saves three
meals, besides coffee-house expense. Sometimes he is fain to put up
with bread and cheese and small beer for dinner; and sometimes he
regales on twopennyworth of ox cheek in a cellar.” “You are a lying
miscreant!” cried Medlar, in an ecstacy of rage; “I can always command
money enough to pay your tailor’s bill, which I am sure is no trifle;
and I have a good mind to give you a convincing proof of my
circumstances, by prosecuting you for defamation, sirrah.” By this time
the violence of his wrath had deprived him of his appetite, and he sat
silent, unable to swallow one mouthful, while his tormentor enjoyed his
mortification, and increased his chagrin, by advising him to lay in
plentifully for his next day’s fast.

Dinner being ended, we came down stairs to the coffee room, and Banter
went away to keep an appointment, saying, he supposed he should see
Wagtail and me in the evening at the Bedford Coffee-house. He was no
sooner gone than the old gentleman took me aside, and said, he was
sorry to see me so intimate with that fellow, who was one of the most
graceless rakes about town, and had already wasted a good estate and
constitution upon harlots; that he had been the ruin of many a young
man, by introducing them into debauched company, and setting a lewd
example of all manner of wickedness; and that, unless I were on my
guard, he would strip me in a short time both of my money and
reputation. I thanked him for his information, and promised to conduct
myself accordingly, wishing, however, his caution had been a few hours
more early, by which means I might have saved five guineas.
Notwithstanding this intelligence, I was inclinable to impute some part
of the charge to Medlar’s revenge for the liberties taken with him at
dinner; and therefore, as soon as I could disengage myself, applied to
Wagtail for his opinion of the character in question, resolved to
compare their accounts, allowing for the prejudice of each, and to form
my judgment upon both, without adhering strictly to either. The doctor
assured me, that he was a very pretty gentleman of family and fortune;
a scholar, a wit, a critic, and perfectly well acquainted with the
town; that his honour and courage were unquestionable, though some
extravagances he had been guilty of, and his talents for satire had
procured him enemies, and made some people shy of his acquaintance.
From these different sketches, I concluded that Banter was a young
fellow of some parts, who had spent his fortune, but retained his
appetites, and fallen out with the world, because he could not enjoy it
to his wish.

I went to the Bedford Coffee-house in the evening, where I met my
friends, from thence proceeded to the play, and afterwards carried them
home to my lodgings, where we supped in great good humour.




CHAPTER XLIX


I receive a Challenge—the Consequence of it—the Quarrel being made up,
am put in Arrest by the Care and Affection of Strap—but immediately
released upon explaining my Affair—the Behaviour of Mr. Oregan and his
two Friends—I visit Melinda, whom I divert with an account of the
Duel—propose Marriage—she refers the Matter to her Mother, of whom I
make a solemn Demand of her Daughter—the old Lady’s behaviour—I am
discarded—-resent their Disdain


When I was ready to go abroad next day, Strap brought me a letter, To
Mr. Random, Esq., these; which, upon opening, I found contained a
challenge conceived in these very extraordinary terms:

“Sir,—Whereas I am informed that you make love to Miss Melinda
Goosetrap, this is to let you know that she is under promise of
marriage to me; and that I am at this present waiting at the back of
Montague House, with a pair of good pistols in my hand; and if you will
keep your appointment, I will make your tongue confess (after the
breath is out of your body) that you do not deserve her so well as


Yours, etc.
Rourk Oregan.”


I guessed, from the style and superscription of this billet, that my
rival was a true Milesian, and was not a little uneasy at the contents;
especially that part, in which he asserted his right to my mistress by
promise, a circumstance I did not not know how to reconcile to her good
sense and penetration. However, this was no time for me to decline the
defiance, because the success of my addresses in a great measure
depended upon my behaviour in that affair. I therefore immediately
loaded my pistols, and betook myself in a hackney coach to the place
appointed, where I found a tall raw-boned man, with a hard-featured
countenance and black bushy beard, walking by himself, wrapped up in a
shabby green coat, over which his own hair descended in leathern queue
from his head, that was covered with a greasy hat trimmed with a
tarnished pointe d’Espagne. He had no sooner perceived me advancing
than he pulled a pistol from his bosom, and, presenting it at me,
snapped it without the least preamble. Alarmed at this rude salutation,
I made a stand, and, before he could adjust his other piece, fired one
of mine at him, without doing any damage, By this time he was ready
with his second, that flashed in the pan without going off; upon which
he called, with a true Tipperary cadence, “Fire away, honey!” and began
to hammer his flint with great deliberation. But I was resolved to make
use of the advantage fortune had given me, and therefore stepped up
without throwing away my fire, desiring him to ask his life, or prepare
for another world; but this stout Hibernian refused to condescend, and
complained bitterly of my having quitted my ground before he could
return my shot: saying I ought to go back to my station, and let him
have an equal chance with me. I endeavoured to persuade him that I had
given him a double chance already: and it was my business to prevent
him from enjoying a third; but now, since I had an opportunity, I
demanded a parley, and desired to know his condition and reason for
calling me to the field, who, to the best of my remembrance, far from
having done him any injury, had never before seen him. He told me that
he was a gentleman of fortune, who had spent all he had, and, hearing
that Melinda had got ten thousand pounds, he intended to make himself
master of that sum by espousing her, and he was determined, in an
honourable way, to cut the throats of all those who stood between him
and his hopes.

I then demanded to know the foundation of his hopes; and now that I had
seen him, being more and more astonished at the circumstance of the
promise, desired that he would explain that mystery. He gave me to
understand, that he trusted entirely to his birth and personal merit;
that he had frequently written to Melinda, setting forth his claim and
pretensions, but she was never kind enough to send an answer, or even
to admit him into her presence; and that the promise he mentioned in
his letter was made by his friend Mr. Gahagan, who assured him that no
woman could resist a man of his appearance. I could not forbear
laughing to excess at the simplicity of my rival, who did not seem to
relish my mirth, but began to be very serious: upon which I endeavoured
to appease him, by giving him my word and honour that, far from
prejudicing his addresses to the lady, I would represent him to her in
the most favourable light I could with any regard to truth; but he must
not be surprised if she should remain blind to his deserts, for nothing
was more capricious than a woman’s mind, and the affection of that sex
was seldom purchased with virtue alone. That my declaration might have
the better effect, I took notice of his deshabille, and, professing
sorrow at seeing a gentleman reduced, slipped two guineas into his
hand, at sight of which he threw away his pistols, and hugging me in
his arms, cried, “Arrah, by Jasus, now, you are the best friend I have
met with these seven long years!” When I had suffered some minutes in
his embrace, he quitted me, and picking up his rusty arms, wished the
devil might burn him if ever he should give me any further trouble
about womankind.

The quarrel being thus amicably composed, I begged leave to look at his
pistols, which I found so crazy and so foul, that I believe it was
happy for him neither of them was discharged, for one of them would
certainly have split in the going off, and he would, in all
probability, have lost his hand in the explosion; but what gave me a
lively idea of the man’s character was, to find, upon examination, that
one of them had been loaded without being primed, and the other primed
without a charge.

While we walked home together, I expressed a desire of knowing my new
friend’s history; and he informed me of his having served in the German
army as a volunteer against the Turks; that for his behaviour at the
siege of Belgrade, he had been honoured with an ensign’s commission,
and afterwards promoted to the rank of lieutenant, in which station it
was his misfortune to affront his captain, who challenged him to the
field, and was killed in the duel, upon which he was obliged to
retreat; that he had been in England some years soliciting his friends
for provision in the British army; but being hitherto unsuccessful, was
desired by Mr. Gahagan to turn his thoughts to matrimony, and make his
fortune by an advantageous match; in consequence of which advice, he
had made up to Melinda: and, having heard by means of an Irish footman
in the family, that I was her chief favourite, had called me out in
hopes of removing by my death the greatest obstruction to his desires;
but now he was convinced of my honour and generosity, he swore by the
blessed Virgin, he would think of her no more, if there were not
another woman in the world. As a further proof of his veracity, which I
did not at all doubt, he opened an old iron snuff-box, and pulled out
his commission in the Imperial army, and his captain’s challenge, which
he preserved as testimonials of his character. I was so well convinced
of this poor man’s honesty and courage, that I determined to speak in
his behalf to some of my acquaintance, who might recommend his case to
the consideration of those who could provide for him; and in the
meantime to accommodate him with a few clothes, by which his appearance
would be much mended, and himself enabled to renew his solicitations in
person.

As we walked along conversing socially together, we were met by a file
of musketeers, and Strap at their head, who no sooner approached than,
with a frantic look, he cried, “Seize them! In the name of God seize
them!” We were accordingly surrounded, and I put in arrest by the
corporal, who was commanding officer; but Captain Oregan disengaged
himself, and ran with such speed towards Tottenham Court Road that he
was out of sight in a moment. When my arms were delivered up, and
myself secured, Strap became a little more composed, and asked pardon
for the liberty he had taken, which he hoped I would excuse, as it
proceeded from his affection. He then told me that, suspecting the
letter (which by the by was brought by the author himself) contained
something extraordinary, he had peeped through the keyhole, and seen me
load my pistols; upon which he ran down to Whitehall, and applied to
the officer on guard for a party to put me in arrest, but before he
returned, I was gone in a coach; that he had inquired which way I went,
and, having heard that duels were commonly fought at the back of
Montague House, he conducted the guard to this place, where he thanked
God for having found me safe and sound. I gave him to understand that I
forgave his officious concern for once, but cautioned him in pretty
severe terms for making me the subject of idle conversation for the
future; then turning to the corporal, thanked him for his care, and
gave him a crown to drink with his men, assuring him that the rencontre
was over long before he came up, and everything compromised, as he
might have observed by our behaviour; as a farther proof of which, he
would find upon examination that one of my pistols had been discharged:
but this civil person, without giving himself or me any farther
trouble, received the bounty with a thousand bows and acknowledgments,
and, returning the pistols, released me immediately.

He was not gone a hundred yards, when my friend Oregan came up in order
to rescue me, with two tatterdemalions, whom he had engaged for that
purpose about the purlieus of St. Giles’s. One of them was armed with a
musket that wanted a lock, and another with a rusty broadsword, but
their dress surpassed all description. When he understood I was already
free he made an apology for his abrupt departure, and introduced me to
his two companions: First, to Counsellor Fitzclabber, who, he told me,
was then employed in compiling a history of the kings of Minster, from
Irish manuscripts; and then to his friend Mr. Gahagan, who was a
profound philosopher and politician, and had projected many excellent
schemes for the good of his country. But it seems these literati had
been very ill rewarded for their ingenious labours; for, between them
both, there was but one shirt, and half a pair of breeches. I thanked
them very kindly for their readiness to assist me, and, having offered
my service in my turn, bade them good morrow, desiring Oregan to
accompany me to my lodgings, where he was fitted with decent clothes
from my wardrobe, so much to his satisfaction, that he swore eternal
gratitude and friendship to me, and, at my request, recounted all the
adventures of his life.

In the afternoon, I waited on Melinda, who received me with great
kindness and familiarity, and laughed excessively at my adventure with
the Irishman, to whose wishes she was no stranger, having more than a
dozen letters in her possession, which he had written to her on the
subject of love, and which, for my entertainment, she submitted to my
perusal. Having made ourselves merry at the expense of this poor
admirer, I seized the opportunity of her mother’s going out of the
room, and introduced my own passion, which I recommended to her with
all the ardour and eloquence I was master of. I flattered, sighed,
swore, entreated, and acted a thousand extravagancies, in hopes of
making some impression on her heart; but she heard everything I said
without discovering the least emotion; and other company came in before
she would vouchsafe one serious reply. After tea, the cards were
brought in according to custom, and it was my good fortune to have
Melinda for my partner; by which means, instead of losing, I came off
with five guineas clear gain.

I soon became acquainted with a good many people of fashion, and spent
my time in the modish diversions of the town, such as plays, operas,
masquerades, drums, assemblies, and muppet-shows; chiefly in company
with Melinda, whom I cultivated with all the eagerness and address that
my prospect could inspire, and my education afford. I spared neither my
person nor my purse to gratify her vanity and pride; my rivals were
intimidated, and indeed outshone; and, after all, I began to fear that
the dear creature had not a heart to lose.

At last, finding myself unable to support the expense of this amour
much longer, I was determined to bring the matter to a crisis; and one
evening, while we were together by ourselves, complained of her
indifference, described the tortures of suspense to a love-sick mind,
and pressed her to disclose her sentiments of matrimony and me with
such earnestness, that she could not, with all her art, shift the
subject, but was obliged to come to an eclaircissement. She told me,
with a careless air, that she had no objection to my person, and if I
could satisfy her mother in other particulars, I should not find her
averse to the match; but she was resolved to do nothing in such a
momentous concern without the advice and consent of her parent. This
was no very agreeable declaration to me, whose aim had been to win her
inclination first, and then secure my conquest by a private marriage,
to which I flattered myself she would express no reluctance. That I
might not, however, desert my cause before it was desperate, I waited
on her mother; and, with great formality, demanded the daughter in
marriage. The good lady, who was a very notable woman, behaved with
great state and civility; thanked me for the honour I intended her
family; and said, she did not doubt that I was in all respects
qualified to make a woman happy; but it concerned her as a parent
anxious about the welfare of her child, to inquire into the particulars
of my fortune, and know what settlement I proposed to make. To this
intimation, which would have utterly disconcerted me if I had not
expected it, I replied, without hesitation that, though my fortune was
very small, I was a gentleman by birth and education, would maintain
her daughter in the sphere of a gentlewoman, and settle her own dowry
on her and her heirs for ever. This careful matron did not seem to
relish my proposal, but observed, with a demure countenance, that there
was no necessity for settling that upon her child which was her own
already; however, if I pleased, her lawyer should confer with mine upon
the matter; and, in the meantime, she desired I would favour her with a
perusal of my rent-roll. Notwithstanding the vexation I was under, I
could scarce forbear laughing in her face at the mention of my
rent-roll, which was indeed a severe piece of satire upon my
pretensions. I frankly owned I had no landed estate; and told her that
I could not exactly specify the sum I was master of, until I had
regulated my affairs, which were at present in some disorder; but that
I would take an opportunity of satisfying her on that head very soon.

It was not long before I took my leave, and returned to my lodgings in
a very melancholy mood, persuaded that I had nothing more to expect
from that quarter. I was confirmed in this opinion next day, when I
went back with a view of explaining myself more fully to the old
gentlewoman; and was told by the footman that his ladies were not at
home, although I had seen Melinda through the blinds at a parlour
window, as I went up to the door. Incensed at this affront, I quitted
the door without saying one word, and as I repassed the parlour, bowed
to Miss, who still remained in the same situation, securely screened,
as she thought, from my view.

This disappointment gave me more uneasiness on Strap’s account than my
own, for I was in no danger of dying for love of Melinda; on the
contrary, the remembrance of my charming Narcissa was a continual check
upon my conscience during the whole course of my addresses; and perhaps
contributed to the bad success of my scheme, by controlling my raptures
and condemning my design.

There was a necessity for informing my companion of everything that
happened to me and I performed this piece of duty in an affected
passion, swearing I would be his pack-horse no longer, and desiring him
to take the management of his affairs into his own hands. This finesse
had the desired effect, for, instead of grumbling over my miscarriage,
Strap was frightened at the passion I feigned, and begged me, for the
love of God, to be appeased; observing that, although we had suffered a
great loss, it was not irreparable; and if Fortune frowned to day, she
might perhaps smile to-morrow. I pretended to acquiesce in his remarks,
praise his equanimity, and promised to improve my misfortune. He, on
the other hand, pretended to be perfectly well satisfied with my
conduct, and conjured me to follow the dictates of my own reflection;
but, in spite of all his affectation, I could perceive his inward
affliction, and his visage sensibly increased in longitude from that
day.




CHAPTER L


I long to be revenged on Melinda—apply to Banter for his Assistance—he
contrives a scheme for that purpose—which is put in Execution with
great Success—I make an Attempt upon the Heart of Miss Gripewell, but
am disappointed—grow melancholy at my Disappointment, and have recourse
to the Bottle—receive a Billet-doux—am ravished with the Contents—find
myself involved in Intrigue, which I imagined would make my Fortune—am
confounded at my mistake, which banishes all Thoughts of Matrimony


In the meantime, my attention was wholly engrossed in search of another
mistress, and the desire of being revenged on Melinda, in both which
schemes I was very much assisted by Billy Chatter, who was such a
necessary creature among the ladies, that in all private dances he
engaged the men. To him therefore I applied, desiring he would
introduce me to a partner of some figure, at the next private assembly,
for the sake of a frolic, the intention of which I would afterwards
communicate. Billy, who had heard something of a difference between
Melinda and me, immediately smoked part of my design, and, thinking I
only wanted to alarm her jealousy a little, promised to gratify my
desire, by matching me with a partner worth thirty thousand pounds,
whom the ladies of this end of the town had lately taken under their
management and protection. Upon further inquiry, I found this person’s
name was Miss Biddy Gripewell; that her father, who had been a
pawnbroker, died intestate, by which means all his substance descended
to his daughter, who was so little a favourite that, could the old man
have prevailed with his own rapacious disposition to part with as much
money as would have paid the expense of a will, she would not have
inherited the sixth part of his fortune; that during his life, far from
being educated in a way suitable to such great expectations, she was
obliged to live like a servant wench, and do the most menial offices in
the family. But his funeral was no sooner performed, than she assumed
the fine lady, and found so many people of both sexes to flatter,
caress, and instruct her, that, for want of discretion and experience,
she was grown insufferably vain and arrogant, and pretended to no less
than a duke or earl at least for her husband; that she had the
misfortune to be neglected by the English quality, but a certain poor
Scottish lord was then making interest to be introduced to her
acquaintance. In the meantime, she was fallen into the hands of a
notable lady, who had already disposed of her to a lieutenant of foot,
a distant relation of her ladyship’s, though Miss as yet knew nothing
of the affair; and lastly that if I proposed to dance with her, I must
give him leave to represent me as a knight, or foreign count at least.
I was ravished at this piece of information, and consented for one
night, to personate a French marquis, that I might the easier fulfil my
revenge.

Having made the appointment with Chatter I went to Banter’s lodgings,
as I had by this time conceived a great opinion of his penetration and
knowledge; and, after I had enjoined secrecy, told him every
circumstance of my disgrace with Melinda, and imparted the plan I had
projected to mortify that proud coquette, desiring his advice in
proving, and assistance in executing the scheme. Nothing could be more
agreeable to his misanthropical temper than an account of her behaviour
and my resentment: he applauded my resolution, and proposed that I
should not only provide myself with a proper partner, but also procure
such a one for Miss Goosetrap, as should infallibly entail upon her the
ridicule of all her acquaintance. For this purpose he mentioned his
barber who he said, was an exceeding coxcomb lately come from Paris,
whose absurd affectation and grimace, would easily pass upon her for
the sprightly politesse of a gentleman improved by travel. I hugged him
for this hint; and he assured me it would be no difficult matter to
make him believe, that Melinda, having seen him by accident, was
captivated by his appearance, and begged for his acquaintance. He
actually engaged him on this pretence, and painted his good fortune in
such colours that the poor shaver was quite beside himself with joy. He
was immediately fitted with a tawdry suit of clothes belonging to
Banter, and by him recommended to Chatter as a very pretty fellow, just
returned from his travels. Master Billy, who acted as a gentleman usher
to a great many of the fair sex in and about town, undertook at once to
bespeak Melinda in his behalf; and everything happened according to my
wish.

At the time appointed I appeared dressed to the best advantage; and, in
the character of a Marquis, had the honour of opening the ball with the
rich heiress, who attracted the eyes of the whole company by the
prodigious number of jewels with which she was adorned. Among others I
perceived Melinda, who could not more conceal her envy than
astonishment at my success; her curiosity was still more flagrant and
tormenting, for she had never seen Miss Gripewell before; and Chatter,
who alone could give her any satisfaction on that head, was engaged in
conversation at the other end of the room. I observed her impatience,
and exulted in her chagrin; and after my partner was set, took the
opportunity of passing by her to make a slight bow without stopping,
which completed my triumph and her indignation. She changed colour,
bridled up, assumed an air of disdain, and flirted her fan with such a
fury, that it went to pieces in a moment, to the no small entertainment
of those who sat near and observed her.

At length the metamorphosed barber took her out, and acted his part
with such ridiculous extravagance that the mirth of the whole company
was excited at his expense, and his partner was so much ashamed that,
before the country dances began, she retired in great confusion, under
pretence of being taken suddenly ill, and was followed by her gallant,
who no doubt imagined her indisposition was nothing but love; and laid
hold of the occasion of conducting her home, to comfort her, with an
assurance of his entertaining a reciprocal passion. They were no sooner
gone than an inquisitive whisper of “Who is he?” ran round the room;
and Chatter could give them no other intelligence about him than that
he was a man of fortune just returned from his travels. I, who alone
was acquainted with his real quality, affected ignorance well knowing
that female curiosity would not rest satisfied with such a general
account, and that the discovery would proceed with a better grace from
anybody than me.

Meanwhile, I was tempted by the richness of the prize to practise upon
Miss Gripewell’s heart, but soon found it too well fortified with pride
and indifference to yield to any efforts in my own character, and I
neither would nor could preserve the title I had borrowed longer than
that night.

As I expected, everything came to light next day. The barber, in pure
simplicity of heart, detected himself to Melinda, and discovered the
foundation of his hopes; she sickened at the affront, and was ashamed
to show her face in public for many weeks after this accident. Poor
Chatter found it impossible to justify himself to her satisfaction; was
in utter disgrace with Miss Gripewell, for having imposed me upon her
as a nobleman; and suffered very much in his character and influence
among the ladies in general.

Finding my finances diminished more than one-half, and my project as
little advanced as on the first day of my arrival in town, I began to
despair of my success, and grew melancholy at the prospect of
approaching want. To dispel the horrors of this fiend I had recourse to
the bottle, and kept more company than ever. I became particularly
attached to the playhouse, conversed with the actors behind the scenes,
grew acquainted with a body of templars, and in a short time commenced
a professed wit and critic. Indeed, I may say, without vanity, that I
was much better qualified than any one of my companions, who were,
generally speaking, of all the creatures I ever conversed with, the
most ignorant and assuming. By means of these avocations I got the
better of care, and learned to separate my ideas in such a manner that,
whenever I was attacked by a gloomy reflection, I could shove it aside,
and call in some agreeable reverie to my assistance. This was not the
case with Strap, who practised a thousand shifts to conceal the sorrow
that preyed upon his carcass, and reduced him to the resemblance of a
mere skeleton.

While I thus posted, in a thoughtless manner, towards poverty, I one
day received, by the penny post, a letter written in a woman’s hand,
containing a great many high-flown compliments, warm protestations of
love, couched in a very poetical style, an earnest desire of knowing
whether or not my heart was engaged, by leaving an answer at a certain
place, directed to R. B., and the whole subscribed “Your incognita.” I
was transported with joy on reading the contents of this billet-doux,
which I admired as a masterpiece of tenderness and elegance, and was
already up to my ears in love with the author, whom my imagination
represented as a lady of fortune, in the bloom of youth and beauty.
Elevated with this conjecture, I went to work, and exhausted my
invention in composing an answer suitable to the sublimity of her style
and the ardour of her sentiments. I expressed my admiration of her wit
in terms the most hyperbolical, and while I acknowledged myself
unworthy of her regard, declared myself enamoured of her understanding;
and in the most pathetic manner implored the honour of an interview.
Having finished this performance, and communicated it to Strap, who
skipped about for joy, I dispatched him with it to the place appointed,
which was the house of a milliner not far from Bond Street, and desired
him to keep watch near the door for some time, that he might discover
the person who should call for it. In less than an hour he returned
with a joyful countenance, and told me that, soon after he had
delivered the letter, a chairman was called, to whom it was given, with
directions to carry it to the house of a rich gentleman in the
neighbourhood, whither he (Strap) followed him, and saw him put it into
the hands of a waiting-woman, who paid the messenger, and shut the
door; that, upon inquiry at an alehouse hard by, where he called for a
pint of beer, he understood the gentleman to whom the house belonged
had an only daughter, very handsome, who would inherit his whole
estate; and who certainly was the author of the billet I had received.
I was of the same opinion, and, hugging myself in the happy prospect,
dressed immediately, and passed in great state the house that contained
my unknown admirer. Nor was my vanity disappointed; for I perceived a
beautiful young creature standing at one of the windows of the
dining-room, who, I imagined, observed me with more than common
curiosity. That I might indulge her view, and at the same time feast my
own, I affected to stop, and gave orders to Strap, in the street, just
opposite to her station, by which means I had an opportunity of seeing
her more distinctly, and of congratulating myself on having made a
conquest of so much perfection. In a few moments she retired, and I
betook myself to the ordinary in a rapture of hope, which deprived me
of my appetite for that meal, and sent me home in the evening to
indulge my contemplation.

Early next day, I was favoured with another epistle from my unknown
admirer, signifying her unutterable joy at the receipt of mine, which,
while it made a tender of my heart, convinced her of the value of it.
Above all things, she professed her extreme pleasure in finding me so
much attached to her understanding, a circumstance that not only
flattered her in the most sensible part, but at the same time argued my
own sagacity. As for the interview I desired, she assured me, that I
could not be more eager for such an occasion than she; but she must not
only sacrifice a little more to decorum, but be satisfied of my
honourable intentions, before she could grant that request. Meanwhile
she gave me to understand that, although she might owe some deference
to the opinion of certain persons, she was resolved, in an affair that
so nearly concerned her happiness, to consult her own inclination,
preferable to the advice of the whole world; especially as she was
urged to such condescension by no consideration of fortune, what she
depended upon being her own without restriction or control. Struck with
admiration at the philosophy and self-denial of my mistress, who seemed
insensible of the beauty she possessed, and in particular ravished with
that piece of intelligence by which I learned her fortune was
independent; I resumed the pen, launched out into encomiums on the
dignity of her sentiments, affected to undervalue the charms of
external beauty, pretended to ground my passion on the qualities of her
mind, complained of her rigour in sacrificing my repose to an
overscrupulous regard to decorum, and declared the purity of my designs
in the most solemn and pathetic vows. This performance being sealed and
directed, was sent to the place appointed by Strap, who, that we might
be still the more confirmed in our belief, renewed his watch, and in a
little time brought back the same information as before, with this
addition, that Miss Sparkle (the name of my correspondent), looking out
at the window, no sooner saw the messenger arrive, than she shut the
casement in a sort of beautiful confusion, and disappeared, eager no
doubt to hear from the dear object of her love.

My doubts now vanished, the long-expected port appeared, and I looked
upon myself as perfectly secure of that happiness I had been in quest
of so long. After dinner, I sauntered in company with Dr. Wagtail, to
that part of the town in which my inamorata lived; and, as he was a
mere register, inquired of him into the name, character, and fortune of
everybody who possessed a good house in the streets through which we
passed. When it came to his turn to mention Sir John Sparkle, he
represented him as a man of an immense estate and narrow disposition,
who mewed up his only child, a fine young lady, from the conversation
of mankind, under the strict watch and inspection of an old governante,
who was either so honest, envious, or insatiable, that nobody had been
as yet able to make her a friend, or get access to her charge, though
numbers attempted it every day; not so much on account of her
expectations from her father, who, being a widower, might marry again
and have sons, as for a fortune of twelve thousand pounds left her by
an uncle, of which she could not be deprived. This piece of news,
exactly tallying with the last part of the letter I had been honoured
with in the morning, had such an effect on me, that any man except
Wagtail might have observed my emotion; but his attention was too much
engrossed by the contemplation of his own importance to suffer him to
be affected with the deportment of any other body, unless it happened
to be so particular that he could not help taking notice of it.

When I had disengaged myself from him, whose conversation grew insipid
to me, I went home, and made Strap acquainted with the fruit of my
researches. This faithful squire was almost choked with transport, and
even wept with joy; but whether on account of himself or me, I shall
not pretend to determine. Next day a third billet-doux was brought to
me, containing many expressions of tenderness, mingled with some
affecting doubts about the artifice of man, the inconstancy of youth,
and the jealousy often attending the most sincere passion; withal
desiring I would excuse her, if she should try me a little longer,
before she declared herself beyond the power of retracting. These
interesting scruples added fuel to my flame and impatience to my hope;
I redoubled my complaints of her indifference, and pressed her to an
assignation with such fervent entreaties, that in a few days she
consented to meet me at the house of that milliner who had forwarded
all my letters. During the interval between the date of her promise and
the hour of appointment, my pride soared beyond all reason and
description; I lost all remembrance of the gentle Narcissa, and my
thoughts were wholly employed in planning triumphs over the malice and
contempt of the world.

At length the happy hour arrived. I flew to the place of rendezvous,
and was conducted into an apartment, where I had not waited ten
minutes, when I heard the rustling of silk, and the sound of feet
ascending the stairs; my heart took the alarm, and beat quick; my
cheeks glowed, my nerves thrilled, and my knees shook with ecstacy! I
perceived the door opening, saw a gold brocade petticoat advance, and
sprang forward to embrace my charmer. Heaven and earth! how shall I
paint my situation, when I found Miss Sparkle converted into a wrinkled
hag turned of seventy! I was struck dumb with amazement, and petrified
with horror! This ancient Urganda, perceived my disorder, and,
approaching with a languishing air, seized my hand, asking in a
squeaking tone, if I was indisposed. Her monstrous affectation
completed the disgust I had conceived for her at her first appearance,
and it was a long time before I could command myself so much as to
behave with common civility: at length, however, I recollected myself,
and pronounced an apology for my behaviour, which I said proceeded from
a dizziness that seized me all of a sudden. My hoary Dulcinea, who, no
doubt, had been alarmed at my confusion, no sooner learned the cause to
which I now ascribed it, than she discovered her joy in a thousand
amorous coquetries, and assumed the sprightly airs of a girl of
sixteen. One while she ogled me with her dim eyes, quenched in rheum;
then, as if she was ashamed of that freedom, she affected to look down,
blush, and play with her fan; then toss her head that I might not
perceive a palsy that shook it, ask some childish questions with a
lisping accent, giggle and grin with her mouth shut to conceal the
ravage of time upon her teeth, leer upon me again, sigh piteously,
fling herself about in her chair to show her agility, and act a great
many more absurdities that youth and beauty can alone excuse. Shocked
as I was at my disappointment, my disposition was incapable of
affronting any person who loved me; I therefore endeavoured to put a
good face to the matter for the present, resolved to drop the whole
affair as soon as I should get clear of her company; with this view, I
uttered some civil things, and in particular desired to know the name
and condition of the lady who had honoured me so much. She told me her
name was Withers, that she lived with Sir John Sparkle in quality of
governess to his only daughter, in which situation she had picked up a
comfortable sufficiency to make her easy for life; that she had the
pleasure of seeing me at church, where my appearance and deportment
made such an impression upon her heart, that she could enjoy no ease
until she had inquired into my character, which she found so amiable in
all respects, that she yielded to the violence of her inclination, and
ventured to declare her passion with too little regard perhaps to the
decorum of her sex; but she hoped I would forgive a trespass of which I
myself was in some measure the cause, and impute her intrusion to the
irresistible dictates of love. No decayed rake ever swallowed a bolus
with more reluctance than I felt in making a reply suitable to this
compliment, when, instead of the jewel, I found the crazy casket only
in my power; and yet my hopes began to revive a little, when I
considered, that, by carrying on the appearance of an intrigue with the
duenna, I might possibly obtain access to her charge. Encouraged by
this suggestion, my temper grew more serene, my reserve wore off, I
talked en cavalier, and even made love to this antiquated coquette, who
seemed extremely happy in her adorer, and spread all her allurements to
make her imagined conquest more secure. The good woman of the house
treated us with tea and sweetmeats, and afterwards withdrew, like a
civil experienced matron as she was.

Left thus to our mutual endearments, Miss Withers (for she was still a
maiden) began to talk of matrimony, and expressed so much impatience in
all her behaviour that, had she been fifty years younger, I might
possibly have gratified her longing without having recourse to the
church; but this step my virtue as well as interest forbade. When the
inclinations of an old maid settle upon a young fellow, he is
persecuted with her addresses; but, should he once grant her the
favour, he will never be able to disentangle himself from her
importunities and reproaches. It was my business to defer the ceremony
as long as possible, under the most specious pretences, with a view of
becoming acquainted with Miss Sparkle in the meantime; and I did not
despair of success, when I considered, that in the course of our
correspondence, I should, in all probability, be invited to visit my
mistress in her own apartment, and by these means have an opportunity
of conversing with her charming ward. Pleased with this prospect, my
heart dilated with joy; I talked in raptures to the state governante,
and kissed her shrivelled hand with great devotion, She was so much
transported with her good fortune, that she could not contain her
ecstacy, but flew upon me like a tigress, and pressed her skinny lips
to mine; when (as it was no doubt concerted by her evil genius) a dose
of garlic she had swallowed that morning, to dispel wind, I suppose,
began to operate with such a sudden explosion, that human nature,
circumstanced as I was, could not endure the shock with any degree of
temper. I lost all patience and reflection, flung away from her in an
instant, snatched my hat and cane, and ran downstairs as if the devil
had me in pursuit, and could scarcely retain the convulsion of my
bowels, which were grievously offended by the perfume that assaulted
me. Strap, who waited my return with impatience, seeing me arrive in
the utmost disorder, stood motionless with apprehension, and durst not
inquire into the cause.

After I had washed my mouth, more than once, and recruited my spirits
with a glass of wine, I recounted to him every particular of what had
happened; to which he made no other reply for some time than lifting up
his eyes, clasping his hands, and uttering a hollow groan. At length he
observed, in a melancholy tone, that it was a thousand pities my organs
were so delicate as to be offended with the smell of garlic. “Ah! God
help us,” said he, “’tis not the steams of garlic, no, nor of something
else, that would give me the least uneasiness—see what it is to be a
cobler’s son!” I replied hastily, “I wish then you would go and
retrieve my miscarriage.” At this suggestion he started, forced a
smile, and left the room, shaking his head. Whether the old gentlewoman
resented my abrupt departure so much that her love changed into
disdain, or was ashamed to see me on account of her infirmity, I know
not; but I was never troubled again with her passion.




CHAPTER LI


I cultivate an Acquaintance with two Noblemen—am introduced to earl
Strutwell—his kind Promise and Invitation—the Behaviour of his Porter
and Lacquey—he receives me with an Appearance of uncommon
Affection—undertakes to speak in my Behalf to the Minister—informs me
of his Success, and wishes me Joy—introduces a Conversation about
Petronius Arbiter—falls in Love with my Watch, which I press upon him—I
make a present of a Diamond Ring to Lord Straddle—impart my good
Fortune to Strap and Banter, who disabuses me, to my utter
Mortification


Baffled hitherto in my matrimonial schemes, I began to question my
talents for the science of fortune-hunting, and to bend my thoughts
towards some employment under the government. With the view of
procuring which, I cultivated the acquaintance of Lords Straddle and
Swillpot, whose fathers were men of interest at court. I found these
young noblemen as open to my advances as I could desire; I accompanied
them in their midnight rambles, and often dined with them at taverns,
where I had the honour of paying the reckoning.

I one day took the opportunity, while I was loaded with protestations
of friendship, to disclose my desire of being settled in some sinecure,
and to solicit their influence in my behalf. Swillpot, squeezing my
hand, said, I might depend upon his service by G—. The other swore that
no man would be more proud than he to run my errands. Encouraged by
these declarations, I ventured to express an inclination to be
introduced to their fathers, who were able to do my business at once.
Swillpot frankly owned he had not spoken to his father these three
years; and Straddle assured me, his father, having lately disobliged
the minister by subscribing his name to a protest in the house of
peers, was thereby rendered incapable of serving his friends at
present; but he undertook to make me acquainted with Earl Strutwell,
who was hand and glove with a certain person who ruled the roast. This
offer I embraced with many acknowledgments, and plied him so closely,
in spite of a thousand evasions, that he found himself under a
necessity of keeping his word, and actually carried me to the levee of
this great man, where he left me in a crowd of fellow-dependents, and
was ushered to a particular closet audience; from whence, in a few
minutes, he returned with his lordship, who took me by the hand,
assured me he would do me all the service he could, and desired to see
me often. I was charmed with my reception, and, although I had heard
that a courtier’s promise is not to be depended upon, I thought I
discovered so much sweetness of temper and candour in this earl’s
countenance, that I did not doubt of finding my account in his
protection. I resolved therefore to profit by this permission, and
waited on him next audience day, when I was favoured with a particular
smile, squeeze of the hand, and a whisper, signifying that he wanted
half-an-hour’s conversation with me in private, when he should be
disengaged, and for that purpose desired me to come and drink a dish of
chocolate with him to-morrow morning.

This invitation, which did not a little flatter my vanity and
expectation, I took care to observe, and went to his lordship’s house
at the time appointed. Having rapped at the gate, the porter unbolted
and kept it half open, placing himself in the gap, like soldiers in the
broach, to dispute my passage. I asked if his lord was stirring? He
answered with a surly aspect, “No.” “At what hour does he commonly
rise?” said I. “Sometimes sooner, sometimes later,” said he, closing
the door upon me by degrees. I then told him I was come by his
lordship’s own appointment, to which intimation this Cerberus replied,
“I have received no orders about the matter,” and was upon the point of
shutting me out, when I recollected myself all of a sudden, and
slipping a crown into his hand, begged as a favour that he would
inquire, and let me know whether or not the earl was up. The grim
janitor relented at the touch of my money, which he took with all the
indifference of a taxgatherer, and showed me into a parlour, where, he
said, I might amuse myself till such time as his lord should be awake.
I had not sat ten minutes in this place, when a footman entered, and,
without speaking, started at me; I interpreted this piece of his
behaviour into, “Pray, sir, what is your business?” and asked the same
question I had put to the porter, when I accosted him first. The
lacquey made the same reply, and disappeared before I could get any
further intelligence. In a little time he returned, on pretence of
poking the fire, and looked at me again with great earnestness; upon
which I began to perceive his meaning, and, tipping him with
half-a-crown, desired he would be so good as to fall upon some method
of letting the earl know that I was in the house. He made a low bow,
said, “Yes, sir,” and vanished. This bounty was not thrown away, for in
an instant he came back, and conducted me to a chamber, where I was
received with great kindness and familiarity by his lordship, whom I
found just risen, in his morning-gown, and slippers. After breakfast,
he entered into a particular conversation with me about my travels, the
remarks I had made abroad, and examined me to the full extent of my
understanding. My answers seemed to please him very much, he frequently
squeezed my hand, and, looking at me with a singular complacency in his
countenance, bade me depend upon his good offices with the ministry in
my behalf. “Young men of your qualifications,” said he, “ought to be
cherished by every administration. For my own part, I see so little
merit in the world, that I have laid it down as a maxim, to encourage
the least appearance of genius and virtue to the utmost of my power:
you have a great deal of both; and will not fail of making a figure one
day, if I am not mistaken; but you must lay your account with mounting
by gradual steps to the summit of your fortune. Rome was not built in a
day. As you understand the languages perfectly well, how would you like
to cross the sea as secretary to an embassy?” I assured his lordship,
with great eagerness, that nothing could be more agreeable to my
inclination: upon which he bade me make myself easy, my business was
done, for he had a place of that kind in his view. This piece of
generosity affected me so much, that I was unable for some time to
express my gratitude, which at length broke out in acknowledgments of
my own unworthiness, and encomiums on his benevolence. I could not even
help shedding tears at the goodness of this noble lord, who no sooner
perceived them than he caught me in his arms, and hugged and kissed me
with a seemingly paternal affection. Confounded at this uncommon
instance of fondness for a stranger, I remained a few moments silent
and ashamed; then rose and took my leave, after he had assured me that
he would speak to the minister in my favour that very day; and desired
that I would not for the future give myself the trouble of attending at
his levee, but come at the same hour every day, when he should be at
leisure, that is, three times a week.

Though my hopes were now very sanguine, I determined to conceal my
prospect from everybody, even from Strap, until I should be more
certain of success: and in the meantime give my patron no respite from
my solicitations. When I renewed my visit, I found the street-door
opened to me as if by enchantment; but in my passage towards the
presence-room, I was met by the valet-de-chambre, who cast some furious
looks at me the meaning of which I could not comprehend. The earl
saluted me at entrance with a tender embrace, and wished me joy of his
success with the Premier, who, he said, had preferred his
recommendation to that of two other noblemen very urgent in behalf of
their respective friends, and absolutely promised that I should go to a
certain foreign court in quality of secretary to an ambassador and
plenipotentiary who was to set out in a few weeks an affair of vast
importance to the nation. I was thunderstruck with my good fortune, and
could make no other reply than kneel and attempt to kiss my
benefactor’s hand, which submission he would not permit; but, raising
me up, pressed me to his breast with surprising emotion, and told me he
had now taken upon himself the care of making my fortune. What enhanced
the value of the benefit still the more, was his making light of the
favour, and shifting the conversation to another subject.

Among other topics of discourse, that of the Belles Lettres was
introduced, upon which his lordship held forth with great taste and
erudition and discovered an intimate knowledge of the authors of
antiquity, “Here’s a book,” said he, taking one from his bosom,
“written with great elegance and spirit; and, though the subject may
give offence to some narrow-minded people, the author will always be
held in esteem by every person of wit and learning.” So saying, he put
into my hand Petronius Arbiter, and asked my opinion of his wit and
manner. I told him, that, in my opinion, he wrote with great ease and
vivacity, but was withal so lewd and indecent that he ought to find no
quarter or protection among people of morals and taste. “I own,”
replied the earl, “that his taste in love is generally decried, and
indeed condemned by our laws; but perhaps that may be more owing to
prejudice and misapprehension than to true reason and deliberation. The
best man among the ancients is said to have entertained that passion;
one of the wisest of their legislators has permitted the indulgence of
it in his commonwealth; the most celebrated poets have not scrupled to
avow it. At this day it prevails not only over all the East, but in
most parts of Europe; in our own country, it gains ground apace, and in
all probability will become in a short time a more, fashionable vice
than simple fornication. Indeed there is something to be said in
vindication of it; for, notwithstanding the severity of the law against
offenders in this way, it must be confessed that the practice of this
passion is unattended with that curse and burthen upon society which
proceeds from a race of miserable and deserted bastards, who are either
murdered by their parents, deserted to the utmost want and
wretchedness, or bred up to prey upon the commonwealth: and it likewise
prevents the debauchery of many a young maiden, and the prostitution of
honest men’s wives; not to mention the consideration of health, which
is much less liable to be impaired in the gratification of this
appetite, than in the exercise of common venery, which, by ruining the
constitutions of our young men, has produced a puny progeny that
degenerates from generation to generation. Nay, I have been told, that
there is another motive perhaps more powerful than all these, that
induces people to cultivate this inclination; namely, the exquisite
pleasure attending its success.”

From this discourse I began to be apprehensive that his lordship,
finding I had travelled, was afraid I might have been infected with
this spurious and sordid desire abroad, and took this method of
sounding my sentiments on the subject. Fired at this supposed
suspicion, I argued against it with great warmth, as an appetite
unnatural, absurd, and of pernicious consequence; and declared my utter
detestation and abhorrence of it in these lines of the satirist:—

Eternal infamy the wretch confound
Who planted first that vice on British ground!
A vice! That spite of nature and sense reigns,
And poisons genial love, and manhood stains.


The earl smiled at my indignation, and told me he was glad to find my
opinion of the matter so conformable to his own, and that what he had
advanced was only to provoke me to an answer, with which he professed
himself perfectly well pleased. After I had enjoyed a long audience, I
happened to look at my watch, in order to regulate my motions by it;
and his lordship, observing the chased case, desired to see the device,
and examine the exception, which he approved with some expressions of
admiration. Considering the obligations I lay under to his lordship, I
thought there could not be a fitter opportunity than the present to
manifest, in some shape, my gratitude; I therefore begged he would do
me the honour to accept of the watch as a small testimony of the sense
I had of his lordship’s generosity; but, he refused it in a peremptory
manner, and said he was sorry I should entertain such a mercenary
opinion of him; observing at the same time, that it was the most
beautiful piece of workmanship he had ever seen, and desiring to know
where he could have such another. I begged a thousand pardons for the
freedom I had taken, which I hoped he would impute to nothing else than
the highest veneration for his person—told him, that, as it came to my
hand by accident in France, I could give him no information about the
maker, for there was no name on the inside; and once more humbly
entreated that he would indulge me so far as to use it for my sake. He
was still positive in refusing it; but was pleased to thank me for my
generous offer, saying, it was a present that no nobleman need be
ashamed of receiving: though he was resolved to show his
disinterestedness with regard to me, for whom he had conceived a
particular friendship; and insisted (if I were willing to part with the
watch) upon knowing what it had cost, that he might at least indemnify
me, by refunding the money. On the other hand, I assured his lordship
that I should look upon it as an uncommon mark of distinction, if he
would take it without further question; and, rather than disoblige me,
he was at last persuaded to put it in his pocket, to my no small
satisfaction, who took my leave immediately, after having received a
kind squeeze, and an injunction to depend upon his promise.

Buoyed up with this reception, my heart opened; I gave away a guinea,
among the lacqueys, who escorted me to the door, flew to the lodgings
of Lord Straddle, upon whom I forced my diamond ring as an
acknowledgment for the great service he had done me, and from thence
hied me home, with an intent of sharing my happiness with honest Strap.
I determined, however, to heighten his pleasure, by depressing his
spirits at first, and then bringing in good news with double relish.
For this purpose, I affected the appearance of disappointment and
chagrin, and told him in an abrupt manner that I had lost the watch and
diamond. Poor Hugh, who had been already harassed into a consumption by
intelligence of this sort, no sooner heard these words, than, unable to
contain himself, he cried, with distraction in his looks, “God in
heaven forbid!” I could carry on the farce no longer; but, laughing in
his face, told him everything that had passed, as above recited. His
features were immediately unbended, and the transition was so
affecting, that he wept with joy, calling my Lord Strutwell by the
appellations of Jewel, Phoenix, Rara avis; and praising God, that there
was still some virtue left among our nobility. Our mutual
congratulations being over, we gave way to our imagination, and
anticipated our happiness by prosecuting our success through the
different steps of promotion, till I arrived at the rank of a prime
minister, and he to that of my first secretary.

Intoxicated with these ideas, I went to the ordinary, where, meeting
with Banter, I communicated the whole affair in confidence to him,
concluding with an assurance that I would do him all the service in my
power. He heard me to an end with great patience, then regarding me a
good while with a look of disdain, pronounced, “So your business is
done, you think?” “As good as done. I believe,” said I. “I’ll tell
you,” replied he, “what will do it still more effectually—a halter!
’Sdeath! if I had been such a gull to two such scoundrels as Strutwell
and Straddle, I would, without any more ado, tuck myself up.” Shocked
at this exclamation, I desired him with some confusion to explain
himself; upon which he gave me to understand that Straddle was a poor
contemptible wretch, who lived by borrowing and pimping for his
fellow-peers; that in consequence of this last capacity, he had
doubtless introduced me to Strutwell, who was so notorious for a
passion for his own sex that he was amazed his character had never
reached my ears; and that, far from being able to obtain for me the
post he had promised, his interest at court was so low, that he could
scarce provide for a superannuated footman once a year in the customs
or excise; that it was a common thing for him to amuse strangers, whom
his jackals ran down, with such assurances and caresses as he had
bestowed on me, until he had stripped them of their cash, and
everything valuable about them, very often of their chastity, and then
leave them a prey to want and infamy: that he allowed his servants no
other wages than that part of the spoil which they could glean by their
industry; and the whole of his conduct towards me was so glaring, that
nobody who knew anything of mankind could have been imposed upon by his
insinuations.

I leave the reader to judge how I relished this piece of information,
which precipitated me from the most exalted pinnacle of hope to the
lowest abyss of despondence, and well nigh determined me to take
Banter’s advice and finish my chagrin with a halter. I had no room to
suspect the veracity of my friend, because, upon recollection, I found
every circumstance of Strutwell’s behaviour exactly tallying with the
character he had described; his hugs, embraces, squeezes, and eager
looks, were now no longer a mystery; no more than his defence of
Petronius, and the jealous frown of his valet-de-chambre, who, it
seems, had been the favourite pathic of his lord.




CHAPTER LII


I attempt to recover my Watch and Jewel, but to no Purpose—resolve to
revenge myself on Strutwell by my Importunity—am reduced to my last
Guinea—obliged to inform Strap of my Necessity, who is almost
distracted with the News, but nevertheless obliged to pawn my best
Sword for present Subsistence—that small Supply being exhausted, I am
almost stupified with my Misfortunes—go to the Gaming Table by the
Advice of Banter, and come off with unexpected Success—Strap’s
Ecstacy—Mrs. Gawky waits upon me, professes Remorse for her Perfidy,
and implores my Assistance—I do myself a Piece of Justice by her Means,
and afterwards reconcile her to her Father


I was so confounded that I could make no reply to Banter, who
reproached me with great indignation for having thrown away upon
rascals that which, had it been converted into ready money, would have
supported the rank of a gentleman for some months, and enabled me, at
the same time, to oblige my friends. Stupified as I was, I could easily
divine the source of his concern, but sneaked away in a solitary
manner, without yielding the least answer to his expostulations; and
began to deliberate within myself in what manner I should attempt to
retrieve the movables I had so foolishly lost. I should have thought it
no robbery to take them again by force, could I have done it without
any danger of being detected; but, as I could have no such opportunity,
I resolved to work by finesse, and go immediately to the lodgings of
Straddle, where I was so fortunate as to find him. “My Lord,” said I,
“I have just now recollected, that the diamond I had the honour of
presenting to you is loosened a little in the socket, and there is a
young fellow just arrived from Paris, who is reckoned the best jeweller
in Europe; I knew him in France; and, if your lordship will give me
leave, will carry the ring to him to be set to rights.” His lordship
was not to be caught in this snare; he thanked me for my offer, and
told me, that, having himself observed the defect, he had sent it to
his own jeweller to be mended; and, indeed, by this time I believe it
was in the jeweller’s hands, though not in order to be mended, for it
stood in need of no alteration.

Balked in this piece of politics, I cursed my simplicity; but resolved
to play a surer game with the earl, which I thus devised. I did not
doubt of being admitted into familiar conversation with him, as before,
and hoped by some means to get the watch into my hand; then, on
pretence of winding or playing with it, drop it on the floor, when, in
all probability, the fall would disorder the work so as to stop its
motion; this event would furnish me with an opportunity of insisting
upon carrying it away in order to be repaired, and then I should be in
no hurry to bring it back. What pity it was I could not find an
occasion of putting this fine scheme in execution! When I went to renew
my visit to his lordship, my access to the parlour was as free as ever;
but after I had waited for some time, the valet-de-chambre came in with
his lord’s compliments, and a desire to see me to-morrow at his levee,
he being at present so much indisposed that he could not see company. I
interpreted this message into a bad omen, and came away muttering
curses against his lordship’s politeness, and ready to go to
loggerheads with myself for being so egregiously duped. But, that I
might have some satisfaction for the loss I had sustained, I besieged
him so closely at his levee, and persecuted him with my solicitations;
not without faint hopes, indeed, of reaping something more from my
industry than the bare pleasure of making him uneasy; though I could
never obtain another private hearing the whole course of my attendance;
neither had I resolution enough to undeceive Strap, whose looks in a
little time were so whetted with impatience, that whenever I came home,
his eyes devoured me, as it were, with eagerness of attention.

At length, however, finding myself reduced to my last guinea, I was
compelled to disclose my necessity, though I endeavoured to sweeten the
discovery by rehearsing to him the daily assurances I received from my
patron. But these promises were not of efficacy sufficient to support
the spirits of my friend, who no sooner understood the lowness of my
finances, than, uttering a dreadful groan, he exclaimed, “In the name
of God, what shall we do?” In order to comfort him, I said, that many
of my acquaintances, who were in a worse condition than we, supported,
notwithstanding, the character of gentlemen; and advising him to thank
God that as yet we had incurred no debt, proposed he should pawn my
sword of steel, inlaid with gold, and trust to my discretion for the
rest. This expedient was wormwood and gall to poor Strap, who, in spite
of his invincible affection for me, still retained notions of economy
and expense suitable to the narrowness of his education; nevertheless
he complied with my request, and raised seven pieces on the sword in a
twinkling. This supply, inconsiderable as it was, made me as happy for
the present, as if I had kept five hundred pounds in bank; for by this
time I was so well skilled in procrastinating every troublesome
reflection, that the prospect of want seldom affected me very much, let
it be ever so near. And now indeed it was nearer than I imagined. My
landlord, having occasion for money, put me in mind of my being
indebted to him five guineas in lodging; and, telling me he had a sum
to make up, begged I would excuse his importunity, and discharge the
debt. Though I could ill spare so much cash, my pride took the
resolution of disbursing it. This I did in a cavalier manner, after he
had written a discharge, telling him with an air of scorn and
resentment, I saw he was resolved that I should not be long in his
books; while Strap, who stood by, and knew my circumstances, wrung his
hands in secret, gnawed his nether lip, and turned yellow with despair.
Whatever appearance of indifference my vanity enabled me to put on, I
was thunderstruck with this demand, which I had no sooner satisfied,
than I hastened into company, with a view of beguiling my cares with
conversation, or drowning them with wine.

After dinner, a party was accordingly made in the coffee-house, from
whence we adjourned to the tavern, where, instead of sharing the mirth
of the company, I was as much chagrined at their good humour as a
damned soul in hell would be at a glimpse of heaven. In vain did I
swallow bumper after bumper! the wine had lost its effect upon me, and,
far from raising my dejected spirits, could not even lay me asleep.
Banter, who was the only intimate I had (Strap excepted), perceived my
anxiety, and, when we broke up, reproached me with pusillanimity, for
being cast down at my disappointment that such a rascal as Strutwell
could be the occasion of. I told him I did not at all see how
Strutwell’s being a rascal alleviated my misfortune; and gave him to
understand that my present grief did not so much proceed from that
disappointment, as from the low ebb of my fortune, which was sunk to
something less than two guineas. At this declaration he cried, “Psha!
is that all?” and assured me there were a thousand ways of living in
town without a fortune, he himself having subsisted many years entirely
by his wit. I expressed an eager desire of being acquainted with some
of these methods, and he, without farther expostulation, bade me follow
him. He conducted me to a house under the piazzas in Covert Garden,
which we entered, and having delivered our swords to a grim fellow who
demanded them at the foot of the staircase, ascended to the second
story, where I saw multitudes of people standing round two
gaming-tables, loaded, in a manner, with gold and silver. My conductor
told me this was the house of a worthy Scotch lord, who, using the
privilege of his peerage, had set up public gaming tables, from the
profits of which he drew a comfortable livelihood. He then explained
the difference between the sitters and the bettors; characterised the
first as old rooks, and the last as bubbles; and advised me to try my
fortune at the silver table, by betting a crown at a time. Before I
would venture anything, I considered the company more particularly, and
there appeared such a group of villanous faces, that I was struck with
horror and astonishment at the sight! I signified my surprise to
Banter, who whispered in my ear, that the bulk of those present were
sharpers, highwaymen, and apprentices, who, having embezzled their
master’s cash, made a desperate push in this place to make up their
deficiencies. This account did not encourage me to hazard any part of
my small pittance: but, at length, being teased by the importunities of
my friend, who assured me there was no danger of being ill-used,
because people were hired by the owner to see justice done to
everybody, I began by risking one shilling, and, in less than an hour,
my winning amounted to thirty. Convinced by this time of the fairness
of the game, and animated with success, there was no need of further
persuasion to continue the play: I lent Banter (who seldom had any
money in his pocket) a guinea, which he carried to the gold table, and
lost in a moment. He would have borrowed another, but finding me deaf
to his arguments, went away in a pet. Meanwhile my gain advanced to six
pieces, and my desire of more increased in proportion: so that I moved
to the higher table, where I laid half-a-guinea on every throw, and
fortune still favouring me, I became a sitter, in which capacity I
remained until it was broad day; when I found myself, after many
vicissitudes, one hundred and fifty guineas in pocket.

Thinking it now high time to retire with my booty, I asked if anybody
would take my place, and made a notion to rise; upon which an old
Gascon, who sat opposite to me, and of whom I had won a little money,
started up with fury in his looks, crying, “Restez, foutre, restez! il
faut donner moi mon ravanchio!” At the same time, a Jew, who sat near
the other, insinuated that I was more beholden to art than fortune for
what I had got; that he had observed me wipe the table very often, and
that some of the divisions appeared to be greasy. This intimation
produced a great deal of clamour against me, especially among the
losers, who threatened with many oaths and imprecations, to take me up
by a warrant as a sharper, unless I would compromise the affair by
refunding the greatest part of my winning. Though I was far from being
easy under his accusation, I relied upon my innocence, threatened in my
turn to prosecute the Jew, for defamation, and boldly offered to submit
my cause to the examination of any justice in Westminster; but they
knew themselves too well to put their characters on that issue, and
finding that I was not to be intimidated into any concession, dropped
their plea, and made way for me to withdraw. I would not, however, stir
from the table until the Israelite had retracted what he had said to my
disadvantage, and asked pardon before the whole assembly.

As I marched out with my prize, I happened to tread on the toes of a
tall raw-boned fellow, with a hooked nose, fierce eyes, black thick
eyebrows, a pigtail wig of the same colour, and a formidable hat pulled
over his forehead, who stood gnawing his fingers in the crowd, and he
sooner felt the application of my shoe heel, than he roared out in a
tremendous voice, “Blood and wounds! you son of a whore, what’s that
for?” I asked pardon with a great deal of submission, and protested I
had no intention of hurting him; but the more I humbled myself the more
he stormed, and insisted on gentlemanly satisfaction, at the same time
provoking me with scandalous names that I could not put up with; so
that I gave loose to my passion, returned his Billingsgate, and
challenged him down to the piazzas. His indignation cooling as mine
warmed, he refused my invitation, saying he would choose his own time,
and returned towards the table muttering threats, which I neither
dreaded nor distinctly heard; but, descending with great deliberation,
received my sword from the door-keeper, whom I gratified with a guinea,
according to the custom of the place, and went home in a rapture of
joy.

My faithful valet, who had set up all night in the utmost uneasiness on
my account, let me in with his face beslubbered with tears, and
followed me to my chamber, where he stood silent like a condemned
criminal, in expectation of hearing that every shilling was spent, I
guessed the situation of his thoughts, and, assuming a sullen look,
bade him fetch me some water to wash. He replied, without lifting his
eyes from the ground, “In my simple conjecture, you have more occasion
for rest, not having (I suppose) slept these four-and-twenty hours.”
“Bring me some water!” said I, in a peremptory tone; upon which he
sneaked away shrugging his shoulders. Before he returned, I had spread
my whole stock on the table in the most ostentatious manner; so that,
when it first saluted his view, he stood like one entranced; and,
having rubbed his eyes more than once, to assure himself of his being
awake, broke out into, “Lord have mercy upon us, what a vast treasure
is here!” “’Tis all our own, Strap,” said I; “take what is necessary,
and redeem the sword immediately.” He advanced towards the table,
stopped short by the way, looked at the money and me by turns, and with
a wildness in his countenance, produced from joy checked by distrust,
cried, “I dare say it is honestly come by.” To remove his scruples, I
made him acquainted with the whole story of my success, which, when he
heard, he danced about the room in an ecstacy, crying, “God be
praised!—a white stone!—God be praised!—a white stone!” So that I was
afraid the change of fortune had disordered his intellects, and that he
was run mad with joy. Extremely concerned at this event, I attempted to
reason him out of his frenzy, but to no purpose; for without regarding
what I said, he continued to frisk up and down, and repeat his
rhapsody, of “God be praised!—a white stone!” At last, I rose in the
utmost consternation, and, laying violent hands upon him, put a stop to
his extravagance by fixing him down to a settee that was in the room.
This constraint banished his delirium; he started as if just awoke, and
terrified at my behaviour, cried, “What is the matter!” When he learned
the cause of my apprehension, he was ashamed of his transports, and
told me, that in mentioning the white stone, he alluded to the Dies
fasti of the Romans, albo lapide notati.

Having no inclination to sleep, I secured my cash, dressed, and was
just going abroad, when the servant of the house told me, there was a
gentlewoman at the door who wanted to speak with me. Surprised at this
information, I made Strap show her up, and in less than a minute, saw a
young woman of a shabby decayed appearance enter my room. After
half-a-dozen curtsies, she began to sob, and told me her name was
Gawky; upon which information I immediately recollected the features of
Miss Lavement, who had been the first occasion of my misfortunes.
Though I had all the reason in the world to resent her treacherous
behaviour to me, I was moved at her distress, and professing my sorrow
at seeing her so reduced desired her to sit, and inquired into the
particulars of her situation. She fell upon her knees and implored my
forgiveness for the injuries she had done me, protesting before God,
that she was forced, against her inclination, into that hellish
conspiracy which had almost deprived me of my life, by the entreaties
of her husband, who, having been afterwards renounced by his father on
account of his marriage with her, and unable to support a family on his
pay, left his wife at her father’s house, and went with the regiment to
Germany, where he was broke for misbehaviour at the battle of
Dettingen; since which time she had heard no tidings of him. She then
gave me to understand, with many symptoms of penitence, that it was her
misfortune to bear a child four months after marriage, by which event
her parents were so incensed, that she was turned out of doors with the
infant, that died soon after: and had hitherto subsisted in a miserable
indigent manner, on the extorted charity of a few friends, who were now
quite tired of giving; that, not knowing where or how to support
herself one day longer, she had fled for succour even to me, who, of
all mankind, had the least cause to assist her, relying upon the
generosity of my disposition, which, she hoped, would be pleased with
this opportunity of avenging itself in the noblest manner on the wretch
who had wronged me. I was very much affected with her discourse and,
having no cause to suspect the sincerity of her repentance, raised her
up, freely pardoned all she had done against me, and promised to
befriend her as much as lay in my power.

Since my last arrival in London, I had made no advances to the
apothecary, imagining it would be impossible for me to make my
innocence appear, so unhappily was my accusation circumstanced: Strap
indeed had laboured to justify me to the schoolmaster; but, far from
succeeding in his attempt, Mr. Concordance dropped all correspondence
with him, because he refused to quit his connection with me. Things
being in this situation, I thought a fairer opportunity of vindicating
my character could not offer than that which now presented itself; I
therefore stipulated with Mrs. Gawky, that before I would yield her the
least assistance, she should do me the justice to clear my reputation
by explaining upon oath before a magistrate the whole of the
conspiracy, as it had been executed against me. When she had given me
this satisfaction, I presented her with five guineas, a sum so much
above her expectation, that she could scarce believe the evidence of
her senses, and was ready to worship me for my benevolence. The
declaration, signed with her own hand, I sent to her father, who, upon
recollecting and comparing the circumstances of my charge, was
convinced of my integrity, and waited on me next day, in company with
his friend the schoolmaster, to whom he had communicated my
vindication. After mutual salutation, Monsieur Lavement began a long
apology for the unjust treatment I had received; but I saved him a good
deal of breath by interrupting his harangue, and assuring him that, far
from entertaining a resentment against him, I thought myself obliged to
his lenity, which allowed me to escape, after such strong assumptions
of guilt appeared against me. Mr. Concordance, thinking it now his turn
to speak, observed that Mr. Random had too much candour and sagacity to
be disobliged at their conduct, which, all things considered, could not
have been otherwise with any honesty of intention. “Indeed,” said he,
“if the plot had been unravelled to us by any supernatural
intelligence; if it had been whispered by a genius, communicated by
dream, or revealed by an angel from on high, we should have been to
blame in crediting ocular demonstration; but as we were left in the
midst of mortality, it cannot be expected we should be incapable of
imposition. I must assure you, Mr. Random, no man on earth is more
pleased than I am at this triumph of your character: and, as the news
of your misfortune panged me to the very entrails, this manifestation
of your innocence makes my midriff quiver with joy.” I thanked him for
this concern, desired them to undeceive those of their acquaintance who
judged harshly of me, and, having treated them with a glass of wine,
represented to Lavement the deplorable condition of his daughter, and
pleaded her cause so effectually, that he consented to settle a small
annuity on her for life: but could not be persuaded to take her home,
because her mother was so much incensed, that she would never see her.




CHAPTER LIII


I purchase new Clothes—reprimand Strutwell and Straddle—Banter proposes
another matrimonial Scheme—I accept of his Terms—set out to Bath in the
Stage-coach with the young Lady and her Mother—the Behaviour of an
Officer and Lawyer—our fellow Travellers described—a smart dialogue
between my Mistress and the Captain


Having finished this affair to my satisfaction, I found myself
perfectly at ease; and, looking upon the gaming-table as a certain
resource for a gentleman in want, became more gay than ever. Although
my clothes were almost as good as new, I grew ashamed of wearing them,
because I thought everybody by this time had got an inventory of my
wardrobe. For which reason I disposed of a good part of my apparel to a
salesman in Monmouth Street for half the value, and bought two new
suits with the money. I likewise purchased a plain gold watch,
despairing of recovering that which I had so foolishly given to
Strutwell, whom, notwithstanding, I still continued to visit at his
levee, until the ambassador he had mentioned set out with a secretary
of his own choosing. I thought myself then at liberty to expostulate
with his lordship, whom I treated with great freedom in a letter, for
amusing me with vain hopes, when he neither had the power nor
inclination to provide for me. Nor was I less reserved with Straddle,
whom I in person reproached for misrepresenting to me the character of
Strutwell, which I did not scruple to aver was infamous in every
respect. He seemed very much enraged at my freedom, talked a great deal
about his quality and honour, and began to make some comparisons which
I thought so injurious to mine, that I demanded an explanation with
great warmth, and he was mean enough to equivocate, and condescend in
such a manner that I left him with a hearty contempt of his behaviour.

About this time, Banter, who had observed a surprising and sudden
alteration in my appearance and disposition, began to inquire very
minutely into the cause, and, as I did not think fit to let him know
the true state of the affair, lest he might make free with my purse, on
the strength of having proposed the scheme that filled it, I told him
that I had received a small supply from a relation in the country, who
at the same time had proffered to use all his interest (which was not
small) in soliciting some post for me that should make me easy for
life. “If that be the case,” said Banter, “perhaps you won’t care to
mortify yourself a little in making your fortune another way. I have a
relation who is to set out for Bath next week, with an only daughter,
who being sickly and decrepit, intends to drink the waters for the
recovery of her health. Her father, who was a rich Turkey merchant,
died about a year ago, and left her with a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, under the sole management of her mother, who is my kinswoman. I
would have put in for the plate myself, but there is a breach at
present between the old woman and me. You must know, that some time ago
I borrowed a small sum of her and promised, it seems, to pay it before
a certain time; but being disappointed in my expectation of money from
the country, the day elapsed without my being able to take up my note;
upon which she wrote a peremptory letter, threatening to arrest me, if
I did not pay the debt immediately. Nettled at this precise behaviour,
I sent a d—d severe answer, which enraged her so much that she actually
took out a writ against me. Whereupon, finding the thing grow serious,
I got a friend to advance the money for me, discharged the debt, went
to her house, and abused her for her unfriendly dealing. She was
provoked by my reproaches, and scolded in her turn. The little deformed
urchin joined her mother with such virulence and volubility of tongue,
that I was fain to make a retreat, after having been honoured with a
great many scandalous epithets, which gave me plainly to understand
that I had nothing to hope from the esteem of the one, or the affection
of the other. As they are both utter strangers to life, it is a
thousand to one that the girl will be picked up by some scoundrel or
other at Bath, if I don’t provide for her otherwise. You are a
well-looking fellow, Random, and can behave as demurely as a quaker. If
you will give me an obligation of five hundred pounds, to be paid six
months after your marriage, I will put you in a method of carrying her
in spite of all opposition.”

This proposal was too advantageous for me to be refused. The writing
was immediately drawn up and executed; and Banter, giving me notice of
the time when, and the stage coach in which they were to set out, I
bespoke a place in the same convenience; and, having hired a horse for
Strap, who was chagrined with the prospect, set forward accordingly.

As we embarked before day, I had not the pleasure for some time of
seeing Miss Snapper (that was the name of my mistress), nor even of
perceiving the number and sex of my fellow travellers, although I
guessed that the coach was full, by the difficulty I found in seating
myself. The first five minutes passed in a general silence, when, all
of a sudden, the coach heeling to one side, a boisterous voice
pronounced, “To the right and left, cover your flanks, d—me! whiz!” I
easily discovered by the tone and matter of this exclamation that it
was uttered by a son of Mars; neither was it hard to conceive the
profession of another person who sat opposite to me, and observed that
we ought to have been well satisfied of our security before we entered
upon the premises. These two sallies had not the desired effect. We
continued a good while as mute as before, till at length the gentleman
of the sword, impatient of longer silence, made a second effort, by
swearing he had got into a meeting of quakers. “I believe so too,” said
a shrill female voice at my left hand, “for the spirit of folly begins
to move.” “Out with it then, madam!” replied the soldier. “You seem to
have no occasion for a midwife,” cried the lady. “D—mn my blood!”
exclaimed the other, “a man can’t talk to a woman, but she immediately
thinks of a midwife.” “True sir,” said she, “I long to be delivered.”
“What of—a mouse, madam?” said he. “No, Sir,” said she, “of a fool.”
“Are you far gone with a fool?” said he. “Little more than two miles,”
said she. “By Gad, you’re a wit, madam,” cried the officer, “I wish I
could with any justice return the compliment,” said the lady. “Zounds,
I have done,” said he. “Your bolt is soon shot, according to the old
proverb,” said she. The warrior’s powder was quite spent; the lawyer
advised him to drop the prosecution, and a grave matron, who sat on the
left hand of the victorious wit, told her she must not let her tongue
run so fast among strangers. This reprimand, softened with the
appellation of child, convinced me that the satirical lady was no other
than Miss Snapper, and I resolved to regulate my conduct accordingly.
The champion, finding himself so smartly handled, changed his battery,
and began to expatiate on his own exploits. “You talk of shot, madam,”
said he; “d—me! I have both given and received some shot in my time—I
was wounded in the shoulder by a pistol ball at Dettingen, where—I say
nothing—but by G—d! if it had not been for me—all’s one for that—I
despise boasting, d—me! whiz!” So saying, he whistled one part and
hummed another, of the Black Joke; then, addressing himself to the
lawyer, went on thus; “Wouldn’t you think it d—d hard, after having, at
the risk of your life, recovered the standard of a regiment that had
been lost, to receive no preferment for your pains? I don’t choose to
name no names, sink me! but, howsomever, this I will refer, by G—d! and
that is this—a musketeer of the French guards, having a standard from a
certain cornet of a certain regiment, d—e! was retreating with his
prize as fast as his horse’s heels could carry him, sink me! Upon
which, I snatched up firelock that belonged to a dead man, d—me! Whiz!
and shot his horse under him, d—n my blood! The fellow got upon his
feet, and began to repose me, upon which I charged my bayonet breast
high, and ran him through the body by G—! One of his comrades, coming
to his assistance, shot me in the shoulder, as I told you before; and
another gave me a contusion on the head with the butt-end of his
carbine; but, d—me, that did not signify. I killed one, put the other
to flight, and taking up the standard, carried it off very
deliberately. But the best joke of all was the son of a b—ch of a
cornet, who had surrendered it in a cowardly manner, seeing it in my
possession, demanded it from me in the front of the line. “D—n my
blood!” says he, “where did you find my standard?” says he. “D—n my
blood!” said I, “where,” said I, “did you lose it?” said I. “That’s
nothing to you,” says he, “’tis my standard,” says he” and by G—d I’ll
have it,” says he. “D—nation seize me,” says I, “if you shall,” says I,
“till I have first delivered it to the general,” says I; and
accordingly I went to the headquarters after the battle, and delivered
it to my Lord Stair, who promised to do for me. But I am no more than a
poor lieutenant still, d—n my blood.”

Having vented this repetition of expletives, the lawyer owned he had
not been requited according to his deserts; observed that the labourer
is always worthy of his hire, and asked if the promise was made before
witnesses, because in that case the law would compel the general to
perform it; but understanding that the promise was made over a bottle,
without being restricted to time or terms, he pronounced it not valid
in law, proceeded to inquire into the particulars of the battle, and
affirmed that, although the English had drawn themselves into premunire
at first, the French managed their cause so lamely in the course of the
dispute, that they would have been utterly nonsuited, had they not
obtained a nolli prosequi. In spite of these enlivening touches, the
conversation was like to suffer another long interruption, when the
lieutenant, unwilling to conceal any of his accomplishments that could
be displayed in his present situation, offered to regale the company
with a song; and, interpreting our silence into a desire of hearing,
began to warble a fashionable air the first stanza of which he
pronounced thus:

“Would you task the moon-tide hair,
To yon flagrant beau repair.
Where waving with the poplin vow,
The bantling fine will shelter you,” etc.


The sense of the rest he perverted as he went on with such surprising
facility that I could not help thinking he had been at some pains to
burlesque the performance. Miss Snapper ascribed it to the true cause,
namely ignorance; and, when he asked her how she relished his music,
answered that, in her opinion, the music and the words were much of a
piece. “Oh, d—n my blood!” said he “I take that as a high compliment;
for everybody allows the words are d—able fine.” “They may be so,”
replied the lady, “for aught I know, but they are above my
comprehension.” “I an’t obliged to find you comprehension, madam, curse
me!” cried he. “No, nor to speak sense neither,” said she. “D—n my
heart,” said he, “I’ll speak what I please.” Here the lawyer
interposed, by telling him, there were some things he must not speak;
and upon being defied to give an instance, mentioned treason and
defamation. “As for the king,” cried the soldier, “God bless him—I eat
his bread, and have lost blood in his cause, therefore I have nothing
to say to him—but, by G—d, I dare say anything to any other man.” “No,”
said the lawyer, “you dare not call me rogue.” “D—me, for what?” said
the other. “Because,” replied the counsellor, “I should have it good
action against you, and recover.” “Well, well,” cried the officer, “if
I dare not call you rogue, I dare think you one, d—me!” This stroke of
wit he accompanied with a loud laugh of self-approbation, which
unluckily did not affect the audience, but effectually silenced his
antagonist, who did not open his mouth for the space of an hour, except
to clear his pipe with three hems, which however, produced nothing.




CHAPTER LIV


Day breaking, I have the Pleasure of viewing the Person of Miss
Snapper, whom I had not seen before—the Soldier is witty upon me—is
offended—talks much of his Valour—is reprimanded by a grave
Gentlewoman—we are alarmed by the cry of Highwaymen—I get out of the
Coach, and stand in my own defence—they ride off without having
attacked us—I pursue them—one of them is thrown from his Horse and
taken—I return to the Coach—am complimented by Miss Snapper—the
Captain’s Behaviour on this Occasion—the Prude reproaches me in a
Soliloquy—I upbraid her in the same Manner—the Behaviour of Miss
Snapper, at Breakfast, disobliges me—the Lawyer is witty upon the
Officer, who threatens him


In the meantime, the day breaking in upon us, discovered to one another
the faces of their fellow travellers: and I had the good fortune to
find my mistress not quite so deformed nor disagreeable as she had been
represented to me. Her head, indeed, bore some resemblance to a
hatchet, the edge being represented by her face; but she had a certain
delicacy in her complexion, and a great deal of vivacity in her eyes,
which were very large and black; and, though the protuberance of her
breast, when considered alone, seemed to drag her forwards, it was easy
to perceive an equivalent on her back which balanced the other, and
kept her body in equilibrio. On the whole, I thought I should have
great reason to congratulate myself if it should be my fate to possess
twenty thousand pounds encumbered with such a wife. I began therefore
to deliberate about the most probable means of acquiring the conquest,
and was so much engrossed by this idea, that I scarce took any notice
of the rest of the people in the coach, but revolved my project in
silence; while the conversation was maintained as before by the object
of my hopes, the son of Mars, and the barrister, who by this time
recollected himself, and talked in terms as much as ever. At length a
dispute happened, which ended in a wager, to be determined by me, who
was so much absorbed in contemplation, that I neither heard the
reference nor the question which was put to me by each in his turn.
Affronted at my supposed contempt, the soldier with great vociferation
swore I was either dumb or deaf if not both, and that I looked as if I
could not say Bo to a goose. Aroused at this observation, I fixed my
eyes upon him, and pronounced with emphasis the interjection Bo! Upon
which he cocked his hat in a fierce manner, and cried, “D—me sir, what
d’ye mean by that.” Had I intended to answer him, which by the by was
not my design, I should have been anticipated by Miss, who told him, my
meaning was to show, that I could cry Bo to a goose; and laughed very
heartily at my laconic reproof. Her explanation and mirth did not help
to appease his wrath, which broke out in several martial insinuations,
such as—“I do not understand such freedoms, d—me! D—n my blood! I’m a
gentleman, and bear the king’s commission. ’Sblood! some people deserve
to have their noses pulled for their impertinence.” I thought to have
checked these ejaculations by a frown; because he had talked so much of
his valour that I had long ago rated him as an ass in a lion’s skin;
but this expedient did not answer my expectation, he took umbrage at
the contraction of my brow, swore he did not value my sulky looks a
fig’s end, and protested he feared no man breathing. Miss Snapper said,
she was very glad to find herself in company with a man of so much
courage, who, she did not doubt, would protect her from all the
attempts of highwaymen during our journey. “Make yourself perfectly
easy on that head, madam,” replied the officer. “I have got a pair of
pistols (here they are), which I took from a horse officer at the
battle of Dettingen; they are double loaded, and if any highwayman in
England robs you of the value of a pin while I have the honour of being
in your company, d—n my heart.” When he had expressed himself in this
manner, a prim gentlewoman, who had sat silent hitherto, opened her
mouth, and said, she wondered how any man could be so rude as to pull
out such weapons before ladies. “D—me, madam,” cried the champion, “if
you are so much afraid at the sight of a pistol, how d’ye propose to
stand fire if there should be occasion?” She then told him that, if she
thought he could be so unmannerly as to use fire-arms in her presence,
whatever might be the occasion, she would get out of the coach
immediately, and walk to the next village, where she might procure a
convenience to herself. Before he could make any answer, my Dulcinea
interposed, and observed that, far from being offended at a gentleman’s
using his arms in his own defence, she thought herself very lucky in
being along with one by whose valour she stood a good chance of saving
herself from being rifled. The prude cast a disdainful look at Miss,
and said that people, who have but little to lose, are sometimes the
most solicitous about preserving it. The old lady was affronted at this
inuendo, and took notice, that people ought to be very well informed
before they speak slightingly of other people’s fortune, lest they
discover their own envy, and make themselves ridiculous. The daughter
declared, that she did not pretend to vie with anybody in point of
riches; and if the lady, who insisted upon non-resistance, would
promise to indemnify us all for the loss we should sustain, she would
be one of the first to persuade the captain to submission, in case we
should be attacked. To this proposal, reasonable as it was, the
reserved lady made no other reply than a scornful glance and a toss of
her head. I was very well pleased with the spirit of my young mistress,
and even wished for an opportunity of distinguishing my courage under
her eye, which I believed could not fail of prepossessing her in my
favour, when all of a sudden Strap rode up to the coach door, and told
us in a great fright, that two men on horseback were crossing the heath
(for by this time we had passed Hounslow), and made directly towards
us.

This piece of information was no sooner delivered, than Mrs. Snapper
began to scream, her daughter grew pale, the old lady pulled out her
purse to be in readiness, the lawyer’s teeth chattered, while he
pronounced, “’Tis no matter—we’ll sue the county and recover.” The
captain gave evident signs of confusion: and I, after having commanded
the coachman to stop, opened the door, jumped out, and invited the
warrior to follow me. But, finding him backward and astonished, I took
his pistols, and, giving them to Strap, who had by this time alighted
and trembled very much, I mounted on horseback; and, taking my own
(which I could better depend upon) from the holsters, cocked them both,
and faced the robbers, who were now very near us. Seeing me ready to
oppose them on horseback, and another man armed a-foot, they made a
halt at some distance to reconnoitre us: and after having rode round us
twice, myself still facing about as they rode, went off the same way
they came, at a hand gallop. A gentleman’s servant coming up with a
horse at the same time, I offered him a crown to assist me in pursuing
them, which he no sooner accepted, than I armed him with the officer’s
pistols, and we galloped after the thieves, who, trusting to the
swiftness of their horses, stopped till we came within shot of them and
then, firing at us, put their nags to the full speed. We followed them
as fast as our beasts could carry us; but, not being so well mounted as
they, our efforts would have been to little purpose, had not the horse
of one of them stumbled, and thrown his rider with such violence over
his head, that he lay senseless when we came up, and was taken without
the least opposition; while his comrade consulted his own safety in
flight, without regarding the distress of his friend. We scarce had
time to make ourselves masters of his arms, and tie his hands together,
before he recovered his senses, when, learning his situation he
affected surprise, demanded to know by what authority we used a
gentleman in that manner, and had the impudence to threaten us with a
prosecution for robbery. In the meantime, we perceived Strap coming up
with a crowd of people, armed up with different kinds of weapons; and
among the rest a farmer, who no sooner perceived the thief, whom we had
secured, than he cried with great emotion, “There’s the fellow who
robbed me an hour ago of twenty pounds, in a canvas bag.” He was
immediately searched, and the money found exactly as it had been
described; upon which we committed him to the charge of the countryman,
who carried him to the town of Hounslow, which, it seems, the farmer
had alarmed; and I, having satisfied the footman for his trouble,
according to promise, returned with Strap to the coach, where I found
the captain and lawyer busy in administering smelling bottles and
cordials to the grave lady, who had gone into a fit at the noise of
firing.

When I had taken my seat, Miss Snapper, who from the coach had seen
everything that happened; made me a compliment on my behaviour, and
said she was glad to see me returned without having received any
injury; her mother too owned herself obliged to my resolution: the
lawyer told me, that I was entitled by act of parliament to a reward of
forty pounds, for having apprehended a highwayman. The soldier
observed, with a countenance in which impudence and shame struggling,
produced some disorder, that if I had not been in such a d—d hurry to
get out of the coach, he would have secured the rogues effectually,
without all this bustle and loss of time, by a scheme, which my heat
and precipitation ruined. “For my own part,” continued he, “I am always
extremely cool on these occasions.” “So it appeared, by your
trembling,” said the young lady. “Death and d—ion!” cried he, “your sex
protects you, madam; if any man on earth durst tell me so much, I’d
send him to hell, d—n my heart! in an instant.” So saying, he fixed his
eyes upon me, and asked if I had seen him tremble? I answered without
hesitation, “Yes.” “D—me, sir!” said he, “d’ye doubt my courage?” I
replied, “Very much.” This declaration quite disconcerted him. He
looked blank, and pronounced with a faltering voice, “Oh! it’s very
well: d—n my blood! I shall find a time.” I signified my contempt of
him, by thrusting my tongue in my cheek, which humbled him so much,
that he scarce swore another oath aloud during the whole journey.

The precise lady, having recruited her spirits by the help of some
strong waters, began a soliloquy, in which she wondered that any man,
who pretended to maintain the character of a gentleman, could, for the
sake of a little paltry coin, throw persons of honour into such
quandaries as might endanger their lives; and professed her surprise
that women were not ashamed to commend such brutality. At the same time
vowing that for the future she would never set foot in a stage coach,
if a private convenience could be had for love or money.

Nettled at her remarks, I took the same method of conveying my
sentiments, and wondered in my turn, that any woman of common sense
should be so unreasonable as to expect that people, who had neither
acquaintance nor connection with her, would tamely allow themselves to
be robbed and maltreated, merely to indulge her capricious humour. I
likewise confessed my astonishment at her insolence and ingratitude in
taxing a person with brutality, who deserved her approbation and
acknowledgment; and vowed that, if ever she should be assaulted again,
I would leave her to the mercy of the spoiler, that she might know the
value of my protection.

This person of honour did not think fit to carry on the altercation any
further, but seemed to chew the cud of her resentment with the
crestfallen captain, while I entered into discourse with my charmer,
who was the more pleased with my conversation, as she had conceived a
very indifferent opinion of my intellects from my former silence. I
should have had cause to be equally satisfied with the sprightliness of
her genius, could she have curbed her imagination with judgment; but
she laboured under such a profusion of talk, that I dreaded her unruly
tongue, and felt by anticipation the horrors of an eternal clack!
However, when I considered, on the other hand, the joys attending the
possession of twenty thousand pounds, I forgot her imperfections,
seized occasion by the forelock, and tried to insinuate myself into her
affection. The careful mother kept a strict watch over her and though
she could not help behaving civilly to me, took frequent opportunities
of discouraging our communication, by reprimanding her for being so
free with strangers, and telling her she must learn to speak less and
think more. Abridged of the use of speech, we conversed with our eyes,
and I found the young lady very eloquent in this kind of discourse. In
short, I had reason to believe that she was sick of the old
gentlewoman’s tuition, and that I should find it no difficult matter to
supersede her authority.

When we arrived at the place where we were to breakfast, I alighted,
and helped my mistress out of the coach, as well as her mother who
called for a private room to which they withdrew in order to eat by
themselves. As they retired together, I perceived that Miss had got
more twists from nature than I had before observed for she was bent
sideways into the figure of an S, so that her progression very much
resembled that of a crab. The prude also chose the captain for her
messmate, and ordered breakfast for two only, to be brought into
another separate room: while the lawyer and I, deserted by the rest of
the company, were fain to put up with each other. I was a good deal
chagrined at the stately reserve of Mrs. Snapper, who, I thought, did
not use me with all the complaisance I deserved; and my companion
declared that he had been a traveller for twenty years, and never knew
the stage coach rules so much infringed before. As for the honourable
gentlewoman I could not conceive the meaning of her attachment to the
lieutenant; and asked the lawyer if he knew for which of the soldier’s
virtues she admired him? The counsellor facetiously replied, “I suppose
the lady knows him to be an able conveyancer, and wants him to make a
settlement in tail.” I could not help laughing at the archness of the
barrister, who entertained me during breakfast with a great deal of wit
of the same kind, at the expense of our fellow travellers; and among
other things said, he was sorry to find the young lady saddled with
such incumbrances.

When we had made an end of our repast, and paid our reckoning, we went
into the coach, took our places, and bribed the driver with sixpence to
revenge us on the rest of his fare, by hurrying them away in the midst
of their meal. This task he performed to our satisfaction, after he had
disturbed their enjoyment with his importunate clamour. The mother and
daughter obeyed the summons first, and, coming to the coach door, were
obliged to desire the coachman’s assistance to get in, because the
lawyer and I had agreed to show our resentment by our neglect. They
were no sooner seated, than the captain appeared, as much heated as if
he had been pursued a dozen miles by an enemy; and immediately after
him came the lady, not without some marks of disorder. Having helped
her up, he entered himself, growling a few oaths against the coachman
for his impertinent interruption; and the lawyer comforted him by
saying, that if he had suffered a nisi prius through the obstinacy of
the defendant, he might have an opportunity to join issue at the next
stage. This last expression gave offence to the grave gentlewoman, who
told him, if she was a man, she would make him repent of such
obscenity, and thanked God she had never been in such company before.
At this insinuation the captain thought himself under a necessity of
espousing the lady’s cause; and accordingly threatened to cut off the
lawyer’s ears, if he should give his tongue any such liberties for the
future. The poor counsellor begged pardon, and universal silence
ensued.




CHAPTER LV


I resolve to ingratiate myself with the Mother, and am favoured by
accident—the Precise Lady finds her husband, and quit the Coach—the
Captain is disappointed of his dinner—we arrive at Bath—I accompany
Miss Snapper to the Long-room, where she is attacked by beau Nash, and,
turns the Laugh against him—I make love to her, and receive a
check—Squire her to an Assembly, where I am blessed with a Sight of my
dear Narcissa, which discomposes me so much, that Miss Snapper,
observing my disorder, is at pains to discover the Cause—is piqued at
the Occasion, and, in our way home, pays me a sarcastic Compliment—I am
met by Miss Williams, who is the maid and Confidante of Narcissa—she
acquaints me with her Lady’s regard for me while under the disguise of
a Servant, and describes the Transports of Narcissa on seeing me at the
Assembly, in the Character of a Gentleman—I am surprised with an
Account of her Aunt’s Marriage, and make an Appointment to meet Miss
Williams the next day


During this unsocial interval, my pride and interest maintained a
severe conflict on the subject of Miss Snapper, whom the one
represented as unworthy of notice, and the other proposed as the object
of my whole attention: the advantages and disadvantages of such a match
were opposed to one another by my imagination; and, at length, my
judgment gave it so much in favour of the first, that I resolved to
prosecute my scheme with all the address in my power. I thought I
perceived some concern in her countenance, occasioned by my silence,
which she, no doubt, imputed to my disgust at her mother’s behaviour;
and, as I believed the old woman could not fail of ascribing my
muteness to the same motive, I determined to continue that sullen
conduct towards her, and fall upon some other method of manifesting my
esteem for the daughter, nor was it difficult for me to make her
acquainted with my sentiments by the expression of my looks, which I
modelled into the character of humanity and love; and which were
answered by her with all the sympathy and approbation I could desire.
But when I began to consider, that, without further opportunities of
improving my success, all the progress I had hitherto made would not
much avail, and that such opportunities could not be enjoyed without
the mother’s permission, I concluded it would be requisite to vanquish
her coldness and suspicion by my assiduities and respectful behaviour
on the road; and she would, in all likelihood, invite me to visit her
at Bath, where I did not fear of being able to cultivate her
acquaintance as much as would be necessary to the accomplishment of my
purpose. And indeed accident furnished me with an opportunity of
obliging her so much that she could not, with any appearance of good
manners, forbear to gratify my inclination.

When we arrived at our dining-place, we found all the eatables at the
inn bespoke by a certain nobleman, who had got the start of us and, in
all likelihood, my mistress and her mother must have dined with Duke
Humphrey, had I not exerted myself in their behalf, and bribed the
landlord with a glass of wine to curtail his lordship’s entertainment
of a couple of fowls and some bacon, which I sent with my compliments
to the ladies. They accepted my treat with a great many thanks, and
desired I would favour them with my company at dinner, where I amused
the old gentlewoman so successfully, by maintaining a seemingly
disinterested ease in the midst of my civility, that she signified a
desire of being better acquainted, and hoped I would be so kind as to
see her sometimes at Bath. While I enjoyed myself in this manner, the
precise lady had the good fortune to meet with her husband, who was no
other than gentleman, or, in other words, valet-de-chambre, to the very
nobleman whose coach stood at the door. Proud of the interest she had
in the house, she affected to show her power by introducing the captain
to her spouse as a person who had treated her with great civility upon
which he was invited to a share of their dinner; while the poor lawyer,
finding himself utterly abandoned, made application to me, and was
through my intercession admitted into our company. Having satisfied our
appetites, and made ourselves merry at the expense of the person of
honour, the civil captain, and complaisant husband, I did myself the
pleasure of discharging the bill by stealth, for which I received a
great many apologies and acknowledgments from my guests, and we
re-embarked at the first warning. The officer was obliged, at last, to
appease his hunger with a luncheon of bread and cheese, and a pint
bottle of brandy, which he dispatched in the coach, cursing the
inappetence of his lordship, who had ordered dinner to be put back a
whole hour.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey,
which was finished next day, when I waited on the ladies to the house
of a relation, in which they intended to lodge, and, passing that night
at the inn, took lodgings in the morning for myself.

The forenoon was spent in visiting everything that was worth seeing in
the place, in company with a gentleman to whom Banter had given me a
letter of introduction; and in the afternoon I waited on the ladies,
and found Miss a good deal indisposed with the fatigue of their
journey. As they foresaw they should have occasion for a male
acquaintance to squire them at all public places, I was received with
great cordiality, and had the mother’s permission to conduct them next
day to the Long Room, which we no sooner entered, than the eyes of
everybody present were turned upon us, and, when we had suffered the
martyrdom of their looks for some time, a whisper circulated at our
expense, which was accompanied with many contemptuous smiles and
tittering observations, to my utter shame and confusion. I did not so
much conduct as follow my charge to a place where she seated her mother
and herself with astonishing composure notwithstanding the unmannerly
behaviour of the whole company, which seemed to be assumed merely to
put her out of countenance. The celebrated Mr. Nash, who commonly
attends in this place, as master of the ceremonies, perceiving the
disposition of the assembly, took upon himself the task of gratifying
their ill-nature further, by exposing my mistress to the edge of his
wit. With this view he approached us, with many bows and grimaces, and,
after having welcomed Miss Snapper to the place, asked her in the
hearing of all present, if she could inform him of the name of Tobit’s
dog. Miss was so much incensed at his insolence, that I should
certainly have kicked him where he stood without ceremony, had not the
young lady prevented the effects of my indignation, by replying with
the utmost vivacity, “His name was Nash, and an impudent dog he was.”
This repartee so unexpected and just, raised such a universal laugh at
the aggressor, that all his assurance was insufficient to support him
under their derision; so that, after he had endeavoured to compose
himself by taking snuff and forcing a smile, he was obliged to sneak
off in a ludicrous attitude, while my Dulcinea was applauded to the
skies for the brilliancy of her wit, and her acquaintance immediately
courted by the best people of both sexes in the room.

This event, with which I was indefinitely pleased at first, did not
fail of alarming me, upon further reflection, when I considered, that
the more she was caressed by persons of distinction, the more her pride
would be inflamed, and consequently, the obstacles to my success
multiplied and enlarged. Nor were my presaging fears untrue. That very
night I perceived her a little intoxicated with the incense she had
received, and, though, she still behaved with a particular civility to
me, I foresaw, that, as soon as her fortune should be known, she would
be surrounded with a swarm of admirers, some of whom might possibly, by
excelling me on point of wealth, or in the arts of flattery and
scandal, supplant me in her esteem, and find means to make the mother
of his party. I resolved therefore to lose no time, and, being invited
to spend the evening with them, found an opportunity, in spite of the
old gentlewoman’s vigilance, to explain the meaning of my glances in
the coach, by paying homage to her wit, and professing myself enamoured
of her person. She blushed at my declaration and in a favourable manner
disapproved of the liberty I had taken, putting me in mind of our being
strangers to each other, and desiring I would not be the means of
interrupting our acquaintance, by any such unseasonable strokes of
gallantry for the future. My ardour was effectually checked by this
reprimand, which was, however, delivered in a gentle manner, that I had
no cause to be disobliged; and the arrival of her mother relieved me
from a dilemma in which I should not have known how to demean myself a
minute longer. Neither could I resume the easiness of carriage with
which I came in; my mistress acted on the reserve, and the conversation
beginning to flag, the old lady introduced her kinswoman of the house,
and proposed a hand at whist.

While we amused ourselves at this diversion, I understood from the
gentlewoman, that there was to be an assembly next night at which I
begged to have the honour of dancing with Miss. She thanked me for the
favour I intended her, assured me she never did dance, but signified a
desire of seeing the company, when I offered my service, which was
accepted, not a little proud of being exempted from appearing with her
in a situation, that, notwithstanding my profession to the contrary,
was not at all agreeable to my inclination.

Having supped, and continued the game, till such time as the successive
yawns of the mother warned me to be gone, I took my leave, and went
home, where I made Strap very happy with an account of my progress.
Next day I put on my gayest apparel, and went to drink tea at Mrs.
Snapper’s, according to appointment, when I found, to my inexpressible
satisfaction, that she was laid up with the toothache, and that Miss
was to be intrusted to my care. Accordingly, we set out for the
ball-room pretty early in the evening, and took possession of a
commodious place, where we had not sat longer than a quarter of an
hour, when a gentleman, dressed in a green frock, came in, leading a
young lady, whom I immediately discovered to be the adorable Narcissa!
Good heaven! what were the thrillings of my soul at that instant! my
reflection was overwhelmed with a torrent of agitation! my heart
throbbed with surprising violence! a sudden mist overspread my eyes, my
ears were invaded with a dreadful sound! I panted for want of breath,
and, in short, was for some moments entranced! This first tumult
subsiding, a crowd of flattering ideas rushed upon my imagination.
Everything, that was soft, sensible, and engaging, in the character of
that dear creature recurred to my remembrance, and every favourable
circumstance of my own qualifications appeared in all the aggravation
of self-conceit, to heighten my expectation! Neither was this transport
of long duration. The dread of her being already disposed of
intervened, and overcast my enchanting reverie! My presaging
apprehension represented her encircled in the arms of some happy rival,
and in consequence for ever lost to me. I was stung with this
suggestion, and, believing the person who conducted her to be the
husband of this amiable young lady, already devoted him to my fury, and
stood up to mark him for my vengeance, when I recollected, to my
unspeakable joy, her brother the fox-hunter, in the person of her
gallant.

Undeceived so much to my satisfaction in this particular, I gazed in a
frenzy of delight on the irresistible charms of his sister, who no
sooner distinguished me in the crowd, than her evident confusion
afforded a happy omen to my flame. At sight of me she started, the
roses instantly vanished from her polished cheeks, and returned in a
moment with a double glow, that overspread her lovely neck, while her
enchanting bosom heaved with strong emotion. I hailed these favourable
symptoms, and, lying in wait for her looks, did homage with my eyes.
She seemed to approve my declaration, by the complacency of her aspect;
and I was so transported with the discovery, that more than once I was
on the point of making up to her, to disclose the throbbings of my
heart in person, had not that profound veneration, which her presence
always inspired, restrained the unseasonable impulse. All my powers
being engrossed in this manner, it may easily be imagined how ill I
entertained Miss Snapper on whom I could not now turn my eyes, without
making comparisons very little to her advantage. It was not even in my
power to return distinct answers to the questions she asked from time
to time, so that she could not help observing my absence of mind; and
having a turn for observation, watched my glances, and, tracing them to
the divine object, discovered the cause of my disorder. That she might,
however, be convinced of the truth of her conjecture, she began to
interrogate me with regard to Narcissa, and, notwithstanding all my
endeavours to disguise my sentiments, perceived my attachment by my
confusion: upon which, she assumed a stateliness of behaviour, and sat
silent during the remaining part of the entertainment. At any other
time, her suspicion would have alarmed me: but now I was elevated by my
passion above every other consideration. The mistress of my soul having
retired with her brother, I discovered so much uneasiness at my
situation, that Miss Snapper proposed to go home; and, while I
conducted her to a chair, told me she had too great a regard for me to
keep me any longer in torment. I feigned ignorance of her meaning, and
having seen her safely at her lodgings, took my leave, and went home in
an ecstasy, where I disclosed everything that had happened to my
confidant and humble servant, Strap, who did not relish the accident so
well as I expected; and observed, that a bird in the hand is worth two
in the bush. “But, however,” said he, “you know best—you know best.”
Next day, as, I went to the Pump Room, in hopes of seeing or hearing
some tidings of my fair enslaver, I was met by a gentlewoman, who,
having looked hard at me, cried, “O Christ, Mr. Random!” Surprised at
this exclamation, I examined the countenance of the person who spoke,
and immediately recognised my old sweetheart and fellow sufferer, Miss
Williams.

I was mightily pleased to find this unfortunate woman under such a
decent appearance, professed my joy at seeing her so well, and desired
to know where I should have the pleasure of her conversation. She was
as heartily rejoiced at the apparent easiness of my fortune, and gave
me to know that she, as yet, had no habitation that she could properly
call her own; but would wait on me at any place I should please to
appoint. Understanding that she was unengaged for the present, I showed
her the way to my lodgings, where, after a very affectionate
salutation, she informed me of her being very happy in the service of a
young lady to whom she was recommended by a former mistress deceased,
into whose family she had recommended herself by the honest deceit she
had concerted, while she lived with me in the garret at London. She
then expressed a vehement desire to be acquainted with the vicissitudes
of my life since we parted, and excused her curiosity on account of the
concern she had for my interest. I forthwith gratified her request,
and, when I described my situation in Sussex, perceived her to attend
to my story with particular eagerness. She interrupted me, when I had
finished that period, with, “Good God! is it possible?” and then begged
I would be so good as to continue my relation; which I did as briefly
as I could, burning with impatience to know the cause of her surprise,
about which I had already formed a very interesting conjecture.

When I had brought my adventures down to the present day, who seemed
very much affected with the different circumstances of my fortune; and
saying, with a smile, she believed my distresses were now at a period,
proceeded to inform me that the lady whom she served was no other than
the charming Narcissa, who had honoured her with her confidence for
some time; in consequence of which trust, she had often repeated the
story of John Brown with great admiration and regard; that she loved to
dwell upon the particulars of his character, and did not scruple to own
a tender approbation of his flame. I became delirious at this piece of
intelligence, strained Miss Williams in my embrace, called her the
angel of my happiness, and acted such extravagances, that she might
have been convinced of my sincerity, had she not been satisfied of my
honour before. As soon as was in condition to yield attention, she
described the present situation of her mistress, who had no sooner
reached her lodgings the night before, than she closeted her, and in a
rapture of joy gave her to know that she had seen me at the ball, where
I appeared in the character which she always thought my due, with such
advantage of transformation that, unless my image had been engraven on
her heart, it would have been impossible to know me for the person who
had worn her aunt’s livery; that by the language of my eyes, she was
assured of the continuance of my passion for her, and consequently of
my being unengaged to any other; and that, though she did not doubt I
would speedily fall upon some method of being introduced, she was so
impatient to hear of me, that she (Miss Williams) had been sent abroad
this very morning, on purpose to learn the name and character I at
present bore. My bosom had been hitherto a stranger to such a flood of
joy as now rushed upon it; my faculties were overborne by the tide; it
was some time before I could open my mouth, and much longer ere I could
utter a coherent sentence. At length, I fervently requested her to lead
me immediately to the object of my adoration; but she resisted my
importunity, and explained the danger of such premature conduct. “How
favourable soever,” said she, “my lady’s inclination towards you may
be, you may depend upon it, she will not commit the smallest trespass
on decorum, either in disclosing her own, or in receiving a declaration
of your passion: and, although the great veneration I have for you has
prompted me to reveal what she communicated to me in confidence, I know
so well the severity of her sentiments with respect to the punctilios
of her sex that, if she should learn the least surmise of it, she would
not only dismiss me as a wretch unworthy of her benevolence, but also
for ever shun the efforts of your love.” I assented to the justness of
her remonstrance, and desired she would assist me with her advice and
direction: upon which it was concerted between us, that for the present
I should be contented with her telling Narcissa that, in the course of
her inquiries, she could only learn my name: and that, if, in a day or
two, I could fall upon no other method of being introduced to her
mistress, she would deliver a letter from me, on pretence of consulting
her happiness: and say that I met her in the streets, and bribed her to
this piece of service. Matters being thus adjusted, I kept my old
acquaintance to breakfast, and learned from her conversation, that my
rival Sir Timothy had drunk himself into an apoplexy, of which he died
five months ago; that the savage was still unmarried and that his aunt
had been seized with a whim which he little expected, and chosen the
schoolmaster of the parish for her lord and husband: but matrimony not
agreeing with her constitution she had been hectic and dropsical a good
while, and was now at Bath, in order to drink the waters for the
recovery of her health; that her niece had accompanied her thither at
her request, and attended her with the same affection as before,
notwithstanding the mistake she had committed: and that the nephew, who
had been exasperated at the loss of her fortune, did not give his
attendance out of good will, but purely to have an eye on his sister,
lest she should likewise throw herself away without his consent or
approbation. Having enjoyed ourselves in this manner, and made an
assignation to meet next day at a certain place, Miss Williams took her
leave; and Strap’s looks being very inquisitive about the nature of the
communication subsisting between us, I made him acquainted with the
whole affair, to his great astonishment and satisfaction.




CHAPTER LVI


I become acquainted with Narcissa’s brother, who invites me to his
House, where I am introduced to that adorable Creature—after dinner,
the Squire retires to take his nap—Freeman, guessing the Situation of
my Thought, withdraws likewise, on pretence of Business—I declare my
passion for Narcissa—am well-received—charmed with her Conversation—the
Squire detains us to Supper—I elude his design by a Stratagem, and get
home sober


In the afternoon, I drank tea at the house of Mr. Freeman, to whom I
had been recommended by Banter; where I had not sat five minutes, till
the foxhunter came in, and by his familiar behaviour appeared to be
intimate with my friend. I was, at first, under some concern, lest he
should recollect my features; but when I found myself introduced to him
as a gentleman from London, without being discovered, I blessed the
opportunity that brought me into his company; hoping that, in the
course of my acquaintance, he would invite me to his house; nor were my
hopes frustrated, for, as we spent the evening together, he grew
extremely fond of my conversation, asked a great many childish
questions about France and foreign parts; and seemed so highly
entertained with my answers, that in his cups he shook me often by the
hand, pronounced me an honest fellow, and in fine desired our company
at dinner next day, at his civil house. My imagination was so much
employed in anticipating the happiness I was to enjoy next day, that I
slept very little that night; but, rising early in the morning, went to
the place appointed, where I met my she-friend, and imparted to her my
success with the squire. She was very much pleased at the occasion,
“which,” she said, “could not fail of being agreeable to Narcissa, who,
in spite of her passion for me, had mentioned some scruples relating to
my true situation and character, which the delicacy of her sentiments
suggested, and which she believed I would find it necessary to remove,
though she did not know how.” I was a good deal startled at this
insinuation, because I foresaw the difficulty I should find in barely
doing myself justice: for, although it never was my intention to impose
myself upon any woman, much less on Narcissa, I laid claim to the
character of a gentleman by birth, education, and behaviour; and yet
(so unlucky had the circumstances of my life fallen out) I should find
it a very hard matter to make good my pretensions even to these,
especially to the last, which was the most essential. Miss Williams was
as sensible as I of this my disadvantage, but comforted me with
observing that, when once a woman has bestowed her affections on a man,
she cannot help judging of him in all respects with a partiality easily
influenced in his favour: she remarked that, although some situations
of my life had been low, yet none of them had been infamous; that my
indigence had been the crime not of me, but of fortune; and that the
miseries I had undergone, by improving the faculties both of mind and
body, qualified me the more for any dignified station; and would of
consequence recommend me to the good graces of any sensible woman: she
therefore advised me to be always open and unreserved to the inquiries
of my mistress, without unnecessarily betraying the meanest occurrences
of my fate; and trust to the strength of her love and reflection for
the rest.

The sentiments of this sensible young woman on this, as well as on
almost every other subject, perfectly agreed with mine. I thanked her
for the care she took of my interests, and, promising to behave myself
according to her directions we parted, after she had assured me that I
depend upon her best offices with her mistress, and that she would from
time to time communicate to me such intelligence as she could procure,
relating to my flame. Having dressed myself to the best advantage, I
waited for the time of dinner with the most fearful impatience; and, as
the hour drew near, my heart beat with such increased velocity, and my
spirits contracted such disorder, that I began to suspect my
resolution, and even to wish myself disengaged. At last Mr. Freeman
called at my lodgings in his way, and I accompanied him to the house
where all my happiness was deposited. We were very kindly received by
the squire, who sat smoking his pipe in a parlour, and asked if we
chose to drink any thing before dinner: though I never had more
occasion for a cordial, I was ashamed to accept his offer, which was
also refused, by my friend. We sat down, however, entered into
conversation, which lasted half-an hour, so that I had time to
recollect myself; and (so capricious were my thoughts) even to hope
that Narcissa would not appear—when, all of a sudden, a servant coming
in, gave us notice that dinner was upon the table, and my perturbation
returned with such violence that I could scarcely conceal it from the
company, as I ascended the staircase. When I entered the dining-room,
the first object that saluted my ravished eyes was the divine Narcissa,
blushing like Aurora, adorned with all the graces that meekness,
innocence, and beauty can diffuse! I was seized with a giddiness, my
knees tottered and I scarce had strength enough to perform the ceremony
of salutation, when her brother, slapping me on the shoulder, cried,
“Measure Randan, that there is my sister.” I approached her with
eagerness and fear; but in the moment of our embrace, my soul was
agonized with rapture! It was a lucky circumstance for us both, that my
entertainer was not endued with an uncommon stock of penetration; for
our mutual confusion was so manifest that Mr. Freeman perceived it, and
as we went home together, congratulated me on my good fortune. But so
far was Bruin from entertaining the least suspicion, that he encouraged
me to begin a conversation with my mistress in a language unknown to
him, by telling her, that he had a gentleman who could jabber with her
in French and other foreign lingoes as fast as she pleased; then,
turning to me, said, “Odds bobs! I wish you would hold discourse with
her in your French or Italian, and tell me if she understands it as
well as she would be thought to do. There’s her aunt and she will
chatter together whole days in it, and I can’t have a mouthful of
English for love or money.” I consulted the look of my amiable mistress
and found her averse to his proposal, which indeed she declined with a
sweetness of denial peculiar to herself, as a piece of disrespect to
that part of the company which did not understand the language in
question. As I had the happiness of sitting opposite to her, I feasted
my eyes much more than my palate which she tempted in vain with the
most delicious bits carved by her fair hand, and recommended by her
persuasive tongue; but all my other appetites were swallowed up in
immensity of my love, which I fed by gazing incessantly on the
delightful object. Dinner was scarcely ended, when the squire became
very drowsy, and after several dreadful yawns, got up, stretched
himself, took two or three turns across the room, begged we would allow
him to take a short nap, and, having laid a strong injunction on his
sister to detain us till his return, went to his repose without further
ceremony. He had not been gone many minutes, when Freeman, guessing the
situation of my heart, and thinking he could not do me a greater favour
than to leave me alone with Narcissa, pretended to recollect himself
all of a sudden, and, starting up, begged the lady pardon for
half-an-hour, for he had unluckily remembered an engagement of some
consequence, that he must perform at that instant: so saying, he took
his leave, promising to come back time enough for tea, leaving my
mistress and me in great confusion.

Now that I enjoyed an opportunity of disclosing the paintings of my
soul, I had not the power to use it. I studied many pathetic
declarations, but, when I attempted to give them utterance, my tongue
denied its office and she sat silent with a downcast look full of
anxious alarm, her bosom heaving with expectation of some great event.
At length I endeavoured to put an end to this solemn pause, and began
with, “It is very surprising, madam, madam”—here the sound dying away,
I made a full stop; while Narcissa, starting, blushed, and, with a
timid accent answered, “Sir?” Confounded at this note of interrogation,
I pronounced with the most sheepish bashfulness, “Madam!” To which she
replied, “I beg pardon—I thought you had spoken to me.” Another pause
ensued—I made another effort, and, though my voice faltered very much
at the beginning, made shift to express myself in this manner: “I say,
madam, it is very surprising that love should act so inconsistently
with itself, as to deprive its votaries of the use of their faculties,
when they have most need of them. Since the happy occasion of being
alone with you presented itself, I have made many unsuccessful attempts
to declare a passion for the loveliest of her sex—a passion which took
possession of my soul, while my cruel fate compelled me to wear a
servile disguise so unsuitable to my birth, sentiments, and let me add,
my deserts; yet favourable in one respect, as it furnished me with
opportunities of seeing and adoring your perfections. Yes, madam, it
was then your dear idea entered my bosom, where it has lived unimpaired
in the midst of numberless cares, and animated me against a thousand
dangers and calamities!”

While I spoke thus, she concealed her face with her fan, and when I
ceased speaking, recovering herself from the most beautiful confusion,
told me she thought herself very much obliged by my favourable opinion
of her, and that she was very sorry to hear I had been unfortunate.
Encouraged by this gentle reply, I proceeded, owned myself sufficiently
recompensed by her kind compassion for what I had undergone, and
declared the future happiness of my life depended solely upon her.
“Sir,” said she, “I should be very ungrateful, if after the signal
protection you once afforded me, I should refuse to contribute towards
your happiness in any reasonable condescension.” Transported at this
acknowledgment I threw myself at her feet, and begged she would regard
my passion with a favourable eye. She was alarmed at my behaviour,
entreated me to rise lest her brother should discover me in that
posture, and to spare her for the present upon a subject for which she
was altogether unprepared. In consequence of this remonstrance, I rose,
assuring her I would rather die than disobey her: but in the meantime
begged her to consider how precious the minutes of this opportunity
were, and what restraint I put upon my inclinations, in sacrificing
them to her desire. She smiled with unspeakable sweetness, and said
there would be no want of opportunities, provided I could maintain the
good opinion her brother had conceived of me, and I, enchanted by her
charms, seized her hand, which I well nigh devoured with kisses. But
she checked my boldness with a severity of countenance, and desired I
would not so far forget myself to her, as to endanger the esteem she
had for me; she reminded me of our being almost strangers to each
other, and of the necessity there was for her knowing me better, before
she could take any resolution in my favour; and, in short, mingled so
much good sense and complacency in her reproof, that I became as much
enamoured of her understanding as I had been before of her beauty, and
asked pardon for my presumption with the utmost reverence of
conviction. She forgave my offence with her usual affability, and
sealed my pardon with a look so full of bewitching tenderness, that,
for some minutes, my senses were lost in ecstacy! I afterwards
endeavoured to regulate my behaviour according to her desire, and turn
the conversation upon a more indifferent subject; but her presence was
an insurmountable obstacle to my design; while I beheld so much
excellence, I found it impossible to call my attention from the
contemplation of it! I gazed with unutterable fondness! I grew mad with
admiration! “My condition is insupportable!” cried I: “I am distracted
with passion! Why are you so exquisitely fair?—why are you so
enchantingly good?—why has nature dignified you with charms so much
above the standard of woman? and, wretch that I am, how dare my
unworthiness aspire to the enjoyment of such perfection!”

She was startled at my ravings, reasoned down my transport, and by her
irresistible eloquence, soothed my soul into a state of tranquil
felicity; but, lest I might suffer a relapse, industriously promoted
other subjects to entertain my imagination. She chid me for having
omitted to inquire about her aunt who (she assured me), in the midst of
all her absence of temper, and detachment from common affairs, often
talked of me with uncommon warmth. I professed my veneration for the
good lady, excused my omission, by imputing it to the violence of my
love, which engrossed my whole soul, and desired to know the situation
of her health. Upon which, the amiable Narcissa repeated what I had
heard before of her marriage, with all the tenderness for her
reputation that the subject would admit of; told me she lived with her
husband hard by, and was so much afflicted with the dropsy, and wasted
by a consumption, that she had small hopes of her recovery. Having
expressed my sorrow for her distemper, I questioned her about my good
friend, Mrs. Sagely, who, I learned to my great satisfaction, was in
good health, and who had by the encomiums she bestowed upon me after I
was gone, confirmed the favourable impression my behaviour at parting
had made on Narcissa’s heart. This circumstance introduced an inquiry
into the conduct of Sir Timothy Thicket, who (she informed me) had
found means to incense her brother so much against me that she found it
impossible to undeceive him: but, on the contrary, suffered very much
in her own character by his scandalous insinuations; that the whole
parish was alarmed, and actually in pursuit of me; so that she had been
in the utmost consternation on my account, well knowing how little my
own innocence and her testimony would have weighed with the ignorance,
prejudice, and brutality of those who must have judged me, had I been
apprehended; that Sir Timothy, having been seized with a fit of
apoplexy, from which with great difficulty he was recovered, began to
be apprehensive of death, and to prepare himself accordingly for that
great event; as a step to which he sent for her brother, owned with
great contrition the brutal design he had upon her, and in consequence
acquitted me of the assault, robbery, and correspondence with her,
which he had laid to my charge; after which confession he lived about a
month in a languishing condition, and was carried off by a second
assault.

Every word that this dear creature spoke, riveted the chains with which
she held me enslaved! My mischievous fancy began to work, and the
tempest of my passion to wake again, when the return of Freeman
destroyed the tempting opportunity, and enabled me to quell the rising
tumult. A little while after, the squire staggered into the room,
rubbing his eyes, and called for his tea, which he drank out of a small
bowl, qualified with brandy; while we took it in the usual way,
Narcissa left us in order to visit her aunt; and when Freeman and I
proposed to take our leave, the foxhunter insisted on our spending the
evening at his house with such obstinacy of affection, that we were
obliged to comply. For my own part, I should have been glad of the
invitation, by which, in all likelihood, I should be blessed with more
of his sister’s company, had I not been afraid of risking her esteem,
by entering into a debauch of drinking with him, which, from the
knowledge of his character, I foresaw would happen: but there was no
remedy. I was forced to rely upon the strength of my constitution,
which I hoped would resist intoxication longer than the squire’s, and
to trust to the good nature and discretion of my mistress for the rest.

Our entertainer, resolving to begin by times, ordered the table to be
furnished with liquor and glasses immediately after tea, but we
absolutely refused to set in for drinking so soon; and prevailed upon
him to pass away an hour or two at whist, in which we engaged as soon
as Narcissa returned. The savage and I happened to be partners at
first, and, as my thoughts were wholly employed in a more interesting
game, I played so ill that he lost all patience, swore bitterly, and
threatened to call for wine, if they would not grant him another
associate. This desire was gratified, and Narcissa and I were of a
side; he won for the same reason that made him lose before; I was
satisfied, my lovely partner did not repine, and the time slipped away
very agreeably, until we were told that supper was served in another
room.

The squire was enraged to find the evening so unprofitably spent, and
wreaked his vengeance on the cards, which he tore, and committed to the
flames with many execrations; threatening to make us redeem our loss
with a large glass and quick circulation; and indeed we had no sooner
supped, and my charmer withdrawn, than he began to put his threat in
execution. Three bottles of port (for he drank no other sort of wine)
were placed before us, with as many water glasses, which were
immediately filled to the brim, after his example, by each out of his
respective allowance, and emptied in a trice to the best in
Christendom. Though I swallowed this, and the next, as fast as the
glass could be replenished, without hesitation or show of reluctance, I
perceived that my brain would not be able to bear many bumpers of this
sort, and dreading the perseverance of a champion who began with such
vigour, I determined to make up for the deficiency of my strength by a
stratagem, which I actually put in practice when the second course of
bottles was called for. The wine being strong and heady, I was already
a good deal discomposed by the dispatch we had made. Freeman’s eyes
began to reel, and Bruin himself was elevated into a song, which he
uttered with great vociferation. When I therefore saw the second round
brought in, I assumed a gay air, entertained him with a French catch on
the subject of drinking, which, though he did rot understand it,
delighted him highly; and, telling him your choice spirits at Paris
never troubled themselves with glasses, asked if he had not a bowl or
cup in the house that would contain a whole quart of wine. “Odds
niggers!” cried he, “I have a silver candle cup that holds just the
quantity, for all the world; fetch it hither, Numps.” The vessel being
produced, I bade him decant his bottle into it, which he having done, I
nodded in a very deliberate manner, and said, “Pledge you.” He stared
at me for some time, and crying, “What! all at one pull, Measter
Randan?” I answered, “At one pull, Sir, you are no milk-sop—we shall do
you justice.” “Shall you?” said he, shaking me by the hand; “odds then,
I’ll see it out, an’t were a mile to the bottom: here’s to our better
acquaintance, measter Randan,” So saying, he applied it to his lips,
and emptied it in a breath. I knew the effect of it would be almost
instantaneous; therefore taking the cup, began to discharge my bottle
into it, telling him he was now qualified to drink with the Cham of
Tartary. I had no sooner pronounced these words than he took umbrage at
them, and after several attempts to spit, made shift to stutter, “A f—t
for your Chams of T—Tartary! I am a f—f—freeborn Englishman, worth
th—three thousand a-year, and v—value no man, d—me.” Then, dropping his
jaw, and fixing his eyes, he hiccuped aloud, and fell upon the floor as
mute as a flounder. Mr. Freeman, heartily glad at his defeat, assisted
me in carrying him to bed, where we left him to the care of his
servants, and went home to our respective habitations, congratulating
each other on our good fortune.




CHAPTER LVII


Miss Williams informs me of Narcissa’s Approbation of my Flame—I
appease the Squire—write to my Mistress—am blessed with an Answer—beg
Leave of her Brother to dance with her at a Ball—obtain his Consent and
hers—enjoy a private Conversation with her—am perplexed with
Reflections—have the Honour of appearing her Partner at a Ball—we are
complimented by a certain Nobleman—he discovers some Symptoms of a
Passion for Narcissa—I am stung with Jealousy—Narcissa, alarmed,
retires—I observe Melinda in the company—the Squire is captivated by
her Beauty


I was met next morning at the usual place by Miss Williams, who gave me
joy of the progress I had made in the affection of her mistress, and
blessed me with an account of that dear creature’s conversation with
her, after she had retired the night before from our company. I could
scarce believe her information, when she recounted her expressions in
my favour, so much more warm and passionate were they than my most
sanguine hopes had presaged; and was particularly pleased to hear that
she approved of my behaviour to her brother after she withdrew.
Transported at the news of my happiness, I presented my ring to the
messenger as a testimony of my gratitude and satisfaction; but she was
above such mercenary considerations, and refused my compliment with
some resentment, saying, she was not a little mortified to see my
opinion of her so low and contemptible. I did myself a piece of justice
by explaining my behaviour on this head, and to convince her of my
esteem, promised to be ruled by her directions in the prosecution of
the whole affair, which I had so much at heart, that the repose of my
life depended upon the consequence.

As I fervently wished for another interview, where I might pour out the
effusion of my love without danger of being interrupted, and perhaps
reap some endearing return from the queen of my desires, I implored her
advice and assistance in promoting this event: but she gave me to
understand, that Narcissa would make no precipitate compliances of this
kind, and I would do well to cultivate her brother’s acquaintance, in
the course of which I should not want opportunities of removing that
reserve which my mistress thought herself obliged to maintain during
the infancy of our correspondence. In the meantime she promised to tell
her lady that I had endeavoured by presents and persuasions, to prevail
upon her (Miss Williams) to deliver a letter from me, which she had
refused to charge herself with, until she should know Narcissa’s
sentiments of the matter; and said, by these means she did not doubt of
being able to open a literary communication between us, which could not
fail of introducing more intimate connections.

I approved of her counsel, and, our appointment being renewed for the
next day, left her with an intent of falling upon some method of being
reconciled to the squire, who, I supposed, would be offended with the
trick we had put upon him. With this view I consulted Freeman, who,
from his knowledge of the foxhunter’s disposition, assured me there was
no other method of pacifying him, than that of sacrificing ourselves
for one night to an equal match with him in drinking. This expedient I
found myself necessitated to comply with for the interest of my
passion, and therefore determined to commit the debauch at my own
lodgings, that I might run no risk of being discovered by Narcissa, in
a state of brutal degeneracy. Mr. Freeman, who was to be of the party,
went, at my desire, to the squire, in order to engage him, while I took
care to furnish myself for his reception. My invitation was accepted,
my guests honoured me with their company in the evening, when Bruin
gave me to understand that he had drunk many tons of wine in his life,
but was never served such a trick as I had played upon him the night
before. I promised to atone for my trespass, and, having ordered to
every man his bottle, began the contest with a bumper to the health of
Narcissa. The toasts circulated with great devotion, the liquor began
to operate, our mirth grew noisy, and, as Freeman said, I had the
advantage of drinking small French claret, the savage was effectually
tamed before our senses were in the least affected, and carried home in
an apoplexy of drunkenness.

I was next morning, as usual, favoured with a visit from my kind and
punctual confidante, who, telling me she was permitted to receive my
letters for her mistress, I took up the pen immediately, and, following
the first dictates of my passion, wrote as follows:

“Dear Madam,
    “Were it possible for the powers of utterance to reveal the soft
    emotions of my soul, the fond anxiety, the glowing hopes, the
    chilling flame, that rule my breast by turns, I should need no
    other witness than this paper, to evince the purity and ardour of
    that flame your charms have kindled in my heart, But alas!
    expression wrongs my love! I am inspired with conceptions that no
    language can convey! Your beauty fills me with wonder, your
    understanding with ravishment, and your goodness with adoration! I
    am transported with desire, distracted with doubts, and tortured
    with impatience. Suffer me then, lovely arbitress of my fate, to
    approach you in person, to breathe in soft murmurs my passion to
    your ear, to offer the sacrifice of a heart overflowing with the
    most genuine and disinterested love, to gaze with ecstacy on the
    divine object of my wishes, to hear the music of her enchanting
    tongue, and to rejoice in her smiles of approbation, which will
    banish the most intolerable suspense from the bosom of


“Your enraptured, R— R—.”


Having finished this effusion, I committed it to the care of my
faithful friend, with an injunction to second my entreaty with all her
eloquence and influence, and in the meantime went to dress, with an
intention of visiting Mrs. Snapper and Miss, whom I had utterly
neglected, and indeed almost forgotten, since my dear Narcissa had
resumed the empire of my soul. The old gentlewoman received me very
kindly, and Miss affected a frankness and gaiety which, however, I
could easily perceive was forced and dissembled: among other things,
she pretended to joke me upon my passion for Narcissa, which she
averred was no secret, and asked if I intended to dance with her at the
next assembly. I was a good deal concerned to find myself become the
town talk on this subject, lest the squire, having notice of my
inclinations, should disapprove of them, and, by breaking off all
correspondence with me, deprive me of the opportunities I now enjoyed.
But I resolved to use the interest I had with him, while it lasted; and
that very night, meeting him occasionally, asked his permission to
solicit her company at the ball, which he very readily granted, to my
inexpressible satisfaction.

Having been kept awake the greatest part of the night by a thousand
delightful reveries that took possession of my fancy, I got up by
times, and, flying to the place of rendezvous, had in a little time the
pleasure of seeing Miss Williams approach with a smile on her
countenance, which I interpreted into a good omen. Neither was I
mistaken in my presage. She presented me with a letter from the idol of
my soul, which, after having kissed it devoutly, I opened with the
utmost eagerness, and was blessed with her approbation in these terms:

“Sir,
    “To say I look upon you with indifference would be a piece of
    dissimulation which I think no decorum requires, and no custom can
    justify. As my heart never felt an impression that my tongue was
    ashamed to declare, I will not scruple to own myself pleased with
    your passion; confident of your integrity, and so well convinced of
    my own discretion, that I should not hesitate in granting you the
    interview you desire, were I not overawed by the prying curiosity
    of a malicious world, the censure of which might be fatally
    prejudicial to the reputation of


“Your Narcissa.”


No anchorite in the ecstacy of devotion ever adored a relic with more
fervour than that with which I kissed this inimitable proof of my
charmer’s candour, generosity, and affection! I read it over a hundred
times, was ravished with her confession in the beginning; but the
subscription of Your Narcissa yielded me such delight as I had never
felt before! My happiness was still increased by Miss Williams, who
blessed me with a repetition of her lady’s tender expressions in my
favour, when she received and read my letter. In short, I had all the
reason in the world to believe that this gentle creature’s bosom was
possessed by a passion for me, as warm, though perhaps not so impetuous
as mine for her.

I informed my friend of the squire’s consent to my dancing with
Narcissa at the ball and desired her to tell her mistress, that I would
do myself the honour of visiting her in the afternoon, in consequence
of his permission, when I hoped to find her as indulgent as her brother
had been complaisant in that particular. Miss Williams expressed a good
deal of joy at hearing I was so much in favour with the foxhunter, and
ventured to assure me, that my visit would be very agreeable to my
mistress, the rather because Bruin was engaged to dine abroad. This was
a circumstance which, I scarce need say, pleased me. I went immediately
to the Long Room, where I found him, and, affecting to know nothing of
his engagement, told him, I would do myself the pleasure to wait upon
him in the afternoon, and to present his sister with a ticket for the
ball. He shook me by the hand, according to custom, and, giving me to
understand that he was to dine abroad, desired me to go and drink tea
with Narcissa notwithstanding, and promised to prepare her for my visit
in the meantime.

Everything succeeding thus to my wish, I waited with incredible
impatience for the time, which no sooner arrived than I hastened to the
scene, which my fancy had preoccupied long before. I was introduced
accordingly to the dear enchantress, whom I found accompanied by Miss
Williams, who, on pretence of ordering tea, retired at my approach.
This favourable accident, which alarmed my whole soul, disordered her
also. I found myself actuated by an irresistible impulse; I advanced to
her with eagerness and awe; and, profiting by the confusion that
prevailed over her, clasped the fair angel in my arms, and imprinted a
glowing kiss upon her lips, more soft and fragrant than the dewy
rosebud just bursting from the stem! Her face was in an instant covered
with blushes, her eyes sparkled with resentment; I threw myself at her
feet, and implored her pardon. Her love became advocate in my cause;
her look softened into forgiveness; she raised me up, and chid me with
so much sweetness of displeasure that I could have been tempted to
repeat the offence, had not the coming in of the servant with the
tea-board prevented my presumption. While we were subject to be
interrupted or overheard, we conversed about the approaching ball, at
which she promised to grace me as a partner, but, when the equipage was
removed, and we were left alone, I resumed the more interesting theme,
and expressed myself with such transport and agitation, that my
mistress, fearing I should commit some extravagance, rang the bell for
her maid, whom she detained in the room, as a check upon my vivacity. I
was not sorry for this precaution, because I could unbosom myself
without reserve before Miss Williams, who was the confidante of us
both. I therefore gave a loose to the inspirations of my passion, which
operated so successfully upon the tender affections of Narcissa, that
she laid aside the constraint she had hitherto worn, and blessed me
with the most melting declaration of her mutual flame! It was
impossible for me to forbear taking the advantage of this endearing
condescension. She now gently yielded to my embraces; while I,
encircling all that I held dear within my arms, tasted in advance the
joys of that paradise I hoped in a little time wholly to possess! We
spent the afternoon in all the ecstacy of hope that the most fervent
love exchanged by mutual vows could inspire; and Miss Williams was so
much affected with our chaste caresses, which recalled the sad
remembrance of what she was, that her eyes were filled with tears.

The evening being pretty far advanced, I forced myself from the dear
object of my flame, who indulged me in a tender embrace at parting,
and, repairing to my lodgings, communicated to my friend Strap every
circumstance of my happiness, which filled him with so much pleasure,
that it ran over at his eyes; and he prayed heartily, that no envious
devil might, as formerly, dash the cup of blessing from my lip. When I
reflected on what had happened, and especially on the unreserved
protestations of Narcissa’s love, I could not help being amazed at her
omitting to inquire into the particular circumstances of life and
fortune of one whom she had favoured with her affection, and I began to
be a little anxious about the situation of her finances; well knowing
that I should do an irreparable injury to the person my soul held most
dear, if I should espouse her without being able to support her in the
rank which was certainly her due. I had heard, indeed, while I served
her aunt, that her father had left her a considerable sum; and that
everybody believed she would inherit the greatest part of her
kinswoman’s dowry, but I did not know how far she might be restricted
by the old gentleman’s will in the enjoyment of what he left her: and I
was too well informed of the virtuoso’s late conduct, to think my
mistress could have any expectation from that quarter. I confided,
however, in the good sense and policy of my charmer, who, I was sure,
would not consent to unite her fate with mine, before she had fully
considered and provided for the consequence.

The ball night being arrived, I dressed myself in a suit I had reserved
for some grand occasion; and, having drunk tea with Narcissa and her
brother, conducted my angel to the scene, where she, in a moment,
eclipsed all her female competitors for beauty, and attracted the
admiration of the whole assembly. My heart dilated with pride on this
occasion, and my triumph rejected all bounds, when, after we had danced
together, a certain nobleman, remarkable for his figure, and influence
in the beau monde, came up, and in the hearing of all present, honoured
us with a very particular compliment upon our accomplishments and
appearance; but this transport was soon checked, when I perceived his
lordship attach himself with great assiduity to my mistress, and say
some warm things, which, I thought, savoured too much of passion. It
was then I began to feel the pangs of jealousy; I dreaded the power and
address of my rival; I sickened at his discourse; when she opened her
lips to answer, my heart died within me; when she smiled, I felt the
pains of the damned! I was enraged at his presumption: I cursed her
complaisance: at length he quitted her, and went to the other side of
the room. Narcissa, suspecting nothing of the rage that inflamed me,
put some questions to me as soon as he was gone, to which I made no
reply, but assumed a grim look, which too well denoted the agitation of
my breast, and surprised her not a little. She no sooner observed my
emotion than she changed colour, and asked what ailed me? but before I
could make answer, her brother, pulling me by the sleeve, bade me take
notice of a lady who sat fronting us, whom I immediately, to my vast
astonishment, distinguished to be Melinda, accompanied by her mother,
and an elderly gentleman, whom I did not know. “Wounds! Mr. Randan,”
cried the squire, “is she not a delicate piece of stuff? ’Sdeath! I
have a good mind—if I thought she was a single person.”

Notwithstanding the perplexity I was in, I had reflection enough to
foresee that my passion might suffer greatly by the presence of this
lady, who, in all probability, would revenge herself upon me, for
having formerly disgraced her, by spreading reports to my prejudice. I
was therefore alarmed at these symptoms of the Squire’s admiration; and
for some time did not know what reply to make, when he asked my opinion
of her beauty; at length I came to a determination, and told him that
her name was Melinda, that she had a fortune of ten thousand pounds,
and was said to be under promise of marriage to a certain lord, who
deferred his nuptials a few months, until he should be of age. I
thought this piece of intelligence, which I had myself invented, would
have hindered him effectually from entertaining any further thoughts of
her; but I was egregiously mistaken. The foxhunter had too much
self-sufficiency to despair of success against any competitor on earth.
He therefore made light of her engagement, saying, with a smile of
self-approbation, “Mayhap she will change her mind; what signifies his
being a lord? I think myself as good a man as e’er a lord in
Christendom, and I’ll see if a commoner worth three thousand a year
won’t serve her turn.” This determination startled me not a little; I
knew he would soon discover the contrary of what I advanced; and as I
believed he would find her ear open to his addresses, did not doubt of
meeting with every obstacle in my amour that her malice could invent,
and her influence execute. This reflection increased my chagrin—my
vexation was evident. Narcissa insisted on going home immediately: and,
as I led her to the door, her noble admirer, with a look full of
languishment, directed to her a profound bow, which stung me to the
soul. Before she went into the chair, she asked, with an appearance of
concern, what was the matter with me? and I could pronounce no more
than “By heaven, I am distracted!”




CHAPTER LVIII


Tortured with Jealousy, I go Home, and abuse Strap—receive a Message
from Narcissa, in Consequence of which I hasten to her Apartment, where
her endearing Assurances banish all my Doubts and Apprehensions—in my
Retreat discover Somebody in the Dark, whom, suspecting to be a Spy, I
resolve to kill, but, to my great Surprise, am convinced of his being
no other than Strap—Melinda slanders me—I become acquainted with Lord
Quiverwit, who endeavours to sound me with regard to Narcissa—the
Squire is introduced to his Lordship, and grows cold towards me—I learn
from my Confidante, that this Nobleman professes honourable Love to my
Mistress, who continues faithful to me, notwithstanding the scandalous
Reports she had heard to my Prejudice—I am mortified with an Assurance
that her whole Fortune depends upon the Pleasure of her Brother—Mr.
Freeman condoles me on the Decline of my Character, which I vindicate
so much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes to combat Fame on my
behalf


Having uttered this exclamation, at which she sighed, I went home in
the condition of a frantic Bedlamite: and, finding the fire in my
apartment almost extinguished, vented my fury upon poor Strap, whose
ear I pinched with such violence, that he roared hideously with pain;
and, when I quitted my hold, looked so foolishly aghast, that no
unconcerned spectator could have seen him without being seized with an
immoderate fit of laughter. It is true, I was soon sensible of the
injury I had done, and asked pardon for the outrage I had committed;
upon which my faithful valet, shaking his head, said, “I forgive you,
and may God forgive you!” But he could not help shedding some tears at
my unkindness. I felt unspeakable remorse for what I had done, cursed
my own ingratitude, and considered his tears as a reproach that my
soul, in its present disturbance, could not bear. It set all my
passions into a ferment: I swore horrible oaths without meaning or
application. I foamed at the mouth, kicked the chairs about the room,
and played abundance of mad pranks that frightened my friend almost out
of his senses. At length my transport subsided, I became melancholy,
and wept insensibly.

During this state of dejection, I was surprised with the appearance of
Miss Williams, whom Strap, blubbering all the while, had conducted into
the chamber without giving me previous notice of her approach. She was
extremely affected with my condition, which she had learned from him,
begged me to moderate my passion, suspend my conjectures, and follow
her to Narcissa, who desired to see me forthwith. That dear name
operated upon me like a charm! I started up, and, without opening my
lips, was conducted into her apartment through the garden, which we
entered by a private door. I found the adorable creature in tears; I
was melted at the sight—we continued silent for some time—my heart was
too full to speak—her snowy bosom heaved with fond resentment; at last
she sobbing cried, “What have I done to disoblige you?” My heart was
pierced with the tender question. I drew near with the utmost reverence
of affection. I fell upon my knees before her, and, kissing her hand,
exclaimed, “Oh! thou art all goodness and perfection! I am undone by
want of merit; I am unworthy to possess thy charms, which heaven hath
destined for the arms of some more favourite being.” She guessed the
cause of my disquiet, upbraided me gently for my suspicion, and gave me
such flattering assurances of her eternal fidelity, that all my doubts
and fears forsook me, and peace and satisfaction reigned within my
breast.

At midnight I left the fair nymph to her repose, and, being let out by
Miss Williams at the garden gate by which I entered, began to explore
my way homeward in the dark, when I heard at my back a noise like that
of a baboon when he mews and chatters. I turned instantly, and,
perceiving something black, concluded I was discovered by some spy,
employed to watch for that purpose; aroused at this conjecture, by
which the reputation of the virtuous Narcissa appeared in jeopardy, I
drew my sword, and would have sacrificed him to her fame, had not the
voice of Strap restrained my arm, it was with great difficulty he could
pronounce, “D—d—d-do! mum—um—um—murder me if you please.” Such an
effect had the cold upon his jaws, that his teeth rattled like a pair
of castanets. Pleased to be thus undeceived, I laughed at his
consternation, and asked what brought him thither? Upon which he gave
me to understand, that his concern for me had induced him to follow me
to that place, where the same reason had detained him till now, and he
frankly owned, that, in spite of the esteem he had for Miss Williams he
began to be very uneasy about me, considering the disposition in which
I went abroad; and, if I had stayed much longer, would certainly have
alarmed the neighbourhood in my behalf. The knowledge of this his
intention confounded me. I represented to him the mischievous
consequences that would have attended such a rash action, and,
cautioning him severely against any such design for the future,
concluded my admonition with an assurance, that, in case he should ever
act so madly, I would, without hesitation, put him to death. “Have a
little patience!” cried he, in a lamentable tone; “your displeasure
will do the business, without your committing murder.” I was touched
with this reproach; and, as soon as we got home, made it my business to
appease him, by explaining the cause of that transport during which I
had used him so unworthily.

Next day when I went into the Long Room, I observed several whispers
circulate all of a sudden, and did not doubt that Melinda had been busy
with my character; but I consoled myself with the love of Narcissa,
upon which I rested with the most perfect confidence; and going up to
the rowly-powly table, won a few pieces from my suspected rival, who,
with an easy politeness, entered into conversation with me, and,
desiring my company to the coffee-house, treated me with tea and
chocolate. I remembered Strutwell, and guarded against his insinuating
behaviour; nor was my suspicion wrong placed; he artfully turned the
discourse upon Narcissa, and endeavoured by hinting at an intrigue he
pretended to be engaged in elsewhere, to learn what connection there
was between her and me. But all his finesse was ineffectual, I was
convinced of his dissimulation, and gave such general answers to his
inquiries, that he was forced to drop the subject, and talk of
something else.

While we conversed in this manner, the savage came in with another
gentleman, who introduced him to his lordship, and he was received with
such peculiar marks of distinction, that I was persuaded the courtier
intended to use him in some shape or other; and from thence I drew an
unlucky omen. But I had more cause to be dismayed the following day,
when I saw the squire in company with Melinda and her mother, who
honoured me with several disdainful glances; and when I afterwards
threw myself in his way, instead of the cordial shake of the hand, he
returned my salute with a cold repetition of “Servant, servant!” which
he pronounced with such indifference or rather contempt, that if he had
not been Narcissa’s brother, I should have affronted him in public.

These occurrences disturbed me not a little; I foresaw the brooding
storm, and armed myself with resolution for the occasion; but Narcissa,
being at stake, I was far from being resigned. I could have renounced
every other comfort of life with some degree of fortitude, but the
prospect of losing her disabled all my philosophy, and tortured my soul
into madness.

Miss Williams found me, next morning, full of anxious tumult, which did
not abate when she told me that my Lord Quiverwit, having professed
honourable intentions, had been introduced to my lovely mistress by her
brother, who had, at the same time, from the information of Melinda,
spoken of me as an Irish fortune-hunter, without either birth or
estate; who supported myself in the appearance of a gentleman by
sharping and other infamous practices; and who was of such an obscure
origin, that I did not even know my own extraction. Though I expected
all this malice, I could not hear it with temper, especially as truth
was so blended with falsehood in the assertion, that it would be almost
impossible to separate the one from the other in my vindication. But I
said nothing on this head, being impatient to know how Narcissa had
been affected with the discovery. That generous creature, far from
believing these imprecations, was no sooner withdrawn with her
confidante, than she inveighed with great warmth against the
malevolence of the world, to which only she ascribed the whole of what
had been said to my disadvantage, and, calling every circumstance of my
behaviour to her into review before her, found everything so polite,
honourable, and disinterested, that she could not harbour the least
doubt of my being the gentleman I assumed. “I have indeed,” said she,
“purposely forborne to ask the particulars of his life, lest the
recapitulation of some misfortunes, which he has undergone, should give
him pain; and, as to the article of his fortune, I own myself equally
afraid of inquiring into it, and of discovering the state of my own,
lest we should find ourselves both unhappy in the explanation; for,
alas! my provision is conditional, and depends entirely on my marrying
with my brother’s consent.”

I was thunderstruck with this intelligence, the light forsook my eyes,
the colour vanished from my cheeks, and I remained in a state of
universal trepidation! My female friend, perceiving my disorder,
encouraged me with assurances of Narcissa’s constancy, and the hope of
some accident favourable to our love; and, as a further consolation,
gave me to understand, that she had acquainted my mistress with the
outlines of my life: and that, although she was no stranger to the
present low state of my finances, her love and esteem were rather
increased than diminished by the knowledge of my circumstances. I was
greatly comforted by this assurance, which saved me a world of
confusion and anxiety; for I must have imparted my situation one day to
Narcissa, and this task I could not have performed without shame and
disorder.

As I did not doubt that by this time the scandalous aspersions of
Melinda were diffused all over the town, I resolved to collect my whole
strength of assurance, to browbeat the efforts of her malice, and to
publish her adventure with the frenchified barber by way of reprisal.
In the meantime, having promised to be at the garden-gate about
midnight, Miss Williams took her leave, bidding me repose myself
entirely on the affection of my dear Narcissa, which was as perfect as
inviolable. Before I went abroad, I was visited by Freeman, who came on
purpose to inform me of the infamous stories that were raised at my
expense. I heard them with great temper, and in my turn disclosed
everything that had happened between Melinda and me; and among other
circumstances entertained him with the story of the barber, letting him
know what share his friend Banter had in that affair. He was convinced
of the injury my reputation had suffered; and, no longer doubting the
fountain from whence this deluge of slander had flowed upon me,
undertook to undeceive the town in my behalf, and roll the stream back
upon its source; but in the meantime, cautioned me from appearing in
public, while the prepossession was so strong against me, lest I should
meet with some affront that might have bad consequences.




CHAPTER LIX


I receive an extraordinary Message at the Door of the Long Room, which,
however, enter, and affront the Squire, who threatens to take the Law
of me—Rebuke Melinda for her Malice—she weeps with Vexation—Lord
Quiverwit is severe upon me—I retort his Sarcasm—am received with the
utmost Tenderness by Narcissa, who desires to hear the Story of my
Life—we vow eternal Constancy to other—I retire—am waked by a
Messenger, who brings a Challenge from Quiverwit, whom I meet, engage,
and vanquish


I thanked him for his advice, which, however, my pride and resentment
would not permit me to follow; for he no sooner left me, in order to do
justice to my character among his friends and acquaintance, than I
sallied out, and went directly to the Long Room. I was met at the door
by a servant, who presented a billet to me without a subscription,
importing that my presence was disagreeable to the company, and
desiring I would take the hint without further disturbance, and bestow
myself elsewhere for the future. This peremptory message filled me with
indignation. I followed the fellow who delivered it, and, seizing him
by the collar in presence of all the company, threatened to put him
instantly to death, if he did not discover the scoundrel who had
charged him with such an impudent commission, that I might punish him
as he deserved. The messenger, affrighted at my menaces and furious
looks, fell upon his knees, and told me, that the gentleman who ordered
him to deliver the letter was no other than Narcissa’s brother, who, at
that time, stood at the other end of the room, talking to Melinda. I
went up to him immediately, and in the hearing of his inamorata,
accosted him in these words; “Lookee, squire, were it not for one
consideration that protects you from my resentment, I would cane you
where you stand, for having had the presumption to send me this
scurrilous intimation;” which I tore to pieces and threw in his face:
at the same time darting an angry regard at his mistress, I told her, I
was sorry she had put it out of my power to compliment her upon her
invention, but at the expense of her good nature and veracity. Her
admirer, whose courage never rose, but in proportion to the wine he had
swallowed, instead of resenting my address in what is called an
honourable way, threatened to prosecute me for an assault, and took
witnesses accordingly: while she, piqued at his pusillanimous
behaviour, and enraged at the sarcasm I had uttered against her,
endeavoured to make her quarrel a public cause, and wept aloud with
spite and vexation.

The tears of a lady could not fail of attracting the notice and concern
of the spectators to whom she complained of my rudeness with great
bitterness, saying, if she were a man, I durst not use her so. The
greatest part of the gentlemen, already prejudiced against me, were
offended at the liberty I had taken, as appeared from their looks;
though none of them signified their disgust any other way except my
Lord Quiverwit, who ventured to say, with a sneer, that I was in the
right to establish my own character, of which he had now no longer any
doubt. Nettled at this severe equivocation, which raised a laugh at my
expense, I replied with some warmth, “I am proud of having in that
particular got the start of your lordship.” He made no answer to my
repartee, but with a contemptuous smile walked off, leaving me in a
very disagreeable situation. In vain did I make up to several people of
my acquaintance, whose conversation, I hoped, would banish my
confusion; everybody shunned me like a person infected, and I should
not have been able to bear my disgrace, had not the idea of the ever
faithful and fond Narcissa come to my relief. I quitted the scene of my
mortification, and, sauntering about the town, happened to wake from my
contemplation, when I found myself just opposite to a toy-shop, which I
entered, and purchased a ring set with a ruby in the form of a heart,
surrounded by diamond sparks, for which I paid ten guineas, intending
it for a present to the charmer of my soul.

I was introduced, at the hour appointed, to this divine creature, who,
notwithstanding what she had heard to my disadvantage, received me with
the utmost confidence and tenderness; and, having been informed of the
general sketches of my life by Miss Williams, expressed a desire, of
knowing the particular circumstances, which I related with great
candour, omitting, however, some things which I concluded altogether
improper for her ear, and which the reader’s reflection will easily
suggest. As my story was little else than a recital of misfortunes, the
tear of sympathy ceased not to trickle from her enchanting eyes during
the whole of the narration, which, when I had finished, she recompensed
me for my trouble with the most endearing protestations of eternal
love. She bewailed her restricted condition, as it was the means of
retarding my happiness; told me that Lord Quiverwit, by her brother’s
permission, had been to drink tea with her that very afternoon, and
actually proposed marriage; and, seeing me extremely affected with this
piece of information, offered to give me a convincing proof of her
affection, by espousing me in private, and leaving the rest to fate. I
was penetrated with this instance of her regard, but, that I might not
be outdone in generosity, resisted the bewitching temptation in
consideration of her honour and interest; at the same time I presented
my ring as a pledge of my inviolable attachment, and, on my knees,
implored Heaven to shower its curses on my head, if ever my heart
should entertain one thought unworthy of the passion I then avowed. She
received my token, gave me in return her picture in miniature,
exquisitely drawn and set in gold; and, in the same posture, called
Heaven to witness and to judge her flame. Our vows being thus
reciprocally breathed, a confidence of hope ensued, and our mutual
fondness becoming as intimate as innocence would allow, I grew
insensible of the progress of time, and it was morning before I could
tear myself from this darling of my soul! My good angel foresaw what
would happen, and permitted me to indulge myself on this occasion, in
consideration of the fatal absence I was doomed to suffer.

I went to bed immediately on my return to my lodging, and, having slept
about two hours, was waked by Strap, who in great confusion told me
there was a footman below with a letter, which he would deliver to
nobody but myself. Alarmed at this piece of news, I desired my friend
to show him into my chamber, and received the following letter, which,
he said, required an immediate answer:

“Sir,—
    “When any man injures my honour, let the difference of rank between
    us be ever so great, I am contented to wave the privilege of my
    quality, and to seek reparation from him on equal terms. The
    insolence of your reply to me yesterday, in the Long Room, I might
    have overlooked, had not your presumptive emulation in a much more
    interesting affair, and which I made this morning, concurred in
    persuading me to chastise your audacity with my sword. If you
    therefore have spirit enough to support the character you assume,
    you will not fail to follow the bearer immediately to a convenient
    place, where you shall be met by


“Quiverwit.”


Whether I was enervated by the love and favour of Narcissa, or awed by
the superior station of my antagonist, I know not, but I never had less
inclination to fight than at this time. However, finding there was a
necessity for vindicating the reputation of my mistress, as well as for
asserting my own honour, I forthwith rose, and, dressing in a hurry,
put on my sword, bade Strap attend me, and set out with my conductor,
cursing my bad fortune all the way, for having been observed in my
return from my angel; for so I interpreted his lordship’s discovery.
When I came within sight of my rival, his lacquey told me he had orders
to stop; upon which I commanded Strap to halt also, while I walked
forward; resolving, if possible, to come to an explanation with my
challenger, before we should come to battle. Nor was an opportunity
wanting; for I no sooner approached than he asked, with a stern
countenance, what business I had in Mr. Topehall’s garden so early in
the morning? “I don’t know, my lord,” said I, “how to answer a question
put to me with such magisterial haughtiness. If your lordship will
please to expostulate calmly, you will have no cause to repent of your
condescension; otherwise I am not to be intimated into any confession.”
“There is no room for denial,” answered he; “I saw you come out with my
own eyes.” “Did any other see me?” said I. “I neither know nor care,”
said he; “I want no other evidence than that of my own senses.” Pleased
to hear that the suspicion was confined to him alone, I endeavoured to
appease his jealousy, by owning an intrigue with the waiting maid: but
he had too much discernment to be so easily imposed upon, and told me
there was only one way to convince him of the truth of what I alleged,
which was no other than renouncing all claim to Narcissa upon oath, and
promising, upon honour, never to speak to her for the future.
Exasperated at this proposal, I unsheathed my sword, saying, “Heavens!
what title have you, or any man on earth, to impose such terms on me?”
He did the same, and making towards me with a contracted brow, said I
was a villain, and had dishonoured Narcissa. “He’s a villain,” I
replied, in a transport of fury, “who brands me with that imputation!
She is a thousand times more chaste than the mother that bore you; and
I will assert her honour with my heart’s blood!” So saying, I rushed
upon him with more eagerness than address, and, endeavouring to get
within his point, received a wound in my neck, which redoubled my rage.
He excelled me in temper as well as in skill, by which means he parried
my thrusts with great calmness, until I had almost exhausted my
spirits; and, when he perceived me beginning to flag, attacked me
fiercely in his turn. Finding himself, however, better opposed than he
expected, he resolved to follow his lounge, and close with me;
accordingly, his sword entered my waistcoat, on the side of the breast
bone, and, running up between my shirt and skin, appeared over my left
shoulder. I imagined that his weapon had perforated my lungs, and of
consequence that the wound was mortal; therefore, determined not to die
unrevenged, I seized his shell, which was close to my breast, before he
could disentangle his point, and, keeping it fast with my left hand,
shortened my own sword with my right, intending to run him through the
heart; but he received the thrust in the left arm, which penetrated up
to the shoulder blade. Disappointed at this expectation, and afraid
still that death would frustrate my revenge, I grappled with him, and,
being much the stronger, threw him upon the ground, where I wrested his
sword out of his hand, and, so great was my confusion, that instead of
turning the point upon him, struck out three of his foreteeth with the
hilt. In the meantime, our servants, seeing us fall, ran up to separate
and assist us; but before their approach I was upon my feet, and had
discovered that my supposed mortal wound was only a slight scratch. The
knowledge of my own safety disarmed me of a good deal of my resentment,
and I began to inquire with some concern into the situation of my
antagonist, who remained on the ground bleeding plentifully at his
mouth and arm. I helped his footman to raise him, and, having bound up
his wound with my handkerchief, assured it was not dangerous; I
likewise restored his sword, and offered to support him to his house.
He thanked me with an air of sullen dignity: and whispering that I
should hear from him soon, went away, leaning on his servant’s
shoulder.

I was surprised at this promise, which I construed into a threat, and
resolved, if ever he should call me out again, to use whatever
advantage fortune might give me over him in another manner. In the
meantime I had leisure to take notice of Strap, who seemed quite
stupified with horror: I comforted him with an assurance, that I had
received no damage, and explained the nature of this affair as we
walked homeward. By the time I had got into my apartment, I found the
wound in my neck stiff and uneasy, and a good deal of clotted blood ran
down upon my shirt; upon which I pulled off my coat and waistcoat, and
unbuttoned my collar, that I might dress it with more ease. My friend
no sooner perceived my shirt quite dyed with blood, than, imagining I
had got at least twenty thousand wounds, he cried, “O Jesus!” and fell
flat on the floor. I stopped the bleeding with a little dry lint, and,
applying a plaster over it, cleaned myself from the gore, shifted, and
dressed, while he lay senseless at my feet, so that when he recovered,
and saw me perfectly well, he could scarce believe his own eyes. Now
that the danger was passed, I was very well pleased with what had
happened, hoping that it would soon become known, and consequently
dignify my character not a little in this place. I was also proud of
having shown myself, in some shape, worthy of the love of Narcissa,
who, I was persuaded, would not think the worse of me for what I had
done.




CHAPTER LX


I am visited by Freeman, with whom I appear in Public, and am
caressed—am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose Presence I quit
flung—Narcissa is carried off by her Brother—I intend to pursue him,
and am dissuaded by my Friend—engage in Play, and lose all my Money—set
out for London—try my Fortune at the Gaming Table without
success—receive a letter from Narcissa—bilk my Tailor


While I entertained myself with these reflections, the news of the
duel, being communicated by some unknown channel, spread all over the
town. I was visited by Freeman, who testified his surprise at finding
me; for it was told, that Lord Quiverwit being dead of his wounds, I
had absconded, in order to avoid the cognizance of the law. I asked, if
people guessed the occasion of the quarrel; and, understanding it was
attributed to his lordship’s resentment of my reply in the Long Room,
confirmed that conjecture, glad to find Narcissa unsuspected. My
friend, after I had assured him that my antagonist was in no danger,
wished me joy of the event, than which, he said, nothing could happen
more opportunely to support the idea he had given of my character to
his friends, among whom he had been very assiduous in my behalf.

On the strength of this assurance, I went with him to the coffee-house,
where I was saluted by a great many of those very persons who had
shunned me the preceding day; and I found everybody making merry with
the story of Melinda’s French gallant. While I remained in this place,
I received a message from Lord Quiverwit, desiring, if I were not
engaged, to see me at his house.

Thither I immediately repaired, and was conducted to an apartment where
I was received by his lordship in bed. When we were left by ourselves,
he thanked me in very polite terms for having used the advantage
fortune had given me over him with such moderation, and asked pardon
for any offence his resentment might have prompted him to commit. “I
would willingly,” said he, “make you my friend; but, as it is
impossible for me to divest myself of my passion for Narcissa, I am too
well convinced of your sentiments, to think we shall ever agree on that
subject. I took the liberty, therefore, of sending for you, in order to
own candidly, that I cannot help opposing your success with that young
lady; though, at the same time I promise to regulate my opposition by
the dictates of justice and honour. This, however, I think proper to
advertise you of, that she has no independent fortune; and, if you
should even succeed in your addresses, you will have the mortification
to see her reduced to indigence, unless you have wherewithal to support
her—and I am credibly informed of your incapacity that way—nay, I will
confess, that, urged by this consideration, I have actually sent notice
to her brother of the progress I suspect you have made in her
affection, and desired him to take his precautions accordingly.”
Alarmed and provoked at this information, I told his lordship, that I
did not see how he could reconcile that piece of conduct with his
profession of open dealing, and flung away from him in a passion.

As I walked homeward, in hope of hearing from my mistress as usual by
means of Miss Williams, I was surprised with the waving of a
handkerchief from the window of a coach-and-six that passed by me at
full speed: and upon further observation, I saw a servant on horseback
riding after it, who, I knew by his livery, belonged to the squire.
Thunderstruck with this discovery, the knowledge of my misfortune
rushed all at once upon my reflection! I guessed immediately that the
signal was made by the dear hand of Narcissa, who, being hurried away
in consequence of Lord Quiverwit’s message to her brother, had no other
method of relating her distress, and imploring my assistance. Frantic
with this conjecture, I ran to my lodgings, snatched my pistols, and
ordered Strap to get post-horses, with such incoherence of speech and
disorder, that the poor valet, terrified with the suspicion of another
duel, instead of providing what I desired, went forthwith to Freeman,
who, being informed of my behaviour, came straight to my apartment, and
conjured me so pathetically to make him acquainted with the cause of my
uneasiness, that I could not refuse telling him my happiness was fled
with Narcissa, and that I must retrieve her or perish. He represented
the madness of such an undertaking, and endeavoured to divert me from
it with great strength of friendship and reason. But all his arguments
would have been ineffectual, had he not put me in mind of the
dependence I ought to have on the love of Narcissa, and the attachment
of her maid, who could not fail of finding opportunities to advertise
me of their situation; and at the same time demonstrated the injury my
charmer’s reputation must suffer from my precipitate retreat. I was
convinced and composed by these considerations: I appeared in public
with an air of tranquillity, was well received by the best company in
town, and, my misfortune taking air, condoled accordingly: while I had
the satisfaction of seeing Melinda so universally discountenanced that
she was fain to return to London, in order to avoid the scoffs and
censure of the ladies at Bath. But, though the hope of hearing from the
darling of my soul supported my spirits a little while, I began to be
very uneasy, when, at the end of several weeks I found that expectation
disappointed. In short, melancholy and despondence took possession of
my soul; and, repining at that providence which, by acting the
stepmother towards me, kept me from the fruition of my wishes, I
determined, in a fit of despair, to risk all I had at the gaming table,
with a view of acquiring a fortune sufficient to render me independent
for life; or of plunging myself into such a state of misery, as would
effectually crush every ambitious hope that now tortured my
imagination.

Actuated by this fatal resolution, I engaged in play, and, after some
turns of fortune found myself, at the end of three days, worth a
thousand pounds; but it was not my intention to stop there, for which
cause I kept Strap ignorant of my success, and continued my career
until I was reduced to five guineas, which I would have hazarded also,
had I not been ashamed to fall from a bet of two hundred pounds to such
a petty sum.

Having thus executed my scheme, I went home, amazed to find myself so
much at ease, and informed my friend Strap of my mischance with such
calmness, that he, imagining I joked, affected to receive the tidings
with great equanimity. But both he and I found ourselves mistaken very
soon. I had misinterpreted my own stupidity into deliberate
resignation, and he had reason to believe me in earnest when he saw me
next morning agitated with the most violent despair, which he
endeavoured to alleviate with all the consolation in his power.

In one of my lucid intervals, however, I charged him to take a place in
the stage coach for London; and, in the meantime, paid my debts in
Bath, which amounted to thirty shillings only. Without taking leave of
my friends, I embarked, Strap having the good fortune to find a return
horse, and arrived in town, without having met with anything remarkable
on the road. While we crossed Bagshot Heath, I was seized with a sort
of inclination to retrieve my fortune, by laying passengers under
contribution in some such place. My thoughts were so circumstanced at
this time, that I should have digested the crime of robbery, so
righteously had I concerted my plan, and ventured my life in the
execution, had I not been deterred by reflecting upon the infamy that
attends detection.

The apartment I formerly lived in being unengaged, I took possession of
it, and next day went in quest of Banter, who received me with open
arms, in expectation of having his bond discharged to his liking: but
when he understood what had happened, his countenance changed of a
sudden, and he told me, with a dryness of displeasure peculiar to
himself, that, if he were in my place, he would put it out of fortune’s
power to play him such another trick, and be avenged of his own
indiscretion at once. When I desired him to explain his meaning, he
pointed to his neck, raised himself on his tiptoes, and was going away
without any further ceremony, when I put him in mind of my indigence,
and demanded the five guineas I had formerly lent him. “Five guineas?”
cried he; “zounds! had you acted with common prudence, you might have
had twenty thousand in your pocket by this time. I depended upon five
hundred from you, as much as if I had had notes for it in the bank; and
by all the rules of equity, you are indebted to me for that sum.” I was
neither pleased nor convinced by this computation, and insisted on my
right with such determined obstinacy, that he was fain to alter his
ton, and appease my clamour by assuring me, that he was not master of
five shillings. Society in distress generally promotes good
understanding among people; from being a dun I descended to be a
client, and asked his advice about repairing my losses. He counselled
me to have recourse again to the gaming table, where I succeeded so
well before, and put myself in a condition by selling my watch. I
followed his directions, and, having accommodated him with a few
pieces, went to the place, where I lost every shilling.

Then I returned to my lodgings full of desperate resolution, and having
made Strap acquainted with my fate, ordered him to pawn my sword
immediately, that I might be enabled to make another effort. This
affectionate creature no sooner understood my purpose, than, seized
with insupportable sorrow at the prospect of my misery, he burst into
tears, and asked what I proposed to do after the small sum he could
raise on the sword should be spent. “On my own account” said he, “I am
quite unconcerned; for, while God spares me health and these ten
fingers, I can earn a comfortable subsistence anywhere; but what must
become of you, who have less humility to stoop, and more appetites to
gratify?” Here I interrupted him, by saying, with a gloomy aspect, I
should never want a resource while I had a loaded pistol in possession.
Stupified with horror at this dreadful insinuation, he stood mute for
some time and then broke out into “God of his infinite mercy enable you
to withstand that temptation of the devil! Consider your immortal
soul—there’s no repentance in the grave! O Lord! that we ever should
have come to this! Are we not enjoined to resign ourselves to the will
of Heaven?—where is your patience?—Durum patientia frango—you are but a
young man—there may be many good things in store for you—accidit in
puncto quo non speratur in anno—remember your uncle, Mr. Bowling;
perhaps he is now on his voyage homeward, pleasing himself with the
hopes of seeing and relieving you; nay, peradventure, he has already
arrived, for the ship was expected about this time.” A ray of hope shot
athwart my soul at this suggestion; I thanked my friend for this
seasonable recollection, and, after having promised to take no
resolution till his return, dismissed him to Wapping for intelligence.

In his absence I was visited by Banter, who, being informed of my bad
luck at play, told me that fortune would probably be one day weary of
persecuting me. “In the meantime,” said he, “here’s a letter for you,
which I received just now inclosed in one from Freeman.” I snatched it
with eagerness, and knowing the superscription to be of Narcissa’s
handwriting, kissed it with transport, and, having opened it, read:

“It is with great difficulty that I have stolen, from the observation
of those spies who are set over me, this opportunity of telling you,
that I was suddenly carried away from Bath by my brother, who was
informed of our correspondence by Lord Quiverwit whom, I since
understand, you have wounded in a duel on my account. As I am fully
convinced of your honour and love, I hope I shall never hear of such
desperate proofs of either for the future. I am so strictly watched
that it will be impossible for you to see me, until my brother’s
suspicion shall abate, or Heaven contrive some other unforeseen event
in our behalf. In the meantime, you may depend on the constancy and
affection of


“Your own
“Narcissa.


    “P. S. Miss Williams, who is my fellow prisoner, desires to be
    remembered to you. We are both in good health, and only in pain for
    you, especially as it will be impracticable for you to convey any
    message or letter to the place of our confinement; for which reason
    pray desist from the attempt, that, by miscarrying, might prolong
    our captivity.


“N—.”


This kind letter afforded me great consolation: I communicated it to
Banter, and, at the same time, showed him her picture: he approved of
her beauty and good sense, and could not help owning that my neglect of
Miss Snapper was excusable, when such a fine creature engrossed my
attention.

I began to be reconciled to my fate, and imagined, that, if I could
contrive means of subsisting until my uncle should arrive, in case he
were not already at home, he would enable me to do something effectual
in behalf of my love and fortune; I therefore consulted Banter about a
present supply, who no sooner understood that I had credit, with a
tailor, than he advised me to take off two or three suits of rich
clothes, and convert them into cash, by selling them at half-price to a
salesman in Monmouth Street. I was startled at this proposal, which I
thought savoured a little of fraud; he rendered it palatable, by
observing that, in a few months, I might be in a condition to do
everybody justice; and, in the meantime, I was acquitted by the honesty
of my intention. I suffered myself to be persuaded by his salvo, by
which my necessity, rather than my judgment, was convinced; and, when I
found there were no accounts of the ship in which my uncle embarked,
actually put the scheme in practice, and raised by it five-and-twenty
guineas, paying him for his advice with the old five.




CHAPTER LXI


I am arrested—carried to the Marshalsea—find my old Acquaintance beau
Jackson in that Jail—he informs me of his Adventures—Strap arrives, and
with difficulty is comforted—Jackson introduces me to a Poet—I admire
his Conversation and Capacity—am deeply affected with my
Misfortune—Strap hires himself as a Journeyman Barber


But this expedient was in a few weeks followed with a consequence I did
not foresee. A player, having purchased one of the suits that were
exposed to sale, appeared in it on the stage one night, while my tailor
unfortunately happened to be present. He knew it immediately, and,
inquiring minutely into the affair, discovered my whole contrivance:
upon which he came into my lodgings, and telling me that he was very
much straightened for want of money, presented his bill, which amounted
to fifty pounds. Surprised at which unexpected address, I affected to
treat him cavalierly, swore some oaths, asked if he doubted my honour,
and telling him I should take care whom I dealt with for the future,
bade him come again in three days. He obeyed me punctually, demanded
his money, and finding himself amused with bare promises, arrested me
that very day in the street. I was not much shocked at this adventure,
which, indeed, put an end to a state of horrible expectation: but I
refused to go to a sponging-house, where I heard there was nothing but
the most flagrant imposition: and, a coach being called, was carried to
the Marshalsea, attended by a bailiff and his follower, who were very
much disappointed and chagrined at my resolution.

The turnkey, guessing from my appearance that I had money in my pocket,
received me with the repetition of the Latin word depone, and gave me
to understand, that I must pay beforehand for the apartment I should
choose to dwell in. I desired to see his conveniences, and hired a
small paltry bed-chamber for a crown a week, which, in any other place,
would not have let for half the money. Having taken possession of this
dismal habitation, I sent for Strap, and my thoughts were busied in
collecting matter of consolation to that faithful squire, when somebody
knocked at my door, which I no sooner opened, than a young fellow
entered in very shabby clothes and marvellous foul linen. After a low
bow, he called me by name, and asked if I had forgotten him. His voice
assisted me in recollecting his person, whom I soon recognised to be my
old acquaintance, Jackson, of whom mention is made in the first part of
my memoirs. I saluted him cordially, expressed my satisfaction at
finding him alive, and condoled him on his present situation, which,
however, did not seem to affect him much, for he laughed very heartily
at the occasion of our meeting so unexpectedly in this place. Our
mutual compliments being past, I inquired about his amour with the lady
of fortune, which seemed to be so near a happy conclusion when I had
the pleasure of seeing him last: and, after an immoderate fit of
laughter, he gave me to understand that he had been egregiously bit in
that affair. “You must know,” said he, “that a few days after our
adventure with the bawd, and her b—ches, I found means to be married to
that same blue lady you speak of, and passed the night with her at her
lodgings, so much to her satisfaction, that early in the morning, after
a good deal of snivelling and sobbing, she owned, that, far from being
an heiress of great fortune, she was no other than a common woman of
the town, who had decoyed me into matrimony, in order to enjoy the
privilege of a femme couverte; and that, unless I made my escape
immediately, I should be arrested for a debt of her contracting, by
bailiffs employed and instructed for that purpose. Startled at this
intimation, I rose in a twinkling, and taking leave of my spouse with
several hearty damns, got safe into the verge of the court, where I
kept snug, until I was appointed surgeon’s mate of a man-of-war at
Portsmouth; for which place I set out on Sunday, went on board of my
ship, in which I sailed to the Straits, where I had the good fortune to
be made surgeon of a sloop that came home a few months after, and was
put out of commission: whereupon, I came to London, imagining myself
forgotten, and freed from my wife and her creditors, but had not been
in town a week, before I was arrested for a debt of hers, amounting to
twenty pounds, and brought to this place, where I have been fixed by
another action since that time. However, you know my disposition, I
defy care and anxiety; and being on the half-pay list, make shift to
live here tolerably easy.” I congratulated him on his philosophy, and,
remembering that I was in his debt, repaid the money he formerly lent
me, which, I believe, was far from being unseasonable. I then inquired
about the economy of the place, which he explained to my satisfaction;
and, after we had agreed to mess together, he was just now going to
give orders for dinner when Strap arrived.

I never in my life saw sorrow so extravagantly expressed in any
countenance as in that of my honest friend, which was, indeed,
particularly adapted by nature for such impressions. When we were left
by ourselves, I communicated to him my disaster, and endeavoured to
console him with the same arguments he had formerly used to me, withal
representing the fair chance I had of being relieved in a short time by
Mr. Bowling. But his grief was unutterable: he seemed to give attention
without listening, and wrung his hands in silence; so that I was in a
fair way of being infected by his behaviour, when Jackson returned,
and, perceiving the deference I paid to Strap, although in a footman’s
habit, distributed his crumbs of comfort with such mirth, jollity and
unconcern, that the features of the distressed squire relaxed by
degrees; he recovered the use of speech, and began to be a little more
reconciled to this lamentable event. We dined together on boiled beef
and greens, brought from a cook’s shop in the neighbourhood, and,
although this meal was served up in a manner little corresponding with
the sphere of life in which I had lately lived, I made a virtue of
necessity, ate with good appetite, and treated my friends with a bottle
of wine, which had the desired effect of increasing the good humour of
my fellow prisoner, and exhilarating the spirits of Strap, who now
talked cavalierly of my misfortune.

After dinner Jackson left us to our private affairs; when I desired my
friend to pack up all our things, and carry them to some cheap lodgings
he should choose for himself in the neighbourhood of the Marshalsea,
after he had discharged my lodgings, for which purpose I gave him
money. I likewise recommended to him the keeping my misfortune secret,
and saying to my landlord, or any other who should inquire for me, that
I was gone into the country for a few weeks: at the same time I laid
strong injunctions upon him to call every second day upon Banter, in
case he should receive any letter for me from Narcissa, by the channel
of Freeman; and by all means to leave a direction for himself at my
uncle’s lodgings in Wapping, by which I might be found when my kinsman
should arrive.

When he departed to execute these orders (which by the bye were
punctually performed that very night), I found myself so little
seasoned to my situation, that I dreaded reflection, and sought shelter
from it in the company of the beau, who, promising to regale me with a
lecture upon taste, conducted me to the common side, where I saw a
number of naked miserable wretches assembled together. We had not been
here many minutes, when a figure appeared, wrapped in a dirty rug, tied
about his loins with two pieces of list, of different colours, knotted
together; having a black bushy beard, and his head covered with a huge
mass of brown periwig, which seems to have been ravished from the crown
of some scarecrow. This apparition, stalking in with great solemnity,
made a profound bow to the audience, who signified their approbation by
a general response of “How d’ye do, doctor!” He then turned towards us,
and honoured Jackson with a particular salutation, upon which my
friend, in a formal manner, introduced him to me by the name of Mr.
Melopoyn. This ceremony being over, he advanced into the middle of the
congregation, which crowded around him, and hemming three times, to my
utter astonishment, pronounced with great significance of voice and
gesture, a very elegant and ingenious discourse upon the difference
between genius and taste, illustrating his assertions with apt
quotations from the best authors, ancient as well as modern. When he
had finished his harangue, which lasted a full hour, he bowed again to
the spectators; not one of whom (I was informed) understood so much as
a sentence of what he had uttered. They manifested, however, their
admiration and esteem by voluntary contributions, which Jackson told
me, one week with another, amounted to eighteen pence. This moderate
stipend, together with some small presents that he received for making
up differences and deciding causes amongst the prisoners, just enabled
him to breathe and walk about in the grotesque figure I have described.
I understood also, that he was an excellent poet, and had composed a
tragedy, which was allowed by everybody who had seen it to be a
performance of great merit: that his learning was infinite, his morals
unexceptionable, and his modesty invincible. Such a character could not
fail of attracting my regard; I longed impatiently to be acquainted
with him, and desired Jackson would engage him to spend the evening in
my apartment. My request was granted; he favoured us with his company,
and, in the course of our conversation perceiving that I had a strong
passion for the Belles Lettres, acquitted himself so well on that
subject, that I expressed a fervent desire of seeing his productions.
In this point too he gratified my inclination; he promised to bring his
tragedy to my room next day, and in the meantime, entertained me with
some detached pieces, which gave me a very advantageous idea of his
poetical talent. Among other things I was particularly pleased with
some elegies, in imitation of Tibullus; one of which I beg leave to
submit to the reader as a specimen of his complexion and capacity:—

    Where now are all my flattering dreams of joy?
Monimia, give my soul her wonted rest;—
    Since first thy beauty fixed my roving eye,
heart-gnawing cares corrode my pensive breast!

    Let happy lovers fly where pleasures call,
With festive songs beguile the fleeting hour,
    Lead beauty through the mazes of the ball,
Or press her wanton in love’s roseate bower:

    For me, no more I’ll range the empurpled mead,
Where shepherd’s pipe and virgins dance around,
    Nor wander through the woodbine’s fragrant shade,
To hear the music of the grove resound.

    I’ll seek some lonely church, or dreary hall,
Where fancy paints the glimmering taper blue,
    Where damps hang mouldering on the ivy’d wall,
And sheeted ghosts drink up the midnight dew,

    There, leagued with hopeless anguish and despair,
A while in silence o’er my fate repair:
    Then, with a long farewell to love and care,
To kindred dust my weary limbs consign.

    Wilt thou, Monimia, shed a gracious tear
On the cold grave where all my sorrows rest?
    Strew vernal flowers, applaud my love sincere,
And bid the turf lie easy on my breast?


I was wonderfully affected with this pathetic complaint, which seemed
so well calculated for my own disappointment in love, that I could not
help attaching the idea of Narcissa to the name of Monimia, and of
forming such melancholy presages of my passion, that I could not
recover my tranquillity: and was fain to have recourse to the bottle,
which prepared me for a profound sleep that I could not otherwise have
enjoyed. Whether these impressions invited and introduced a train of
other melancholy reflections, or my fortitude was all exhausted in the
effort I made against despondence, during the first day of my
imprisonment, I cannot determine; but I awoke in the horrors, and found
my imagination haunted with such dismal apparitions, that I was ready
to despair: and I believe the reader will own, I had no great cause to
congratulate myself, when I considered my situation. I was interrupted
in the midst of these gloomy apprehensions by the arrival of Strap, who
contributed not a little to the re-establishment of my peace, by
letting me know that he had hired himself as a journeyman barber; by
which means he would be able not only to save me a considerable
expense, but even make shift to lay up something for my subsistence,
after my money should be spent, in case I should not be relieved
before.




CHAPTER LXII


I read Melopoyn’s Tragedy, and conceive a vast Opinion of his Genius—he
recounts his Adventures


While we ate our breakfast together, I made him acquainted with the
character and condition of the poet, who came in with his play at that
instant, and, imagining we were engaged about business, could not be
prevailed upon to sit; but, leaving his performance, went away. My
friend’s tender heart was melted at the sight of a gentleman and
Christian (for he had a great veneration for both these epithets) in
such misery; and assented with great cheerfulness to a proposal I made
of clothing him with the our superfluities; a task with which he
charged himself, and departed immediately to perform it.

He was no sooner gone than I locked my door, and sat down to the
tragedy; which I read to the end with vast pleasure, not a little
amazed at conduct of the managers who had rejected it. The fable, in my
opinion, was well chosen and naturally conducted, the incidents
interesting, the characters beautifully contrasted, strongly marked,
and well supported; the diction poetical, spirited and correct; the
unities of the drama maintained with the most scrupulous exactness; the
opening gradual and engaging, the peripeteia surprising, and the
catastrophe affecting. In short, I judged it by the laws of Aristotle
and Horace, and could find nothing in it exceptionable but a little too
much embellishment in some few places, which objection he removed to my
satisfaction, by a quotation of Aristotle’s _Poetics_, importing, that
the least interesting parts of a poem ought to be raised and dignified
by the charms and energy of diction.

I revered his genius, and was seized with an eager curiosity to know
the particular events of a fortune so unworthy of his merit. At that
instant Strap returned with a bundle of clothes, which I sent with my
compliments to Mr. Melopoyn, as a small token of my regard, and desired
the favour of his company to dinner. He accepted my present and
invitation, and in less than half-an-hour made his appearance in a
decent dress, which altered his figure very much to his advantage. I
perceived by his countenance that his heart was big with gratitude, and
endeavoured to prevent his acknowledgments, by asking pardon for the
liberty I had taken; he made no reply, but, with an aspect full of
admiration and esteem, bowed to the ground, while the tears gushed from
his eyes. Affected with these symptoms of an ingenuous mind, I shifted
the conversation, and complimented him on his performance, which I
assured him afforded me infinite pleasure. My approbation made him
happy. Dinner being served, and Jackson arrived, I begged their
permission for Strap to sit at table with us, after having informed
them that he was a person to whom I was extremely obliged; they were
kind enough to grant that favour, and we ate together with great
harmony and satisfaction.

Our meal being ended, I expressed my wonder at the little regard Mr.
Melopoyn had met with from the world: and signified a desire of hearing
how he had been treated by the managers of the playhouses, to whom I
understood from Jackson, he had offered his tragedy without success.
“There is so little entertaining in the incidents of my life,” said he,
“that I am sure the recital will not recompense your attention; but,
since you discover an inclination to know them I understand my duty too
well to disappoint your desire.

“My father, who was a curate in the country, being by the narrowness of
his circumstances hindered from maintaining me at the university, took
the charge of my education upon himself, and laboured with such
industry and concern in the undertaking, that I had little cause to
regret the want of public masters. Being at great pains to consult my
natural bias, He discovered in me betimes an inclination for poetry;
upon which he recommended to me an intimate acquaintance with the
classics, in the cultivation of which he assisted me with a paternal
zeal and uncommon erudition. When he thought me sufficiently acquainted
with the ancients, he directed my studies to the best modern authors,
French and Italian as well as English, and laid a particular injunction
upon me make myself master of my mother tongue.

“About the age of eighteen, I grew ambitious of undertaking a work of
some consequence; and, with my father’s approbation, actually planned
the tragedy you have read; but, before I had finished four acts, that
indulgent parent died, and left my mother and me in very indigent
circumstances. A near relation, compassionating our distress, took us
into his family, where I brought my fable to a conclusion; and, soon
after that period my mother quitted this life. When my sorrow for this
melancholy event had subsided, I told my kinsman, who was a farmer,
that, having paid my last duty to my parent, I had now no attachment to
detain me in the country, and therefore was resolved to set out for
London, and offer my play to the stage, where I did not doubt of
acquiring a large share of fame as well as fortune; in which case I
should not be unmindful of my friends and benefactors. My cousin was
ravished with the prospect of my felicity, and willingly contributed
towards the expense of fitting me out for my expedition.

“Accordingly I took a place in the waggon, and arrived in town, where I
hired an apartment in a garret, willing to live as frugally as
possible, until I should know what I had to expect from the manager, to
whom I intended to offer my play. For, though I looked upon myself as
perfectly secure of a good reception, imagining that a patentee would
be as eager to receive as I to present my production, I did not know
whether or not he might be pre-engaged in favour of another author, a
circumstance that would certainly retard my success. On this
consideration, too, I determined to be speedy in my application, and
even to wait upon one of the managers the very next day. For this
purpose, I inquired my landlord if he knew where either or both of them
lived: and he, being curious to know my business, and at the same time
appearing to be a very honest friendly man (a tallow chandler), I made
him acquainted with my design, upon which he told me that I went the
wrong way to work; that I would not find such easy access to a manager
as I imagined; and that if I delivered my performance without proper
recommendation, it would be as one to a thousand if ever it would be
minded. “Take my advice,” said he, “and your business is done. One of
the patentees is a good catholic, as I am, and uses the same father who
confesses me. I will make you acquainted with this good priest, who is
an excellent scholar, and if he should approve of your play, his
recommendation will go a great way in determining Mr. Supple to bring
it on the stage.” I applauded his expedient, and was introduced to the
friar, who, having perused the tragedy, was pleased to signify his
approbation, and commended me in particular for having avoided all
reflections upon religion. He promised to use all his influence with
his son Supple in my behalf, and to inform himself that very day at
what time it was proper for me to wait upon him with the piece. He was
punctual in performing his engagement, and next morning gave me to
understand that he had mentioned my affair to the manager, and that I
had nothing more to do than to go to his house any time in the
forenoon, and make use of his name, upon which I should find immediate
admittance. I took his advice, put my performance in my bosom, and,
having received directions, went immediately to the house of Mr.
Supple, and knocked at the door, which had a wicket in the middle,
faced with a net-work of iron. Through this a servant having viewed me
for some time, demanded to know my business. I told him my business was
with Mr. Supple, and that I came from Mr. O’Varnish. He examined my
appearance once more, then went away, returned in a few minutes, and
said his master was busy, and could not be seen. Although I was a
little mortified at my disappointment, I was persuaded that my
reception was owing to Mr. Supple’s ignorance of my errand: and, that I
might meet with no more obstructions of the same kind, I desired Mr.
O’Varnish to be my introductor the next time. He complied with my
request, and obtained immediate admittance to the manager, who received
me with the utmost civility, and promised to read my play with the
first convenience. By his own appointment I called again in a
fortnight, but he was gone out: I returned in a week after, and the
poor gentleman was extremely ill: I renewed my visit in a fortnight
after that, and he assured me he had been so much fatigued with
business, that he had not been able as yet to read it to an end, but he
would take the first opportunity: and, in the meantime, observed that
what he had yet seen of it was very entertaining. I comforted myself
with this declaration a few weeks longer, at the end of which I
appeared again before his wicket, was let in, and found him laid up
with the gout. I no sooner entered his chamber than, looking at me with
a languishing eye, he said, “Mr. Melopoyn, I’m heartily sorry for an
accident that has happened during my illness. You must know that my
eldest boy, finding your manuscript upon the table in the dining-room,
where I used to read it, carried it into the kitchen, and leaving it
there, a negligent wench of a cook-maid, mistaking it for waste paper,
has expended it but a few leaves in singing fowls upon the spit. But I
hope the misfortune is not irreparable, since, no doubt, you have
several copies.”

“I protest to you, my good friend, Mr. Random, I was extremely shocked
at this information; but the good-natured gentleman seemed to be so
much affected with my misfortune, that I suppressed my concern, and
told him that, although I had not another copy, I should be able to
retrieve the loss by writing another from my memory, which was very
tenacious. You cannot imagine how well pleased Mr. Supple was at this
assurance; he begged I would set about it immediately, and carefully
revolve and recollect every circumstance before I pretended to commit
it to paper, that it might be the same individual play that he had
perused. Encouraged by this injunction, which plainly demonstrated how
much he interested himself in the affair, I tasked my remembrance and
industry, and in three weeks produced the exact image of the former,
which was conveyed to him by my good friend Father O’Varnish, who told
me next day, that Mr. Supple would revise it superficially, in order to
judge of its sameness with the other, and then give his final answer.
For this examination I allotted a week: and, in full confidence of
seeing it acted in a little while, demanded an audience of the manager,
when that term was expired. But, alas! the season had slipped away
insensibly. He convinced me, that if my play had been put into
rehearsal at the time, it could not have been ready for performing
until the end of March, when the benefit nights came on; consequently,
it would have interfered with the interest of the players, whom it was
not my business to disoblige.

“I was fain to acquiesce in these reasons, which, to be sure, were
extremely just; and to reserve my performance for the next season, when
he hoped I would not be so unlucky. Although it was a grievous
disappointment to me, who, by this time, began to want both money and
necessaries; having on the strength of my expectation from the theatre,
launched out into some extravagances, by which the sum I brought to
town was already almost consumed. Indeed, I ought to be ashamed at this
circumstance of my conduct; for my finances were sufficient, with good
economy, to have maintained me comfortably a whole year. You will
perhaps be amazed when I tell you that, in six months, I expended not a
farthing less than ten guineas: but, when one considers the temptations
to which a young man is exposed in this great city, especially if he be
addicted to pleasure, as I am, the wonder will vanish, or at least
abate. Nor was the cause of my concern limited to my own situation
entirely: I had written an account of my good reception to my kinsman
the farmer, and desired him to depend upon me for the money he had
kindly accommodated me with about the end of February, which promise I
now found myself unable to perform. However, there was no remedy but
patience: I applied to my landlord, who was a very good-natured man,
candidly owned my distress, and begged his advice in laying down some
plan for my subsistence; he readily promised to consult his confessor
on this subject, and, in the meantime, told me, I was welcome to lodge
and board with him until fortune should put it in my power to make
restitution.

“Mr. O’Varnish, being informed of my necessity, offered to introduce me
to the author of a weekly paper, who, he did not doubt, would employ me
in that way, provided he should find me duly qualified; but, upon
inquiry, I understood that this journal was calculated to foment
divisions in the commonwealth, and therefore I desired to be excused
from engaging in it. He then proposed that I should write something in
the poetical way, which I might dispose of to a bookseller for a pretty
sum of ready money, and, perhaps, establish my own character into the
bargain. This event would infallibly procure friends, and my tragedy
would appear next season to the best advantage, by being supported both
by interest and reputation. I was charmed with this prospect, and
having heard what friends Mr. Pope acquired by his pastorals, set about
a work of that kind, and in less than six weeks composed as many
eclogues, which I forthwith offered to an eminent bookseller, who
desired me to leave them for his perusal, and he would give an answer
in two days. At the end of that time, I went to him, when he returned
the poems, telling me, they would not answer his purpose, and sweetened
his refusal by saying there were some good clever lines in them. Not a
little dejected at this rebuff, which, I learned from Mr. O’Varnish,
was owing to the opinion of another author whom this bookseller always
consulted on these occasions, I applied to another person of the same
profession, who told me the town was cloyed with pastorals, and advised
me, if I intended to profit by my talents, to write something satirical
or luscious, such as the Button Hole, Shockey and Towner, The Leaky
Vessel, etc, and yet this was a man in years, who wore a reverend
periwig, looked like a senator, and went regularly to church. Be that
as it will, I scorned to prostitute my pen in the manner proposed, and
carried my papers to a third, who assured me that poetry was entirely
out of his way; and asked me if I had got never a piece of secret
history, thrown into a series of letters, or a volume of adventures,
such as those of Robinson Crusoe, and Colonel Jack, or a collection of
Conundrums, wherewith to entertain the plantations. Being quite
unfurnished for this dealer, I had recourse to another with as little
success; and I verily believe, was rejected by the whole trade.

“I was afterwards persuaded to offer myself as a translator, and
accordingly repaired to a person who was said to entertain numbers of
that class in his pay; he assured me, he had already a great deal of
that work on his hands, which he did not know what to do with; observed
that translations were a mere drug, that branch of literature being
overstocked with an inundation of authors from North Britain; and asked
what I would expect per sheet for rendering the Latin classics into
English. That I might not make myself too cheap, I determined to set a
high price upon my qualifications, and demanded half-a-guinea for every
translated sheet. “Half-a-guinea!” cried he, staring at me; then paused
a little, and said, he had no occasion for my service at present. I
found my error, and, resolving to make amends, fell one-half in my
demand; upon which he stared at me and told me his hands were full. I
attempted others without finding employment, and was actually reduced
to a very uncomfortable prospect, when I bethought myself of offering
my talents to the printers of half-penny ballads and other such
occasional essays, as are hawked about the streets. With this in view I
applied to one of the most noted and vociferous of this tribe, who
directed me to a person whom I found entertaining a whole crowd of them
with gin, bread, and cheese; he carried me into a little back parlour,
very neatly furnished, where I signified my desire of being enrolled
among his writers; and was asked what kind of composition I professed.
Understanding that my inclination leaned towards poetry, he expressed
his satisfaction, telling me one of his poets had lost his senses, and
was confined in Bedlam, and the other was become dozed with drinking
drams; so that he had not done anything tolerable these many weeks.
When I proposed that we should enter into terms of agreement, he gave
me to understand that his bargains were always conditional, and his
authors paid in proportion to the sale of their works.

“Having therefore settled these conditions, which (I do assure you)
were not very advantageous to me, he assigned me a subject for a
ballad, which was to be finished in two hours; and I retired to my
garret in order to perform his injunction. As the theme happened to
suit my fancy, I completed a pretty sort of an ode within the time
prescribed, and brought it to him, big with hope of profit and
applause. He read it in a twinkling, and, to my utter astonishment,
told me it would not do; though indeed he owned I wrote a good hand,
and spelled very well, but my language was too high flown, and of
consequence not at all adapted to the capacity and taste of his
customers. I promised to rectify that mistake and in half an hour
humbled my style to the comprehension of vulgar readers; he approved of
the alteration, and gave me some hopes of succeeding in time, though he
observed that my performance was very deficient in the quaintness of
expression that pleases the multitude: however, to encourage me, he
ventured the expense of printing and paper, and, if I remember aright,
my share of the sale amounted to fourpence halfpenny.

“From that day I studied the Grub Street manner with great diligence,
and at length became such a proficient that my works were in great
request among the most polite of the chairmen, draymen,
hackney-coachmen, footmen, and servant maids: nay, I have enjoyed the
pleasure of seeing my productions adorned with cuts, pasted upon the
walls as ornaments in beer cellars and cobblers’ stalls; and have
actually heard them sung in clubs of substantial tradesmen—but empty
praise (you know, my dear friend) will not supply the cravings of
nature. I found myself in danger of starving in the midst of all my
fame; for of ten songs I composed, it was well if two had the good
fortune to please. For this reason I turned my thoughts to prose, and,
during a tract of gloomy weather, published an apparition, on the
substance of which I subsisted very comfortably a whole month; I have
made many a good meal upon a monster; a rape has often afforded me
great satisfaction; but a murder, well timed, was my never-failing
resource. What then? I was almost a slave to my employers, who expected
to be furnished at a minute’s warning with prose and verse, just as
they thought the circumstances of the times required, whether the
inclination was absent or present. Upon my sincerity, Mr. Random, I
have been so much pestered and besieged by those children of clamour,
that life became a burden to me.”




CHAPTER LXIII


The Continuation and Conclusion of Mr. Melopoyn’s Story


‘I made shift, notwithstanding, to maintain myself till the beginning
of next winter, when I renewed my addresses to my friend Mr. Supple,
and was most graciously received. “I have been thinking of your affair,
Mr. Melopoyn,” said he, “and am determined to show how far I have your
interest at heart, by introducing you to a young nobleman of my
acquaintance, who is remarkable for his fine taste in dramatic
writings, and is besides a man of such influence that, if once he
should approve of your play, his patronage will support it against all
the efforts of envy and ignorance; for, I do assure you, that merit
alone will not bring success. I have already spoken of your performance
to Lord Rattle, and if you will call at my house in a day or two, you
shall have a letter of introduction to his lordship.” I was sensibly
touched with this mark of Mr. Supple’s friendship; and looking upon my
affair as already done, went home and imparted my good fortune to my
landlord, who, to render my appearance more acceptable to my patron,
procured a suit of new clothes for me on his own credit.

“Not to trouble you with idle particulars, I carried my tragedy to his
lordship’s lodgings, and sent it up along with Mr. Supple’s letter by
one of his servants, who desired me, by his lord’s order, to return in
a week. I did so, and was admitted to his lordship, who received me
very courteously, told me he had perused my play, which he thought, on
the whole, was the best coup d’essai he had ever seen; but that he had
marked some places in the margin, which he imagined might be altered
for the better. I was transported with this reception, and promised
(with many acknowledgments of his lordship’s generosity) to be governed
solely by his advice and direction.”

“Well, then,” said he, “write another fair copy with the alterations I
have proposed, and bring it to me as soon as possible; for I am
resolved to have it brought on the stage this winter.” You may be sure
I set about this task with alacrity; and although I found his
lordship’s remarks much more numerous and of less importance than I
expected, I thought it was not my interest to dispute upon trifles with
my patron; therefore new modelled it according to his desire in less
than a month.

“When I waited upon him with the manuscript, I found one of the actors
at breakfast with his lordship, who immediately introduced him to my
acquaintance, and desired him to read a scene of my play. This task he
performed very much to my satisfaction, with regard to emphasis and
pronunciation; but he signified his disgust at several words in every
page, which I presuming to defend, Lord Rattle told me, with a
peremptory look, I must not pretend to dispute with him, who had been a
player these twenty years, and understood the economy of the stage
better than any man living. I was forced to submit; and his lordship
proposed the same actor should read the whole play in the evening,
before some gentlemen of his acquaintance, whom he would convene to his
lodgings for that purpose.

“I was present at the reading; and I protest to you, my dear friend, I
never underwent such a severe trial in the whole course of my life at
that juncture; for although the player might be a very honest man and a
good performer, he was excessively illiterate and assuming, and made a
thousand frivolous objections, which I was not permitted to answer.
However, the piece was very much applauded on the whole; the gentlemen
present, who, I understood, were men of fortune, promised to
countenance and support it as much as they could; and Lord Rattle,
assuring me that he would act the part of a careful nurse to it,
desired me to carry it home, and alter it immediately according to
their remarks. I was fain to acquiesce in his determination, and
fulfilled his injunctions with all the expedition in my power; but,
before I could present the new copy, my good friend Mr. Supple had
disposed of his property and patent to one Mr. Brayer; so that fresh
interest was to be made with the new manager. This task Lord Rattle
undertook, having some acquaintance with him, and recommended my
performance so strongly that it was received.

“I looked upon myself now as upon the eve of reaping the fruits of all
my labour. I waited a few days in expectation of its being put in
rehearsal, and wondering at the delay, applied to my worthy patron, who
excused Mr. Brayer on account of the multiplicity of business in which
he was involved, and bade me beware of teasing the patentee. I
treasured up this caution, and exerted my particular three weeks
longer; at the end of which his lordship gave me to understand that Mr.
Brayer had read my play, and owned it had indubitable merit; but, as he
had long been pre-engaged to another author, he could not possibly
represent it that season; though, if I would reserve it for the next,
and in the interim make such alterations as he had proposed by
observations on the margin, I might depend upon his compliance.

“Thunderstruck at this disappointment, I could not, for some minutes,
utter one syllable. At length, however, I complained bitterly of the
manager’s insincerity in amusing me so long, when he knew from the
beginning that he could not gratify my desire. But his lordship
reprimanded me for my freedom, said Mr. Brayer was a man of honour, and
imputed his behaviour with respect to me nothing else but
forgetfulness. And indeed I have had some reason, since that time, to
be convinced of his bad memory; for, in spite of appearances, I will
not allow myself to interpret his conduct in any other way. Lord Rattle
observing me very much affected with my disappointment, offered his
interest to bring on my play at the other house, which I eagerly
accepting, he forthwith wrote a letter of recommendation to Mr.
Bellower, actor and prime minister to Mr. Vandal, proprietor of that
theatre, and desired me to deliver it with my tragedy, without loss of
time. Accordingly, I hastened to his house, where after having waited a
whole hour in the lobby, I was admitted to his presence, and my
performance received with great state. He told me he was extremely busy
at present, but he would peruse it as soon as possible, and bade me to
call again in a week. I took my leave, not a little astonished at the
pert and supercilious behaviour of this stage player, who had not
treated me with good manners; and began to think the dignity of a poet
greatly impaired since the days of Euripides and Sophocles; but all
this was nothing in comparison of what I have since observed.

“Well, Mr. Random, I went back at the appointed time, and was told that
Mr. Bellower was engaged, and could not see me, I repeated my visit a
few days after, and having waited a considerable time was favoured with
an audience, during which, he said, he had not as yet read my play.
Nettled at this usage, I could contain myself no longer, but, telling
him, I imagined he would have paid more deference to Lord Rattle’s
recommendation, demanded my manuscript with some expression of
resentment. “Ay,” said he in a theatrical tone, “with all my heart.”
Then pulling out the drawer of the bureau at which he sat, he took out
a bundle, and threw it upon a table that was near him, pronouncing the
word, “There!” with great disdain. I took it up, and perceiving with
some surprise, that it was a comedy, told him it did not belong to me;
upon which he offered another which I also disclaimed. A third was
produced, and rejected for the same reason. At length he pulled out a
whole bundle, and spread them before me, saying, “There are seven—take
which you please—or take them all.” I singled out my own, and went
away, struck dumb with admiration at what I had seen—not so much on
account of his insolence, as of the number of new plays which from this
circumstance I concluded were yearly offered to the stage. You may be
sure, I did not fail to carry my complaint to my patron, who did not
receive it with all the indignation I expected; but taxed me with
precipitation, and told me I must lay my account with bearing with the
humours of the players, if I intended to write for the stage. “There is
now no other remedy,” he said, “but to keep it till the next season for
Mr. Brayer, and alter it at your leisure, in the summer, according to
his directions.” I was now reduced to a terrible alternative, either to
quit all hopes of my tragedy, from which I had all along promised
myself a large share of fortune and reputation, or to encounter eight
long months of adversity in preparing for and expecting its appearance.
This last penance, painful as it was, seemed most eligible to my
reflection at that time, and therefore I resolved to undergo it.

“Why should I tire you with particulars of my consequence? I wrestled
with extreme poverty until the time of my probation was expired; and
went to my Lord Rattle in order to remind him of my affair, when I
understood, to my great concern, that his lordship was just on the
point of going abroad, and which was still more unfortunate for me, Mr.
Brayer had gone into the country; so that my generous patron had it not
in his power to introduce me personally, as he intended: however, he
wrote a very strong letter to the manager in my favour, and put him in
mind of the promise he had made in behalf of my play.

“As soon as I was certified of Brayer’s return, I went to his house
with this letter, but was told he was gone out. I called again next day
early in the morning, received the same answer, and was desired to
leave my name and business: I did so, and returned the day after, when
the servant still affirmed that his master was gone abroad; though I
perceived him, as I retired, observing me through a window. Incensed at
this discovery, I went to a coffee-house hard by, and, inclosing his
lordship’s letter in one from myself, demanded a categorical answer. I
sent it to his house by a porter, who returned in a few minutes, and
told me Mr. Brayer would be glad to see me at that instant. I obeyed
the summons, and was received with such profusion of compliments and
apologies, that my resentment immediately subsided, and I was even in
pain for the concern which this holiest man showed at the mistake of
his servant, who, it seems, had been ordered to deny him to everybody
but me. He expressed the utmost veneration for his good and noble
friend, Lord Rattle, whom he should always be proud to serve; promised
to peruse the play with all dispatch, and give me a meeting upon it:
and, as a testimony of his esteem, made me a present of a general order
for the season, by which I should be admitted to any part of the
theatre. This was a very agreeable compliment to me, whose greatest
pleasure consisted in seeing dramatic performances, and you need not
doubt that I often availed myself of my privilege. As I had an
opportunity of being behind the scenes when I pleased, I frequently
conversed with Mr. Brayer about my play, and asked when he meant to put
it into rehearsal; but he had always so much business upon his hands,
that it remained with him unopened a considerable while; and I became
very uneasy about the season, that wasted apace, when I saw in the
papers another new play advertised, which had been written, offered,
accepted, and rehearsed, in the compass of three months. You may easily
guess how much I was confounded at this event! I own to you that, in
the first transports of my anger, I suspected Mr. Brayer of having
acted towards me in the most pitiful perfidious manner; and was
actually glad at his disappointment in the success of his favourite
piece, which, by the strength of art, lingered till the third night,
and then died in a deplorable manner. But now that passion has no share
in my reflection, I am willing to ascribe his behaviour to his want of
memory or want of judgment, which, you know, are natural defects, that
are more worthy of compassion than reproach.

“About this time I happened to be in company with a gentlewoman, who,
having heard of my tragedy, told me, she was well acquainted with the
wife of a gentleman who was very well known to a lady, who had great
interest with a person who was intimate with Earl Sheerwit: and that,
if I pleased, she would use her influence in my behalf. As this
nobleman had the character of a Maecenas in the nation, and could stamp
a value upon any work by his sole countenance and approbation, I
accepted her offer with eagerness, in full confidence of seeing my
reputation established, and my wishes fulfilled in a very short time,
provided that I should have the good fortune to please his lordship’s
taste. I withdrew the manuscript from the hands of Mr. Brayer, and
committed it to the care of this gentlewoman, who laboured so
effectually in my interest, that in less than a month it was conveyed
to the earl, and in a few weeks after, I had the satisfaction to hear
that he had read and approved it very much. Transported with this piece
of intelligence, I flattered myself with the hopes of his interesting
himself in its favour, but, hearing no more of this matter in three
whole months, I began (God forgive me!) to suspect the veracity of the
person who brought me the good tidings; for I thought it impossible
that a man of his rank and character, who knew the difficulty of
writing a good tragedy, and understood the dignity of the work, should
read and applaud an essay of this kind, without feeling an inclination
to befriend the author, whom his countenance alone could raise above
dependence. But it was not long before I found my friend very much
wronged by my opinion.

“You must know, that the civilities I had received from Lord Rattle,
and the desire he manifested to promote the success of my play,
encouraged me to write an account of my bad fortune to his lordship,
who condescended so far as to desire, by letter, a young squire of a
great estate, with whom he was intimate, to espouse my cause, and, in
particular, make me acquainted with one Mr. Marmozet, a celebrated
player, who had lately appeared on the stage with astonishing eclat,
and bore such sway in the house where he acted, that the managers durst
not refuse anything he recommended. The young gentleman, whom Lord
Rattle had employed for this purpose, being diffident of his own
interest with Mr. Marmozet, had recourse to a nobleman of his
acquaintance, who, at his solicitation, was so good as to introduce me
to him; and the conversation turning upon my performance, I was not a
little surprised, as well as pleased, to hear that Earl Sheerwit had
spoken very much in its praise, and even sent Mr. Marmozet the copy,
with a message, expressing a desire that he would act in it next
season. Nor was this favourite actor backward in commending the piece,
which he mentioned with such expressions of regard, that I do not
choose to repeat: assuring me that he would appear in it, provided he
should be engaged to play at all during the ensuing season. In the
meantime, he desired I would give him leave to peruse it in the
country, whither he intended to remove next day, that he might have
leisure to consider and point out such alterations as might, perhaps,
be necessary for its representation; and took my direction, that he
might communicate by letter the observations he should make. Trusting
to these assurances, and the interest which had been made in my behalf,
I hugged myself in the expectation of seeing it not only acted, but
acted to the greatest advantage, and this I thought could not fail of
recompensing me in ample manner for the anxiety and affliction I had
undergone; but six weeks being elapsed, I did not know how to reconcile
Mr. Marmozet’s silence with his promise of writing to me in ten days
after he set out for the country; however, I was at last favoured with
a letter, importing that he had made some remarks on my tragedy, which
he would freely impart at meeting, and advised me to put it, without
loss of time, into the hands of that manager, who had the best company;
as he himself was quite uncertain whether or not he should be engaged
that winter. I was a good deal alarmed at this last part of his letter,
and advised about it with a friend, who told me, it was a plain
indication of Mr. Marmozet’s desire to get rid of his promise; that his
pretended uncertainty about acting next winter was no other than a
scandalous evasion; for, to his certain knowledge, he was already
engaged, or at least in terms, with Mr. Vandal; and that his design was
to disappoint me, in favour of a new comedy, which he had purchased of
the author, and intended to bring upon the stage for his own advantage.

“In short, my dear sir, this person, who, I must own, is if a sanguine
complexion, handled the moral character of Mr. Marmozet with such
severity, that I began to suspect him of some particular prejudice, and
put myself upon my guard against his insinuations. I ought to crave
pardon for this tedious narration of trivial circumstances, which,
however interesting they may be to me, must certainly be very dry and
insipid to the ear of one unconcerned in the affair. But I understand
the meaning of your looks, and will proceed.

“Well, sir, Mr. Marmozet, upon his return to town, treated me with
uncommon complaisance, and invited me to his lodgings, where he
proposed to communicate his remarks, which, I confess, were more
unfavourable than I expected; but I answered his objections, and, as I
thought, brought him over to my opinion; for, on the whole, he
signified the highest approbation of the performance. In the course of
our dispute, I was not a little surprised to find this poor gentleman’s
memory so treacherous, as to let him forget what he had said to me,
before he went out of town, in regard to Earl Sheerwit’s opinion of my
play, which he now professed himself ignorant of; and I was extremely
mortified at hearing from his own mouth, that his interest with Mr.
Vandal was so very low as to be insufficient of itself to bring a new
piece upon the stage. I then begged his advice, and he counselled me to
apply to Earl Sheerwit, for a message in my favour to the manager, who
would not presume to refuse anything recommended by so great man; and
he was so kind as to promise to second this message with all his power.
I had immediate recourse to the worthy gentlewoman my friend, already
mentioned, who opened the channels of her conveyance with such
expedition, that in a few days I had a promise of the message, provided
I could assure myself of Mr. Vandal’s being unengaged to any other
writer; for his lordship did not choose to condescend so far, until he
should understand that there was a probability (at least) of
succeeding; at the same time that blessed me with this piece of news, I
was startled at another, by the same channel of communication; which
was, that Mr. Marmozet, before he advised me to this application, had
informed the earl that he had read my play, and found it altogether
unfit for the stage. Though I could not doubt the certainty of this
intelligence, I believed there was some inapprehension in the case;
and, without taking any notice of it, told Mr. Marmozet the answer I
had been favoured with; and he promised to ask Mr. Vandal the question
proposed. I waited upon him in a day or two, when he gave me to
understand, that Mr. Vandal having professed himself free of all
engagements, he had put my play into his hands, and represented it as a
piece strongly recommended by Earl Sheerwit, who (he assured him) would
honour him with a message in its favour; and he desired me to call for
an answer at Mr. Vandal’s house in three days. I followed his
directions, and found the manager, who being made acquainted with my
business, owned that Mr. Marmozet had given him a manuscript play, but
denied that he had mentioned Earl Sheerwit’s name. When I informed him
of the circumstances of the affair, he said, he had no engagement with
any author; that he would read my tragedy forthwith; and did not
believe he should venture to reject it in contradiction to his
lordship’s opinion, for which he had the utmost veneration, but put it
into rehearsal without loss of time. I was so much intoxicated with
this encouragement, that I overlooked the mysterious conduct of Mr.
Marmozet, and attended the manager at the time appointed, when, to my
infinite confusion, he pronounced my play improper for the stage, and
rejected it accordingly. As soon as I could recollect myself from the
disorder into which this unexpected refusal had thrown me, I expressed
a desire of hearing his objections, which were so groundless,
indistinct, and unintelligible, that I persuaded myself he had not at
all perused the piece, but had been prompted by somebody whose lessons
he had not rightly retained. However, I have been since informed that
the poor man’s head, which was not naturally very clear, had been
disordered with superstition, and that he laboured under the tyranny of
a wife, and the terrors of hellfire at the same time.

“Precipitated in this manner from the highest pinnacle of hope to the
abyss of despondence, I was ready to sink under the burden of my
affliction, and, in the bitterness of my anguish, could not help
entertaining some doubts of Mr. Marmozet’s integrity, when I
recollected and compared the circumstances of his conduct towards me. I
was encouraged in this suspicion by being told that my Lord Sheerwit
had spoken of his character with great contempt: and, in particular,
resented his insolence in opposing his own taste to that of his
lordship, concerning my tragedy. While I hesitated between different
opinions of the matter, that friend, who (as I told you before) was a
little hot-headed, favoured me with a visit, and, having heard a
circumstantial account of the whole affair, could not contain his
indignation, but affirmed without ceremony that Mr. Marmozet was the
sole occasion of my disappointment; that he acted from first to last
with the most perfidious dissimulation, cajoling me with insinuating
civilities, while he underhand employed all his art and influence to
prejudice the ignorant manager against my performance; that nothing
could equal his hypocrisy but his avarice, which engrossed the
faculties of his soul so much, that he scrupled not to be guilty of the
meanest practices to gratify that sordid appetite; that, in consequence
of this disposition, he had prostituted his honour in betraying my
inexperience, and in undermining the interest of another author of
established reputation, who had also offered a tragedy to the stage,
which he thought would interfere with the success of the comedy he had
bought, and determined to bring on at all events.

“I was shocked at the description of such a monster, which I could not
believe existed in the world, bad as it is, and argued against the
asseverations of my friend, by demonstrating the bad policy of such
behaviour, which could not fail of entailing infamy upon the author;
and the small temptation that a man of Mr. Marmozet’s figure and
success could have to consult his interest in such a grovelling manner,
which must create contempt and abhorrence of him in his patrons, and
effectually deprive him of the countenance and protection he now enjoys
in such an eminent degree. He pretended to laugh at my simplicity, and
asked, if I knew for which of his virtues he was so much caressed by
the people of fashion. “It is not,” said he, “for the qualities of his
heart, that this little parasite is invited to the tables of dukes and
lords, who hire extraordinary cooks for his entertainment. His avarice
they see not, his ingratitude they feel not, his hypocrisy accommodates
itself to their humours, and is of consequence pleasing; but he is
chiefly courted for his buffoonery, and will be admitted into the
choicest parties of quality for his talent of mimicking Punch and his
wife Joan, when a poet of the most excellent genius is not able to
attract the least regard.” God forbid, Mr. Random, that I should credit
assertions that degrade the dignity of our superiors so much, and
represent the poor man as the most abject of all beings! No, I looked
upon them as the hyperboles of passion; and though that comedy of which
he spoke did actually appear, I dare not doubt the innocence of Mr.
Marmozet, who, I am told, is as much as ever in favour with the earl; a
circumstance that, surely, could not be, unless he had vindicated his
character to the satisfaction of his lordship. Pray forgive this long
digression, and give me the hearing a little longer; for, thank heaven!
I am now near the goal.

“Baffled in all my attempts, I despaired of seeing my play acted; and
bethought myself of choosing some employment that might afford a sure,
though mean subsistence; but my landlord, to whom I was by this time
considerably indebted, and who had laid his account with having his
money paid all in a heap from the profits of my third night, could not
brook his disappointment, therefore made another effort in my behalf,
and, by dint of interest, procured a message from a lady of fashion to
Mr. Brayer, who had always professed a great veneration for her,
desiring that he would set up my play forthwith, and assuring him that
she and all her friends would support it in the performance. To
strengthen my interest, she engaged his best actors in my cause; and,
in short, exerted herself so much, that it was again received, and my
hopes began to revive. But Mr. Brayer, honest man, was so much
engrossed by business of vast consequence, though to appearance he had
nothing at all to do, that he could not find time to read it until the
season was pretty far advanced; and read it he must, for
notwithstanding his having perused it before, his memory did not retain
one circumstance of the matter.

“At length he favoured it with his attention, and having proposed
certain alterations, sent his duty to the lady who patronised it, and
promised, on his honour, to bring it on next winter, provided these
alterations should be made, and the copy delivered to him before the
end of April. With an aching heart, I submitted to these conditions,
and performed them accordingly: but fortune owed me another unforeseen
mortification; Mr. Marmozet, during the summer, became joint patentee
with Mr. Brayer, so that when I claimed performance of articles, I was
told he could do nothing without the consent of his partner, who was
pre-engaged to another author.

“My condition was rendered desperate by the death of my good friend and
landlord, whose executors obtained a judgment against my effects, which
they seized, turned me out into the streets naked, friendless, and
forlorn: there I was arrested at the suit of my tailor, and thrown into
the prison, where I have made shift to live these five weeks on the
bounty of my fellow prisoners, who, I hope, are not the worse for the
instruction and good offices by which I manifest my gratitude; but in
spite of all their charitable endeavours, my life was scarce tolerable,
until your uncommon benevolence enabled me to enjoy it with comfort.”




CHAPTER LXIV


I am seized with a deep Melancholy, and become a Sloven—am relieved by
my Uncle—he prevails upon me to engage with his Owners, as a Surgeon of
the Ship which he commands—he makes me a considerable Present—entertain
Strap as his steward—I take leave of my Friends, and go on Board—the
Ship arrives in the Downs


I shall not make any reflection on this story, in the course of which
the reader must perceive how egregiously the simplicity and milky
disposition of this worthy man had been duped and abused by a set of
scoundrels, who were so habituated to falsehood and equivocation, that
I verily believed they would have found the utmost difficulty in
uttering one syllable of truth, though their lives had depended upon
their sincerity. Notwithstanding all I had suffered from the knavery
and selfishness of mankind, I was amazed and incensed by the base
indifference which suffered such uncommon merit as he possessed to
languish in obscurity, and struggle with all the miseries of a
loathsome gaol; and should have blessed the occasion that secluded me
from such a perfidious world, had not the remembrance of my amiable
Narcissa preserved my attachment to a society of which she constituted
a part. The picture of that lovely creature was the constant companion
of my solitude. How often did I contemplate the resemblance of those
enchanting features that first captivated my heart! how often did I
weep over those endearing scenes which her image recalled! and how
often did I curse my perfidious fate for having robbed me of the fair
original! In vain did my imagination flatter me with schemes of future
happiness: surly reason always interposed, and in a moment overthrew
the unsubstantial fabric, by chastising the extravagance of my hope,
and representing my unhappy situation in the right point of view. In
vain did I fly for refuge to the amusements of the place, and engage in
the parties of Jackson at cards, billiards, nine-pins, and fives; a
train of melancholy thoughts took possession of my soul, which even the
conversation of Melopoyn could not divert. I ordered Strap to inquire
every day at Banter’s lodgings, in expectation of hearing again from my
charmer; and my disappointment considerably, augmented my chagrin. My
affectionate valet was infected with my sorrow, and often sat with me
whole hours without speaking, uttering sigh for sigh, and shedding tear
for tear. This fellowship increased our distemper; he became incapable
of business, and was discarded by his master; while I, seeing my money
melt away without any certainty of deliverance, and, in short, all my
hopes frustrated, grew negligent of life, lost all appetite, and
degenerated into such a sloven that during the space of three months I
was neither washed, shifted, nor shaved; so that my face, rendered
meagre with abstinence, was obscured with dirt, and overshadowed with
hair, and my whole appearance squalid and even frightful; when, one
day, Strap brought me notice, that there was a man below who wanted to
speak with me. Roused at this intelligence, and in full hopes of
receiving a letter from the dear object of my love, I ran downstairs
with the utmost precipitation. And found to my infinite surprise my
generous uncle, Mr. Bowling! Transported at the sight, I sprang forward
to embrace him. Upon which he started aside with great agility, drew
his hanger, and put himself upon his guard, crying, “Avast, brother,
avast! Sheer off. Yo ho! you turnkey, why don’t you keep a better look
out? Here’s one of your crazy prisoners broke from his lashings, I
suppose.” I could not help laughing heartily at his mistake; but this I
soon rectified by my voice, which he instantly recollected, and shook
me by the hand with great affection, testifying his concern at seeing
me in such a miserable condition.

I conducted him to my apartment, where, in presence of Strap, whom I
introduced to him as one of my best friends, he gave me to understand,
that he was just arrived from the Coast Of Guinea, after having made a
pretty successful voyage, in which he had acted as mate, until the ship
was attacked by a French privateer, that the captain being killed
during the engagement, he had taken the command, and was so fortunate
as to sink the enemy; after which exploit he fell in with a merchant
ship from Martinico, laden with sugar, indigo and some silver and by
virtue of his letter of marque, attacked, took, and carried her safe
into Kinsale in Ireland, where she was condemned as a lawful prize; by
which means he had not only got a pretty sum of money, but also
acquired the favour of his owners, who had already conferred upon him
the command of a large ship, mounted with twenty nine-pounders, ready
to sail upon a very advantageous voyage, which he was not at liberty to
discover. And he assured me that it was with the greatest difficulty he
found me, in consequence of a direction left for him at his lodgings at
Wapping.

I was rejoiced beyond measure at this account of his good fortune; and,
at his desire, recounted all the adventures that had happened to me
since we parted. When he understood the particulars of Strap’s
attachment to me, he squeezed his hand very cordially, and promised to
make a man of him; then, giving me ten guineas for my present occasion,
took a direction for the tailor who arrested me, and went away in order
to discharge the debt, telling me at parting, that he would soon fetch
up all my leeway with a wet sail.

I was utterly confounded at this sudden transition, which affected me
more than any reverse I had formerly felt; and a crowd of incoherent
ideas rushed so impetuously upon my imagination, that my reason could
neither separate nor connect them; when Strap, whose joy had manifested
itself in a thousand fool-cries, came into my room with his shaving
utensils, and without any previous intimation, began to lather my
beard, whistling with great emotion all the while. I started from my
reverie, and, being too well acquainted with Strap to trust myself in
his hands while he was under such agitation, desired to be excused,
sent for another barber, and suffered myself to be trimmed. Having
performed the ceremony of ablution, I shifted, and dressing in my
gayest apparel, waited for the return of my uncle, who was agreeably
surprised at my sudden transformation.

This beneficent kinsman had satisfied my creditor, and obtained an
order for my discharge, so that I was no longer a prisoner; but, as I
had some reluctance to part with my friends and fellows in distress, I
prevailed upon Mr. Bowling to favour us with his company, and invited
Mr. Melopoyn and Jackson to spend the evening at my apartment, where I
regaled them with a supper, good wine, and the news of my release, on
which they heartily congratulated me, notwithstanding the loss of my
company, which, they were pleased to say, they should severely feel. As
for Jackson, his misfortune made so little impression on himself, and
he was altogether so loose, indifferent, and indiscreet, that I could
scarce pity his situation: but I had conceived a veneration and
friendship for the poet, who was, in all respects, an object much more
worthy of compassion and regard. When our guests withdrew, and my uncle
had retired, with an intention of visiting me next morning, I made up a
bundle of some linen and other necessaries; and, bidding Strap carry
them to Mr. Melopoyn’s lodgings, went thither myself, and pressed it
upon his acceptance, with five guineas, which, with much difficulty, he
received, assuring me at the same time, that he should never have it in
his power to make satisfaction. I then asked if I could serve him in
any other way; to which he answered, “You have already done too much;”
and, unable to contain the emotions of his soul any longer, burst into
tears, and wept aloud. Moved at this spectacle, I left him to his
repose, and, when my uncle returned in the morning, represented his
character in such a favourable light, that the honest seaman was
affected with his distress, and determined to follow my example, in
presenting him with five pieces more; upon which, that I might save him
some confusion, I advised Mr. Bowling to inclose it in a letter to be
delivered by Strap, after we should be gone.

This was accordingly done. I took a formal leave of all my acquaintance
in the gaol; and, just as I was about to step into a hackney coach at
the gate, Jackson calling me, I returned, and he asked me in a whisper,
if I could lend him a shilling! His demand being so moderate, and in
all likelihood the last he would make upon me, I slipped a guinea into
his hand, which he no sooner perceived, than he cried, “O Jesus, a
guinea!” then laying hold of a button of my coat, broke out into
laughter; and when his immoderate fit of convulsion was ended, told me
I was an honest fellow, and let me go. The coachman was ordered to
drive to Mr. Bowling’s lodgings, where, when we arrived, he entered
into a serious discourse with me, on the subject of my situation, and
proposed that I should sail with him in quality of his surgeon; in
which case he would put me in a method of getting a fortune in a few
years by my own industry; and assured me, that I might expect to
inherit all that he should die possessed of, provided I should survive
him. Though I was penetrated with a sense of his generosity, l was
startled at a proposal that offered violence to my love, and signified
my sentiments on that head, which he did not seem to relish; but
observed that love was the fruit of idleness, that when once I should
be employed in business, and my mind engaged in making money, I should
be no more troubled with these silly notions, which none but your
fair-weathered Jacks, who have nothing but their pleasure to mind,
ought to entertain. I was piqued at this insinuation, which I looked
upon as a reproach, and, without giving myself time to deliberate,
accepted his offer. He was overjoyed at my compliance, carried me
immediately to his chief owner, with whom a bargain was struck; so that
then I could not retract with honour, had I been ever so much averse to
the agreement. That I might not have time to cool, he bade me draw out
a list of medicines for a complement of five hundred men, adapted to
the distempers of hot climates and sufficient for a voyage of eighteen
months; and carry it to a certain wholesale apothecary, who would also
provide me in two well-qualified mates. While I was thus employed Strap
came in, and looked very blank, when he understood my resolution:
however, after a pause of some minutes, he insisted upon going along
with me; and at my desire was made ship’s steward by Captain Bowling,
who promised to be at the expense of fitting him out, and to lend him
two hundred pounds to purchase an adventure.

When I had delivered my list of medicines, chosen a couple of my own
countrymen for mates, and bespoke a set of chirurgical instruments, my
uncle told me, that by his last voyage he had cleared almost three
thousand pounds, one-third of which he would immediately make over and
put into my hands; that he would procure for me credit to the value of
so much more in such goods as would turn to best account in the country
to which we were bound; and that, although he looked upon my interest
as his own, he would keep the remaining part of his fortune in his own
disposal, with a view of preserving his independence, and the power of
punishing me, in case I should not make a good use of what he had
already bestowed.

Without troubling the reader with an account of the effect which this
surprising generosity had upon my mind, I shall only say, that his
promises were instantly performed, and an invoice of merchandise proper
for the voyage presented to me, that I might purchase the goods, and
ship them with all expedition. In the midst of this hurry, the
remembrance of my charming Narcissa often interposed, and made me the
most miserable of all mortals. I was distracted with the thought of
being torn from her, perhaps for ever; and though the hope of seeing
her again might have supported me under the torments of separation, I
could not reflect upon the anguish she must feel at parting with me,
and the incessant sorrows to which her tender bosom would be exposed
during my absence, without being pierced with the deepest affliction!
As my imagination was daily and nightly upon the rack to invent some
method of mitigating this cruel stroke, or at least of acquitting my
love and honour in the opinion of this gentle creature, I at length
stumbled upon an expedient, with which the reader will be made
acquainted in due time; and, in consequence of my determination, became
less uneasy and disturbed.

My business being finished, and the ship ready to sail, I resolved to
make my last appearance among my acquaintance at the other end of the
town, where I had not been since my imprisonment; and as I had, by the
advice of my uncle, taken off some very rich clothes for sale, I put on
the gayest suit in my possession, and went in a chair to the
coffee-house I used to frequent, where I found my friend Banter so
confounded at the magnificence of my dress, that, when I made up to
him, he gazed at me with a look of astonishment, without being able,
for some minutes, to open his lips; then pulling me aside by the
sleeve, and fixing his eyes on mine, accosted me thus: “Random, where
the devil have you been! eh? What is the meaning of all this finery?
Oho! I understand you. You are just arrived from the country! what, the
roads are good, eh? Well, Random, you are a bold fellow, and a lucky
fellow! but take care, the pitcher goes often to the well, but is broke
at last.” So saying, he pointed to his collar; by which gesture, and
the broken hints he had ejaculated, I found he suspected me of having
robbed on the highway; and I laughed very heartily at his supposition.
Without explaining myself any further, I told him he was mistaken in
his conjecture; that I had been for some time past with the relation of
whom he had frequently heard me speak; and that, as I should set out
next day upon my travels, I had come to take my leave of my friends,
and to receive of him the money he had borrowed from me, which, now
that I was going abroad, I should certainly have occasion for. He was a
little disconcerted at this demand; but, recollecting himself in a
moment, swore in an affected passion, that I had used him extremely
ill, and he would never forgive me for having, by this short warning,
put it out of his power to free himself of an obligation he could no
longer bear. I could not help smiling at this pretended delicacy, which
I commended highly, telling him he needed not to be uneasy on that
score, for I would give him a direction to a merchant in the city, with
whom I would leave a discharge on the sum, to be delivered upon
payment. He professed much joy at this expedient, and with great
eagerness asked the person’s name and place of abode, which he
forthwith wrote in his pocket-book, assuring me, that he should not be
long in my debt. This affair, which I knew he should never after think
of, being settled to his satisfaction, I sent cards to all my friends,
desiring the favour of their company at a tavern in the evening, when
they honoured my invitation, and I had the pleasure of treating them in
a very elegant manner, at which they expressed equal admiration as
applause. Having enjoyed ourselves till midnight, I took my leave of
them, and was well nigh stifled with caresses: next day, I set out with
Strap in a postchaise for Gravesend, where we went on board; and the
wind serving, weighed anchor in less than twelve hours. Without meeting
with any accident, we reached the Downs, where we were obliged to come
to an anchor, and wait for an easterly wind to carry us out of the
Channel.




CHAPTER LXV


I set out for Sussex—consult Mrs. Sagely—achieve an Interview with
Narcissa—return to the Ship—we get clear of the Channel—I learn our
Destination—we are chased by a large Ship—the company are dismayed, and
encouraged by the Captain’s speech—our pursuer happens to be an English
Man of War—we arrive at the Coast of Guinea, purchase four hundred
Negroes—sail for Paraguay, get safe into the River of Plate, and sell
our Cargo to great Advantage


It was now I put in execution the scheme I had projected at London; and
asking leave of the captain for Strap and me to stay on shore till the
wind should become favourable, my request was granted, because he had
orders to remain in the Downs until he should receive some dispatches
from London, which he did not expect in less than a week. Having
imparted my resolution to my trusty valet, who (though he endeavoured
to dissuade me from such a rash undertaking) would not quit me in the
enterprise, I hired horses, and set out immediately for that part of
Sussex where my charmer was confined, which was not above thirty miles
distant from Deal, where we mounted. As I was perfectly well acquainted
with the extent of the squire’s estate and influence, I halted within
five miles of his house, where we remained till the twilight, at which
time we set forward, and, by the favour of a dark night, reached a
copse about half-a-mile from the village where Mrs. Sagely lived. Here
we left our horses tied to a tree, and went directly to the house of my
old benefactress, Strap trembling all the way, and venting ejaculatory
petitions to heaven for our safety. Her habitation being quite
solitary, we arrived at the door without being observed, when I ordered
my companion to enter by himself; and, in case there should be company
with her, deliver a letter which I had writ for that purpose, and say
that a friend of hers in London, understanding that he intended to
travel this road, had committed it to his care. He rapped at the door,
to which the good old matron coming, told him that, being a lone woman,
he must excuse her, if she did not open it, until he had declared his
name and business. He answered, that his name was unknown to her, and
that his business was to deliver a letter, which (to free her from all
apprehension) he would convey to her through the space between the door
and threshold. This he instantly performed: and she no sooner read the
contents, which specified my being present, than she cried, “If the
person who wrote this letter be at hand, let him speak, that I may be
assured by his voice whether or not I may safely admit him.” I
forthwith applied my mouth to the keyhole, and pronounced, “Dear
mother, you need not be afraid, it is I, so much indebted to your
goodness, who now crave admittance.” She knew my voice, and opening the
door immediately, received me with a truly maternal affection,
manifesting, by the tears she let fall, her concern lest I should be
discovered, for she had been informed of everything that had happened
between Narcissa and me from the dear captive’s own mouth. When I
explained the motive of my journey, which was no other than a desire of
seeing the object of my love before I should quit the kingdom, that I
might in person convince her of the necessity I was under to leave her,
reconcile her to that event, by describing the advantages that in all
probability would attend it, repeat my vows of eternal constancy, and
enjoy the melancholy pleasure of a tender embrace at parting. I say,
when I had thus signified my intention, Mrs. Sagely told me, that
Narcissa, upon her return from Bath, had been so strictly watched that
nobody but one or two of the servants devoted to her brother, was
admitted to her presence, that afterwards she had been a little
enlarged, and was permitted to see company; during which indulgence,
she had been several times at the cottage; but of late she had been
betrayed by one of the servants, who discovered to the squire, that he
had once carried a letter from her to the post-house directed to me;
upon which information she was now more confined than ever, and that I
could have no chance of seeing her, unless I would run the risk of
getting into the garden, where she and her maid were every day allowed
to take the air, and lie hid until I should have an opportunity of
speaking to them—an adventure attended with such danger, that no man in
his right wits would attempt it. This enterprise, hazardous as it was,
I resolved to perform, in spite of all the arguments of Mrs. Sagely,
who reasoned, chid, and entreated by turns; and the tears and prayers
of Strap, who conjured me on his knees, to have more regard to myself
as well as to him, than to attempt my own destruction in such a
precipitate manner. I was deaf to but the suggestions of my love; and
ordering him to return immediately with the horses to the inn from
whence we set out, and wait for my coming in that place, he at first
peremptorily refused to leave me, until I persuaded him, that if our
horses should remain where they were till daylight, they would
certainly be discovered, and the whole country alarmed. On this
consideration, he took his leave in a sorrowful plight, kissed my hand,
and, weeping, cried “God knows if ever I shall see you again.” My kind
landlady, finding me obstinate, gave me her best advice how to behave
in the execution of my project: and after having persuaded me to take a
little refreshment, accommodated me with a bed, and left me to my
repose. Early in the morning I arose, and armed with a couple of loaded
pistols and a hanger, went to the back part of the squire’s garden,
climbed over the wall, and, according to Mrs. Sagely’s direction,
concealed myself in a thicket, hard by an alcove that terminated a walk
at a good distance from the house, which (I was told) my mistress
mostly frequented. Here I absconded from five o’clock in the morning to
six in the evening, without seeing a human creature; at last I
perceived two women approaching, whom, by my throbbing heart, I soon
recognised to be the adorable Narcissa and Miss Williams. I felt the
strongest agitation of soul at the sight; and guessing, that they would
repose themselves in the alcove, stopped into it unperceived, and hid
upon the stone table a picture of myself in miniature, for which I had
sat in London, purposing to leave it with Narcissa before I should go
abroad. I exposed it in this manner, as an introduction to my own
appearance, which, without some previous intimation, I was afraid might
have an unlucky effect upon the delicate nerves of my fair enslaver;
and then withdrew into the thicket, where I could hear their discourse,
and suit myself to the circumstance of the occasion. As they advanced,
I observed an air of melancholy in the countenance of Narcissa, blended
with such unspeakable sweetness, that I could scarce refrain from
flying into her arms, and kissing away the pearly drop that stood
collected in each bewitching eye. According to my expectation, she
entered the alcove, and perceiving something on the table, took it up.
No sooner did she cast her eye upon the features, than, startled at the
resemblance, she cried, “Good God!” and the roses instantly vanished
from her cheeks. Her confidante, alarmed at this exclamation, looked at
the picture; and, struck with the likeness, exclaimed, “Jesus! the very
features of Mr. Random!” Narcissa, having recollected herself a little,
said, “Whatever angel brought it hither as a comfort to me in my
affliction, I am thankful for the benefit, and will preserve it as the
dearest object of my care.” So saying, she kissed it with surprising
ardour, shed a flood of tears, and then deposited the lifeless image in
her lovely bosom. Transported at these symptoms of her unaltered
affection, I was about to throw myself at her feet, when Miss Williams,
whose reflection was less engaged than that of her mistress, observed
that the picture could not transport itself hither, and that she could
not help thinking I was not far off. The gentle Narcissa, starting at
this conjecture, answered, “Heaven forbid! for although nothing in the
universe could yield me satisfaction equal to that of his presence for
one poor moment, in a proper place, I would rather forfeit his
company—almost for ever, than see him here, where his life would be
exposed to so much danger.” I could no longer restrain the impulse of
my passion, but, breaking from my concealment, stood before her, when
she uttered a fearful shriek, and fainted in the arms of her companion.
I flew towards the treasure of my soul, clasped her in my embrace, and
with the warmth of my kisses, brought her again to life. Oh that I were
endowed with the expression of a Raphael, the graces of a Guido, the
magic touches of a Titian, that I might represent the fond concern, the
chastened rapture and ingenuous blush, that mingled on her beauteous
face, when she opened her eyes upon me, and pronounced, “O heavens! is
it you?” I am afraid I have already encroached upon the reader’s
patience with the particulars of this amour, of which (I own) I cannot
help being impertinently circumstantial. I shall therefore omit the
less material passages of this interview, during which I convinced her
reason, though I could not appease the sad presages of her love, with
regard to the long voyage and dangers I must undergo. When we had spent
an hour (which was all she could spare from the barbarity of her
brother’s vigilance) in lamenting over our hard fate, and in repeating
our reciprocal vows, Miss Williams reminded us of the necessity there
was for our immediate parting; and, sure, lovers never parted with such
sorrow and reluctance as we. But because my words are incapable of
doing justice to this affecting circumstance, I am obliged to draw a
veil over it, and observe, that I returned in the dark to the house of
Mrs. Sagely, who was overjoyed to hear of my success, and opposed the
tumults of my grief with such strength of reason, that my mind
regained, in some measure, its tranquillity; and that very night, after
having forced upon the good gentlewoman a purse of twenty guineas, as a
token of my gratitude and esteem, I took my leave of her, and set out
on foot for the inn, where my arrival freed honest Strap from the
horrors of unutterable dread.

We took horse immediately, and alighted early next morning at Deal,
where I found my uncle in great concern on account of my absence,
because he had received his despatches, and must have weighed with the
first fair wind, whether I had been on board or not. Next day, a brisk
easterly gale springing up, we set sail, and in eight and forty hours
got clear of the Channel.

When we were about two hundred leagues to westward of the Land’s End,
the captain, taking me apart into the cabin, told me that, now he was
permitted by his instructions, he would disclose the intent and
destination of our voyage. “The ship,” said he, “which has been fitted
out at a great expense, is bound for the coast of Guinea, where we
shall exchange part of our cargo for slaves and gold dust, from whence
we will transport our negroes to Buenos Ayres in New Spain, where (by
virtue of passports, obtained from our own court, and that of Madrid)
we will dispose of them and the goods that remain on board for silver,
by means of our supercargo, who is perfectly well acquainted with the
coast, the lingo, and inhabitants.” Being thus let into the secret of
our expedition, I borrowed of the supercargo a Spanish grammar,
dictionary, and some other books of the same language, which I studied
with such application that, before we arrived in New Spain, I could
maintain a conversation with him in that tongue. Being arrived in the
warm latitudes, I ordered (with the captain’s consent) the whole ship’s
company to be blooded and purged, myself undergoing the same
evacuation, in order to prevent those dangerous fevers to which
northern constitutions are subject in hot climates; and I have reason
to believe, that this precaution was not unserviceable, for we lost but
one sailor during our whole passage to the coast.

One day, when we had been about five weeks at sea, we descried to
windward a large ship bearing down upon us with all the sail she could
carry. Upon which, my uncle ordered the studding-sails to be hoisted
and the ship to be cleared for engaging; but, finding that (to use the
seaman’s phrase) we were very much wronged by the ship which had us in
chase, and by this time had hoisted French colours, he commanded the
studding-sails to be taken in, the courses to be clowed up, the main
topsail to be backed, the tompions to be taken out of the guns, and
every man to repair to his quarters. While every body was busied in the
performance of these orders, Strap came upon the quarter-deck,
trembling and looking aghast, and, with a voice half-suppressed by
fear, asked if I thought we were a match for the vessel in pursuit of
us. Observing his consternation, I said, “What! are you afraid, Strap.”
“Afraid! (he replied); n-n-no; what should I be afraid of? I thank God
I have a clear conscience; but I believe it will be a bloody battle,
and I wish you may not have occasion for another hand to assist you in
the cockpit.” I immediately perceived his drift, and making the captain
acquainted with his situation, desired he might be stationed below with
me and my mates. My uncle, incensed at his pusillanimity, bade me send
him down instantly, that his fear might not infect the ship’s company;
whereupon I told the poor steward that I had begged him for my
assistant, and desired him to go down and help my mates to get ready
the instruments and dressings. Notwithstanding the satisfaction he must
have felt at those tidings, he affected a shyness of quitting the upper
deck; and said, he hoped I did not imagine he was afraid to do his duty
above board; for he believed himself as well prepared for death as any
man in the ship, no disparagement to me or the captain. I was disgusted
at this affectation; and, in order to punish his hypocrisy, assured him
he might take his choice, either of going down to the cockpit with me,
or staying upon deck during the engagement. Alarmed at this
indifference, he replied, “Well, to oblige you, I’ll go down, but
remember it is more for your sake than my own.” So saying, he
disappeared in a twinkling, without waiting for an answer.

By this time, we could observe two tier of guns in the ship which
pursued us, and which was now but two short miles astern. This
discovery had an evident effect upon the sailors, who did not scruple
to say, that we should be torn to pieces, and blown out of the water,
and that, if in case any of them should lose their precious limbs, they
must go a begging for life, for there was no provision made by the
merchants for those poor souls who are maimed in their service. The
captain, understanding this, ordered the crew abaft, and spoke to them
thus: “My lads, I am told you hang an a—se. I have gone to sea thirty
years, a man and a boy, and never saw English sailors afraid before.
Mayhap you may think I want to expose you for the lucre of gain.
Whosoever thinks so, thinks a d—ned lie, for my whole cargo is insured;
so that, in case I should be taken, my loss would not be great. The
enemy is stronger than we, to be sure. What then? have we not a chance
for carrying away one of her masts, and so get clear of her? If we find
her too hard for us, ’tis but striking at last. If any man is hurt in
the engagement, I promise on the word of an honest seaman, to make him
a recompense according to his loss. So now, you that are lazy,
lubberly, cowardly dogs, get away and skulk in the hold and bread-room;
and you, that are jolly boys, stand by me, and let us give one
broadside for the honour of Old England.” This eloquent harangue was so
well adapted to the disposition of his hearers, that one and all of
them, pulling off their hats, waved them over their heads, and saluted
him with three cheers; upon which he sent his boy for two large
case-bottles of brandy: having treated every man with a dram, they
repaired to their quarters, and waited impatiently for the word of
command. I must do my uncle the justice to say, that in the whole of
his disposition, he behaved with the utmost intrepidity, conduct, and
deliberation. The enemy being very near, he ordered me to my station,
and was just going to give the word for hoisting the colours, and
firing, when the supposed Frenchman hauled down his white pennant,
jack, and ensign, hoisted English ones, and fired a gun a-head of us.
This was a joyful event to Captain Bowling, who immediately showed his
colours, and fired a gun to leeward; upon which the other ship ran
alongside of us, hailed him, and, giving him to know that she was an
English man-of-war of forty guns, ordered him to hoist out his boat and
come on board. This command he obeyed with the more alacrity, because,
upon inquiry, he found that she was commanded by an old messmate of
his, who was overjoyed to see him, detained him to dinner, and sent his
barge for the supercargo and me, who were very much caressed on his
account. As this commander was destined to cruise upon the French in
the latitude of Martinico, his stem and quarters were adorned with
white fleurs-de-lis, and the whole shell of the ship so much disguised
for a decoy to the enemy, that it was no wonder my uncle did not know
her, although he had sailed on board of her many years. We kept company
with her four days, during which time the captains were never asunder,
and then parted, our course lying different from hers.

In less than fortnight after our separation, we made the land of
Guinea, near the mouth of the River Gambia; and trading along the coast
as far to the southward of the Line as Angola and Bengula, in less than
six months disposed of the greatest part of our cargo, and purchased
four hundred negroes, my adventure having been laid out in gold dust.

Our complement being made up, we took our departure from Cape Negroe,
and arrived in the Rio de la Plata in six weeks, having met with
nothing remarkable in our voyage, except an epidemic fever, not unlike
the jail distemper, which broke out among our slaves and carried off a
good many of the ship’s company; among whom I lost one of my mates, and
poor Strap had well nigh given up the ghost. Having produced our
passport to the Spanish governor, we were received with great courtesy,
sold our slaves in a very few days, and could have put off five times
the number at our own price; though we were obliged to smuggle the rest
of our merchandise, consisting of European bale-goods, which however we
made shift to dispose of at a great advantage.




CHAPTER LXVI


I am invited to the Villa of a Spanish Don, where we went with an
English Gentleman, and make a very interesting discovery—we leave
Buenos Ayres, and arrive at Jamaica


Our ship being freed from the disagreeable lading of negroes, to whom,
indeed, I had been a miserable slave since our leaving the coast of
Guinea, I began to enjoy myself, and breathe with pleasure the pure air
of Paraguay, this part of which is reckoned the Montpelier of South
America, and has obtained, on account of its climate, the name of
Buenos Ayres. It was in this delicious place that I gave myself
entirely up to the thoughts of my dear Narcissa, whose image still kept
possession of my breast, and whose charms, enhanced by absence,
appeared to my imagination, if possible, more engaging than ever! I
calculated the profits of my voyage, which even exceeded my
expectation; resolved to purchase sinecure upon my arrival in England,
and if I should find the squire as averse to me as ever, marry his
sister by stealth; and in case our family should increase, rely on the
generosity of my uncle, who was by this time worth a considerable sum.

While I amused myself with these agreeable projects, and the
transporting thoughts of enjoying Narcissa, we were very much caressed
by the Spanish gentlemen, who frequently formed parties of pleasure for
our entertainment, in which we made excursions a good way into the
country. Among those who signalised themselves by their civility to us,
was one Don Antonio de Ribera, a very polite young gentleman, with whom
I had contracted an intimate friendship, who invited us one day to his
country house, and, as a further inducement to our compliance, promised
to procure for us the company of an English Signor, who had been
settled in those parts many years and acquired the love and esteem of
the whole province by his affability, good sense, and honourable
behaviour.

We accepted his invitation, and set out for his villa, where we had not
been longer than an hour, when the person arrived in whose favour I had
been so much prepossessed. He was a tall man, remarkably well shaped,
of a fine mien and appearance, commanding respect, and seemed to be
turned of forty; the features of his face were saddened with a reserve
and gravity, which in other countries would have been thought the
effect of melancholy; but here appeared to have been contracted by his
commerce with the Spaniards, who are remarkable for that severity of
countenance. Understanding from Don Antonio that we were his
countrymen, he saluted us all round very complacently, and fixing his
eyes attentively on me, uttered a deep sigh. I had been struck with a
profound veneration for him at his first coming into the room; and no
sooner observed this expression of his sorrow, directed, as it were, in
a particular manner to me, that my heart took part in his grief; I
sympathised involuntarily and sighed in my turn. Having asked leave of
our entertainer, he accosted us in English, professed his satisfaction
at seeing so many of his countrymen in such a remote place, and asked
the captain, who went by the name of Signor Thoma, from what part of
Britain he had sailed and whither he was bound. My uncle told him that
we had sailed from the River Thames, and were bound for the same plane
by the way of Jamaica, where we intended to take in a lading of sugar.

Having satisfied himself in these and other particulars about the state
of the war, he gave us to understand, that he had a longing desire to
revisit his native country, in consequence of which he had already
transmitted to Europe the greatest part of his fortune in neutral
bottoms, and would willingly embark the rest of it with himself in our
ship, provided the captain had no objection to such a passenger. My
uncle very prudently replied, that for his part he should be glad of
his company, if he could procure the consent of the governor, without
which he durst not take him on board, whatever inclination he had to
oblige him. The gentleman approved of his discretion, and telling him
that there would be no difficulty in obtaining the connivance of the
governor, who was his good friend, shifted the conversation to another
subject.

I was overjoyed to hear his intention, and already interested myself so
much in his favour that, had he been disappointed, I should have been
very unhappy. In the course of our entertainment, he eyed me with
uncommon attachment, I felt a surprising attraction towards him; when
he spoke, I listened with attention and reverence; the dignity of his
deportment filled me with affection and awe; and, in short, the
emotions of my soul, in presence of this stranger, were strong and
unaccountable.

Having spent the best part of the day with us, he took his leave,
telling Captain Thoma, that he should hear from him in a short time. He
was no sooner gone than I asked a thousand questions about him of Don
Antonio, who could give me no other satisfaction than that his name was
Don Rodrigo, that he had lived fifteen or sixteen years in these parts,
was reputed rich, and supposed to have been unfortunate in his younger
years, because he was observed to nourish a pensive melancholy, even
from the time of his first settlement among them; but that nobody had
ventured to inquire into the cause of his sorrow, in consideration of
his peace, which might suffer in the recapitulation of his misfortunes.

I was seized with an irresistible desire of knowing the particulars of
his fate, and enjoyed not an hour of repose during the whole night, by
reason of the eager conceptions that inspired me with regard to his
story, which I resolved (if possible) to learn. Next morning, while we
were at breakfast, three mules, richly caparisoned, arrived with a
message from Don Rodrigo, desiring our company, and that of Don
Antonio, at his house, which was situated about ten miles further up in
the country. I was pleased with this invitation, in consequence of
which we mounted the mules which he had provided for us, and alighted
at his house before noon. Here we were splendidly entertained by the
generous stranger, who still seemed to show a particular regard for me,
and after dinner made me a present of a ring, set with a beautiful
amethyst, the production of that country, saying, at the same time,
that he was once blessed with a son, who, had he lived, would have been
nearly of my age. This observation, delivered with a profound sigh,
made my heart throb with violence: a crowd of confused ideas rushed
upon my imagination, which, while I endeavoured to unravel, my uncle
perceived my absence of thought, and tapping me on the shoulder, said,
“Oons, are you asleep, Rory?” Before I had time to reply, Don Rodrigo,
with uncommon eagerness of voice and look, pronounced, “Pray, captain,
what is the young gentleman’s name?” “His name,” said my uncle, “is
Roderick Random.” “Gracious Powers!” cried the stranger, starting
up—“And his mother’s?” “His mother,” answered the captain, amazed, “was
called Charlotte Bowling.” “O bounteous Heaven!” exclaimed Don Rodrigo,
springing across the table, and clasping me in his arms, “my son! my
son! have I found thee again? do I hold thee in my embrace, after
having lost and despaired of seeing thee so long?” So saying, he fell
upon my neck, and wept aloud with joy; while the power of nature
operating strongly in my breast. I was lost in rapture, and while he
pressed me to his heart, let fall a shower of tears in his bosom. His
utterance was choked up a good while by the agitation of his soul; at
length he broke out into “Mysterious Providence!—O my dear Charlotte,
there yet remains a pledge of our love! and such a pledge!—so found! O
infinite Goodness, let me adore thy all-wise decrees!” Having thus
expressed himself, he kneeled upon the floor, lifted up his eyes and
hands to heaven, and remained some minutes in silent ecstacy of
devotion. I put myself in the same posture, adored the all-good
Dispenser in a prayer of mental thanksgiving: and when his ejaculation
was ended, did homage to my father, and craved his paternal blessing.
He hugged me again with unutterable fondness, and having implored the
protection of Heaven upon my head, raised me from the ground, and
presented me as his son to the company, who wept in concert over this
affecting scene. Among the rest, my uncle did not fail to discover the
goodness and joy of his heart. Albeit unused to the melting mood, he
blubbered with great tenderness, and wringing my father’s hand, cried,
“Brother Random, I’m rejoiced to see you—God be praised for this happy
meeting!” Don Rodrigo, understanding that he was his brother-in-law,
embraced him affectionately, saying, “Are you my Charlotte’s brother?
Alas! unhappy Charlotte! but why should I repine? we shall meet again,
never more to part! Brother, you are truly welcome. Dear son, I am
transported with unspeakable joy! This day is a jubilee—my friends and
servants shall share my satisfaction.”

While he dispatched messengers to the gentlemen in the neighbourhood,
to announce this event, and gave orders for a grand entertainment, I
was so much affected with the tumults of passion, which assailed me on
this great, sudden, and unexpected occasion, that I fell sick, fevered,
and in less than three hours became quite delirious: so that the
preparations were countermanded, and the joy of the family converted
into grief and despair. Physicians were instantly called, I was
plentifully blooded in the foot, my lower extremities were bathed in a
decoction of salutiferous herbs: in ten hours after I was taken ill I
enjoyed a critical sweat, and next day felt the remains of the
distemper, but an agreeable lassitude, which did not hinder me from
getting up. During the progress of this fever, which, from the term or
its duration, is called ephemera, my father never once quitted my
bedside, but administered the prescriptions of the physicians with the
most pious care; while Captain Bowling manifested his concern by the
like attendance. I no sooner found myself delivered from this disease,
than I bethought myself of my honest friend Strap; and resolving to
make him happy forthwith in the knowledge of my good fortune, told my
father in general, that I had been infinitely obliged to this faithful
adherent, and begged he would indulge me so far as to send for him,
without letting him know my happiness, until he could receive an
account of it from my own mouth.

My request was instantly complied with, and a messenger with a spare
mule despatched to the ship, carrying orders from the captain to the
mate, to send the steward by the bearer. My health being, in the
meantime, re-established, and my mind composed I began to relish this
important turn of my fortune, in reflecting upon the advantages with
which it must be attended; and, as the idea of my lovely Narcissa
always joined itself to every scene of happiness I could imagine, I
entertained myself now with the prospect of possessing her in that
distinguished sphere to which she was entitled by her birth and
qualifications. Having often mentioned her name while I was deprived of
my senses, my father guessed that there was an intimate connection
between us, and discovering the picture which hung in my bosom by
ribbon, did not doubt that it was the resemblance of my amiable
mistress. In this belief he was confirmed by my uncle, who told him
that it was the picture of a young woman, to whom I was under promise
of marriage. Alarmed at this piece of information, Don Rodrigo took the
first opportunity of questioning me about the particulars of this
affair, which when I had candidly recounted, he approved of my passion,
and promised to contribute all in his power towards its success. Though
I never doubted his generosity, I was transported on this occasion, and
throwing myself at his feet, told him, he had now completed my
happiness, for, without the possession of Narcissa I should be
miserable among all the pleasures of life. He raised me with a smile of
paternal fondness; said he knew what it was to be in love; and observed
that, if he had been as tenderly beloved by his father as I was by
mine, he should not now perhaps have cause—here he was interrupted by a
sigh, the tear rushed into his eye, suppressed the dictates of his
grief, and the time being opportune, desired me to relate the passages
of my life, which my uncle had told him were manifold and surprising. I
recounted the most material circumstances of my fortune, to which he
listened with wonder and attention, manifesting from time to time the
different emotions which my different situations may be supposed to
have raised in a parent’s breast; and, when my detail was ended,
blessed God for the adversity I had undergone, which, he said, enlarged
the understanding, improved the heart, steeled the constitution, and
qualified a young man for all the duties and enjoyments of life much
better than any education which affluence could bestow.

When I had thus satisfied his curiosity, I discovered an inclination to
hear the particulars of his story, which he gratified by beginning with
his marriage, and proceeded to the day of his disappearing, as I have
related in the first part of my memoirs. “Careless of life,” continued
he, “and unable to live in a place where every object recalled the
memory of my dear Charlotte, whom I had lost through the barbarity of
an unnatural parent, I took my leave of you, my child, then an infant,
with a heart full of unutterable woe, but little suspecting that my
father’s unkindness would have descended to my innocent orphan; and
setting out alone at midnight for the nearest seaport, early next
morning got on board a ship, bound, as I had heard, for France; and,
bargaining with the master for my passage, bade a long adieu to my
native country, and put to sea with the first fair wind. The place of
our destination was Granville, but we had the misfortune to run upon a
ridge of rocks near the Island of Alderney, called the Caskets, where
the sea running high, the ship went to pieces, the boat sunk alongside,
and every soul on board perished, except myself, who, by the assistance
of a grating got ashore on the coast of Normandy. I went directly to
Caen, where I was so lucky as to meet with a count, whom I had formerly
known in my travels; with this gentleman I set out for Paris, where I
was recommended by him and other friends, as tutor to a young nobleman,
whom I accompanied to the court of Spain. There we remained a whole
year, at the end of which my pupil being recalled by his father, I
quitted my office, and stayed behind, by the advice of a certain
Spanish grandee, who took me into his protection, and introduced me to
another nobleman, who was afterwards created viceroy of Peru. He
insisted on my attending, him to his government of the Indies, where,
however, by reason of my religion, it was not in his power to make my
fortune any other way than by encouraging me to trade, which I had not
long prosecuted when my patron died, and I found myself in the midst of
strangers, without one friend to support or protect me. Urged by this
consideration, I sold my effects, and removed to this country, the
governor of which, having been appointed by the viceroy, was my
intimate acquaintance. Here has heaven prospered my endeavours, during
a residence of sixteen years, in which my tranquillity was never
invaded but by the remembrance of your mother, whose death I have in
secret mourned without ceasing, and the reflection of you, whose fate I
could never learn notwithstanding all my inquiries by means of my
friends in France, who, after the most strict examination, could give
me no other account than that you went abroad six years ago, and was
never after heard of. I could not rest satisfied with this imperfect
information, and, though my hope of finding you was but languid,
resolved to go in quest of you in person; for which purpose, I have
remitted to Holland the value of twenty thousand pounds, and am in
possession of fifteen thousand more, with which I intended to embark
myself on board of Captain Bowling, before I discovered this amazing
stroke of Providence, which, you may be sure, has not altered my
intention.”

My father, having entertained us with this agreeable sketch of his
life, withdrew, in order to relieve Don Antonio, who, in his absence,
had done the honours of his house; and I was just dressed for my
appearance among the guests, when Strap arrived from the ship.

He no sooner entered the grand apartment in which I was, and saw the
magnificence of my apparel, than his speech was lost in amazement, and
he gaped in silence at the objects that surrounded him. I took him by
the hand, observed that I had sent for him to be a witness and sharer
of my happiness, and told him I had found a father. At these words he
started, and, after having continued some minutes with his mouth and
eyes wide open, cried, “Ah!—odd, I know what! go thy ways, poor
Narcissa, and go thy ways somebody else—well—Lord, what a thing is
love! God help us! are all our mad pranks and protestations come to
this? And have you fixed your habitation in this distant land? God
prosper you—I find we must part at last—for I would not leave my poor
carcase so far from my native home, for all the wealth of the
universe!” With these ejaculations, he began to sob and make wry faces;
upon which I assured him of his mistake, both in regard to my staying
in Paraguay, and informed him, as briefly as I could, of the great
event that had happened. Never was rapture more ludicrously expressed
than in the behaviour of this worthy creature, who cried, laughed,
whistled, sung, and danced, all in a breath. His transport was scarce
over, when my father entered, who no sooner understood that this was
Strap, than he took him by the hand, saying, “Is this the honest man
who befriended you so much in your distress? You are welcome to my
house, and I will soon put it in the power of my son to reward you for
your good offices in his behalf; in the meantime go with us and partake
of the repast that is provided.” Strap, wild as he was with joy, would
by no means accept of the proffered honour, crying, “God forbid! I know
my distance—your worship shall excuse me.” And Don Rodrigo, finding his
modesty invincible, recommended him to his major-domo, to be treated
with the utmost respect; while he carried me in a large saloon, where I
was presented to a numerous company, who loaded me with compliments and
caresses, and congratulated my father in terms not proper for me to
repeat.

Without specifying the particulars of our entertainment, let it suffice
to say, it was at the same time elegant and sumptuous, and the
rejoicings lasted two days; after which, Don Rodrigo settled his
affairs, converted his effects into silver and gold, visited and took
leave of all his friends, who were grieved at his departure, and
honoured me with considerable presents; and, coming on board of my
uncle’s ship, with the first fair wind we sailed from the Rio de la
Plata, and in two months came safe to an anchor in the harbour of
Kingston, in the Island of Jamaica.




CHAPTER LXVII


I visit my old Friend Thompson—we set sail for Europe—meet with an odd
Adventure—arrive in England—I ride across the Country from Portsmouth
to Sussex—converse with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me of Narcissa’s being
in London—in consequence of this Intelligence, I proceed to
Canterbury—meet with my old friend Morgan—arrive in London—visit
Narcissa—introduce my Father to be—he is charmed with her good sense
and beauty—we come to a Determination of demanding her Brother’s
Consent to our Marriage


I inquired, as soon as I got ashore, about my generous companion, Mr.
Thompson, and hearing that he lived in a flourishing condition upon the
estate left him by his wife’s father, who had been dead some years, I
took horse immediately, with the consent of Don Rodrigo, who had heard
me mention him with great regard, and in a few hours reached the place
of his habitation.

I should much wrong the delicacy of Mr. Thompson’s sentiments to say
barely he was glad to see me: he felt all that the most sensible and
disinterested friendship could feel on this occasion, introduced me to
his wife, a very amiable young lady, who had already blessed him with
two fine children, and being as yet ignorant of my circumstances,
frankly offered me the assistance of his purse and interest. I thanked
him for his generous intention, and made him acquainted with my
situation, on which he congratulated me with great joy, and, after I
had stayed with him a whole day and night, accompanied me back to
Kingston, to wait upon my father, whom he invited to his house. Don
Rodrigo complied with his request, and, having been handsomely
entertained during the space of a week, returned extremely well
satisfied with the behaviour of my friend and his lady, to whom, at
parting, he presented a very valuable diamond ring, as a token of his
esteem. During the course of my conversation with Mr. Thompson, he gave
me to understand, that his old commander Captain Oakum was dead some
months, and that, immediately after his death, a discovery had been
made of some valuable effects that he had feloniously secreted out of a
prize by the assistance of Dr. Mackshane, who was now actually in
prison on that account, and, being destitute of friends, subsisted
solely on the charity of my friend, whose bounty he had implored in the
most abject manner, after having been the barbarous occasion of driving
him to that terrible extremity on board of The Thunder, which we have
formerly related. Whatsoever this wretch had been guilty of, I
applauded Mr. Thompson’s generosity towards him in his distress, which
wrought so much upon me also, that I sent him ten pistoles, in such a
private manner that he could never know his benefactor.

While my father and I were caressed among the gentlemen on shore,
Captain Bowling had written to his owners, by the packet, which sailed
a few days after our arrival, signifying his prosperous voyage
hitherto, and desiring them to insure his ship and cargo homeward
bound: after which precaution he applied himself so heartily to the
task of loading his ship that, with the assistance of Mr. Thompson, she
was full in less than six weeks. This kind gentleman likewise procured
for Don Rodrigo bills upon London for the greatest part of his gold and
silver, by which means it was secured against the risk of the seas and
the enemy; and, before we sailed, supplied us with such large
quantities of all kinds of stock, that not only we, but the ship’s
company, fared sumptuously during the voyage.

Everything being ready, we took our leave of our kind entertainers,
and, going on board at Port Royal, set sail for England on the first
day of June. We beat up to windward, with fine easy weather, and one
night believing ourselves near Cape Tiberon, lay to, with an intention
to wood and water next morning in the bay. While we remained in this
situation, a sailor, having drunk more new rum than he could carry,
staggered over board, and, notwithstanding all the means that could be
used to preserve him, went to the bottom, and disappeared. About two
hours after this melancholy accident happened, as I enjoyed the cool
air on the quarter-deck, I heard a voice rising, as it were, out of the
sea and calling, “Ho, the ship ahoy!” Upon which one of the men upon
the forecastle cried, “I’ll be d—n’d if that an’t Jack Marlinspike, who
went overboard!” Not a little surprised at this event, I jumped into
the boat that lay alongside, with the second mate and four men, and
rowing towards the place from whence the voice (which repeated the
hail) seemed to proceed, we perceived something floating upon the
water. When we had rowed a little further, we discerned it to be a man
riding upon a hencoop, who, seeing us approach, pronounced with a
hoarse voice, “D—n your bloods! why did you not answer when I hailed?”
Our mate, who was a veritable seaman, hearing his salute, said, “By G—,
my lads, this is none of our man. This is the devil—pull away for the
ship.” The fellows obeyed his command without question, and were
already some fathoms on our return, when I insisted on their taking up
the poor creature, and prevailed upon them to go back to the wreck,
which when we came near the second time, and signified our intention,
we received an answer of “Avast, avast—what ship, brother?” Being
satisfied in this particular, he cried, “D—n the ship, I was in hopes
it had been my own—where are you bound?” We satisfied his curiosity in
this particular too; upon which he suffered himself to be taken on
board, and, after having been comforted with a dram, told us, he
belonged to the Vesuvio man-of-war, upon a cruise off the island of
Hispaniola; that he had fallen overboard four-and-twenty hours ago, and
the ship being under sail, they did not choose to bring to, but tossed
a hencoop overboard for his convenience, upon which he was in good
hopes of reaching the Cape next morning: howsomever, he was as well
content to be aboard of us because he did not doubt that we should meet
his ship, and if he had gone ashore in the bay, he might have been
taken prisoner by the French. My uncle and father were very much
diverted with the account of this fellow’s unconcerned behaviour; and
in two days, meeting with the Vesuvio, as he expected, sent him on
board of her, according to his desire.

Having beat up successfully the windward passage, we stretched to the
northward, and falling in with a westerly wind, in eight weeks arrived
in the soundings, and in two days after made for the Lizard. It is
impossible to express the joy I felt at the sight of English ground!
Don Rodrigo was not unmoved, and Strap shed tears of gladness. The
sailors profited by our satisfaction, the shoe that was nailed to the
mast being quite filled with our liberality. My uncle resolved to run
up into the Downs at once, but the wind shifting when we were abreast
of the Isle of Wight, he was obliged to turn into St. Helen’s, and come
to Spithead, to the great mortification of the crew, thirty of whom
were immediately pressed on board a man-of-war.

My father and I went ashore immediately at Portsmouth, leaving Strap
with the captain to go round with the ship and take care of our
effects; and I discovered so much impatience to see my charming
Narcissa, that my father permitted me to ride across the country to her
brother’s house; while he should hire a post-chaise for London, where
he would wait for me at a place to which I directed him.

Fired with all the eagerness of passion, I took post that very night,
and in the morning reached an inn about three miles from the squire’s
habitation; here I remained till next morning, allaying the torture of
my impatience with the rapturous hope of seeing that divine creature
after an absence of eighteen months, which, far from impairing, had
raised my love to the most exalted pitch! Neither were my reflections
free from apprehensions: that something intervened in spite of all my
hope, and represented her as having yielded to the importunity of her
brother and blessed the arms of a happy rival. My thoughts were even
maddened with the fear of her death; and, when I arrived in the dark at
the house of Mrs. Sagely, I had not for some time courage to desire
admittance, lest my soul should be shocked with dismal tidings. At
length, however, I knocked, and no sooner certified the good
gentlewoman of my voice than she opened the door, and received me with
the most affectionate embrace, that brought tears into her aged eyes:
“For heaven’s sake, dear mother,” cried I, “tell me how is Narcissa? is
she the same that I left her?” She blessed my ears with saying, “She is
as beautiful, in as good health, and as much yours as ever.”
Transported at this assurance, I begged to know if I could not see her
that very night, when this sage matron gave me to understand that my
mistress was in London, and that things were strangely altered in the
squire’s house since my departure; that he had been married a whole
year to Melinda, who at first found means to wean his attention so much
from Narcissa, that he became quite careless of that lovely sister,
comforting himself with the clause in his father’s will, by which she
should forfeit her fortune, by marrying without his consent: that my
mistress, being but indifferently treated by her sister-in-law, had
made use of her freedom some months ago, and gone to town, where she
was lodged with Miss Williams, in expectation of my arrival; and had
been pestered with the addresses of Lord Quiverwit, who, finding her
heart engaged, had fallen upon a great many shifts to persuade her that
I was dead; but, finding all his artifices unsuccessful, and despairing
of gaining her affection, he had consoled himself for her indifference,
by marrying another lady some weeks ago, who had already left him on
account of some family uneasiness. Besides this interesting
information, she told me there was not a great deal of harmony between
Melinda and the squire, who was so much disgusted at the number of
gallants who continued to hover about her even after her marriage, that
he had hurried her down into the country, much against her own
inclination, where their mutual animosities had risen to such a height,
that they preserved no decency before company or servants, but abused
one another in the grossest terms.

This good old gentlewoman, to give me a convincing proof of my dear
Narcissa’s unalterable love, gratified me with a sight of the last
letter she had favoured her with, in which I was mentioned with so much
honour, tenderness, and concern, that my soul was fired with
impatience, and I determined to ride all night, that I might have it
the sooner in my power to make her happy. Mrs. Sagely, perceiving my
eagerness, and her maternal affection being equally divided between
Narcissa and me, begged leave to remind me of the sentiments with which
I went abroad, that would not permit me for any selfish gratification
to prejudice the fortune of that amiable young lady, who must entirely
depend upon me, after having bestowed herself in marriage. I thanked
her for her kind concern, and as briefly as possible described my
flourishing situation, which afforded this humane person infinite
wonder and satisfaction. I told her, that now I had an opportunity to
manifest my gratitude for the many obligations I owed, I would
endeavour to make her old age comfortable and easy; as a step to which
I proposed she should come and live with Narcissa and me. This
venerable gentlewoman was so much affected with my words, that the
tears ran down her ancient cheeks; she thanked heaven that I had not
belied the presages she had made, on her first acquaintance with me;
acknowledging my generosity, as she called it, in the most elegant and
pathetic expressions; but declined my proposal, on account of her
attachment to the dear melancholy cottage where she had so peacefully
consumed her solitary widowhood. Finding her immovable on this subject,
I insisted on her accepting a present of thirty guineas, and took my
leave, resolving to accommodate her with the same sum annually, for the
more comfortable support of the infirmities of old age.

Having rode all night, I found myself at Canterbury in the morning,
where I alighted to procure fresh horses; and, as I walked into the
inn, perceived an apothecary’s on the other side of the street, with
the name of Morgan over the door; alarmed at this discovery, I could
not help thinking that my old messmate had settled in this place, and
upon inquiry found my conjecture true, and that he was married lately
to a widow in that city, by whom he had got three thousand pounds.
Rejoiced at this intelligence, I went to his shop as soon as it was
open, and found my friend behind the counter, busy in preparing a
clyster. I saluted him at entrance, with, “Your servant, Mr. Morgan.”
Upon which he looked at me, and replying, “Your most humble servant,
good sir,” rubbed his ingredients in the mortar without any emotion.
“What,” said I, “Morgan, have you forgot your old messmate?” At these
words he looked up again, and starting, cried, “As Cot is my—sure it
cannot—yes, by my salfation, I pelieve it is my dear friend Mr.
Rantom.” He was no sooner convinced of my identity, than he threw down
the pestle, overset the mortar, and jumping over the board, swept up
the contents with his clothes, flew about my neck, hugged me
affectionately, and daubed me all over with turpentine and the yolks of
eggs which he had been mixing when I came in. Our mutual
congratulations being over, he told me, that he found himself a widower
upon his return from the West Indies; that he had got interest to be
appointed surgeon of a man-of-war, in which capacity he had served some
years, until he married an apothecary’s widow, with whom he now enjoyed
a pretty good sum of money, peace, and quiet, and an indifferent good
trade. He was very desirous of hearing my adventures, which I assured
him I had not time to relate, but told him in general, my circumstances
were very good, and that I hoped to see him when I should not be in
such a hurry as at present. He insisted, however, on my staying
breakfast, and introduced me to his wife, who seemed to be a decent
sensible woman, pretty well stricken in years. In the course of our
conversation, he showed the sleeve-buttons I had exchanged with him at
our parting in the West Indies, and was not a little proud to see that
I had preserved his with the same care. When I informed him of
Mackshane’s condition, he seemed at first to exult over his distress;
but, after a little recollection, said, “Well, he has paid for his
malice; I forgife him, and may Cot forgife him likewise.” He expressed
great concern for the soul of Captain Oakum, which he believed was now
gnashing its teeth; but it was some time before I could convince him of
Thompson’s being alive, at whose good fortune, nevertheless, he was
extremely glad.

Having renewed our protestations of friendship, I bade the honest
Welshman and his spouse farewell, and, taking post-horses, arrived at
London that same night, where I found my father in good health, to whom
I imparted what I had learned of Narcissa. This indulgent parent
approved of my intention of marrying her, even without fortune,
provided her brother’s consent could not be obtained; promised to make
over to me in a few days a sufficiency to maintain her in a fashionable
manner and expressed a desire of seeing this amiable creature, who had
captivated me so much. As I had not slept the night before, and was
besides fatigued with my journey, I found myself under a necessity of
taking some repose, and went to bed accordingly: next morning, about
ten o’clock, took a chair, and according to Mrs. Sagely’s directions,
went to my charmer’s lodgings, and inquired for Miss Williams. I had
not waited in the parlour longer than a minute, when this young woman
entered, and no sooner perceived me, than she shrieked and ran
backward: but I got between her and the door, and clasping her in my
arms, brought her to herself with an embrace. “Good heaven,” cried she,
“Mr. Random, is it you indeed? My mistress will run distracted with
joy.” I told her, it was from an apprehension that my sudden appearance
might have had some bad effect on my dear Narcissa, that I had desired
to see her first, in order to concert some method of acquainting her
mistress gradually with my arrival. She approved of my conduct, and,
after having yielded to the suggestions of her own friendship, in
asking if my voyage had been successful, charged herself with that
office, and left me glowing with desire of seeing and embracing the
object of my love. In a very little time I heard some body coming down
the stairs in haste, and the voice of my angel pronounce, with an eager
tone, “O heaven! is it possible! where is he?” How were my faculties
aroused at this well known sound! and how was my soul transported when
she broke in upon my view in all the bloom of ripened beauty! Grace was
in all her steps, heaven in her eye, in every gesture dignity and love!
You, whose souls are susceptible of the most delicate impressions,
whose tender bosoms have felt the affecting vicissitudes of love, who
have suffered an absence of eighteen long months from the dear object
of your hope, and found at your return the melting fair as kind and
constant as your heart can wish, do me justice on this occasion, and
conceive what unutterable rapture possessed us both, while we flew into
each other’s arms! This was no time for speech: locked in a mutual
embrace, we continued some minutes in a silent trance of joy! When I
thus encircled all my soul held dear—while I hung over her
beauties—beheld her eyes sparkle, and every feature flush with virtuous
fondness—when I saw her enchanting bosom heave with undissembled
rapture, and knew myself the happy cause—heavens! what was my
situation! I am tempted to commit my paper to the flames, and to
renounce my pen for ever, because its most ardent and lucky expression
so poorly describes the emotions of my soul. “O adorable Narcissa!”
cried I, “O miracle of beauty, love and truth! I at last fold thee in
my arms! I at last can call thee mine! No jealous brother shall thwart
our happiness again; fortune hath at length recompensed me for all my
sufferings, and enabled me to do justice to my love.” The dear creature
smiled ineffably charmingly, and, with a look of bewitching tenderness,
said, “and shall we never part again?” “Never,” I replied, “thou
wondrous pattern of all earthly perfection! never, until death shall
divide us! By this ambrosial kiss, a thousand times more fragrant than
the breeze that sweeps the orange grove, I never more will leave thee!”

As my first transport abated, my passion grew turbulent and unruly. I
was giddy with standing on the brink of bliss, and all my virtue and
philosophy were scarce sufficient to restrain the inordinate sallies of
desire. Narcissa perceived the conflict within me, and with her usual
dignity of prudence, called off my imagination from the object in view,
and with eager expressions of interested curiosity, desired to know the
particulars of my voyage. In this I gratified her inclination, bringing
my story down to the present hour. She was infinitely surprised at the
circumstance of finding my father, which brought tears into her lovely
eyes. She was transported at hearing that approved of my flame,
discovered a longing desire of being introduced to him, congratulated
herself and me upon my good fortune, and observed, that this great and
unexpected stroke of fate seemed to have been brought about by the
immediate direction of Providence. Having entertained ourselves some
hours with the genuine effusions of our souls, I obtained her consent
to complete my happiness as soon as my father should judge it proper;
and, applying with my own hands a valuable necklace, composed of
diamonds and amethysts set alternately, which an old Spanish lady at
Paraguay had presented me with, I took my leave, promising to return in
the afternoon with Don Rodrigo. When I went home, this generous parent
inquired very affectionately about the health of my dear Narcissa, to
whom, that I might be the more agreeable, he put into my hand a deed,
by which I found myself in possession of fifteen thousand pounds,
exclusive of the profits of my own merchandise, which amounted to three
thousand more. After dinner I accompanied him to the lodgings of my
mistress, who, being dressed for the occasion, made a most dazzling
appearance. I could perceive him struck with her figure, which I really
think was the most beautiful that ever was created under the sun. He
embraced her tenderly, and told her he was proud of having a son who
had spirit to attempt, and qualifications to engage the affections of
such a fine lady. She blushed at this compliment, and, with eyes full
of the softest languishment turned upon me, said, she should have been
unworthy of Mr. Random’s attention, had she been blind to his
extraordinary merit. I made no other answer than a low bow. My father,
sighing, pronounced, “Such was once my Charlotte;” while the tear
rushed into his eye, and the tender heart of Narcissa manifested itself
in two precious drops of sympathy, which, but for his presence, I would
have kissed away. Without repeating the particulars of our
conversation, I shall only observe, that Don Rodrigo was as much
charmed with her good sense as with her appearance, and she was no less
pleased with his understanding and polite address. It was determined
that he should write to the squire, signifying his approbation of my
passion for his sister, and offering a settlement, which he should have
no reason to reject; and that, if he should refuse the proposal, we
would crown our mutual wishes without any further regard to his will.




CHAPTER LXVIII


My Father makes a present to Narcissa—the Letter is dispatched to her
Brother—I appear among my Acquaintance—Banter’s Behaviour—the Squire
refuses his Consent—my Uncle comes to Town—approves of my Choice—I am
married—we meet the Squire and his Lady at the Play—our Acquaintance is
courted


After having spent the evening to the satisfaction of all present, my
father addressed himself thus to Narcissa. “Madam, give me leave to
consider you hereafter as my daughter, in which capacity I insist upon
your accepting this first instance of my paternal duty and affection.”
With these words he put into her hand a bank note of five hundred
pounds, which she no sooner examined, than with a low courtesy she
replied. “Dear sir, though I have not the least occasion for this
supply, I have too great a veneration for you to refuse this proof of
your generosity and esteem, which I the more freely receive, because I
already look upon Mr. Random’s interest as inseparably connected with
mine.” He was extremely well pleased with her frank and ingenuous
reply, upon which we saluted, and wished her good night. The letter, at
my request, was dispatched to Sussex by an express, and in the
meantime, Don Rodrigo, to grace my nuptials, hired a ready furnished
house, and set up a very handsome equipage.

Though I passed the greatest part of the day with the darling of my
soul, I found leisure sometimes to be among my former acquaintance, who
were astonished at the magnificence of my appearance. Banter in
particular was confounded at the vicissitudes of my fortune, the causes
of which he endeavoured in vain to discover, until I thought fit to
disclose the whole secret of my last voyage, partly in consideration of
our former intimacy, and partly to prevent unfavourable conjectures,
which he and others, in all probability, would have made in regard to
my circumstances. He professed great satisfaction at this piece of
news; and I had no cause to believe him insincere, when I considered
that he would now look upon himself as acquitted of the debt he owed
me, and at the same time flatter himself with the hopes of borrowing
more. I carried him home to dinner with me, and my father liked his
conversation so much, that, upon hearing his difficulties, he desired
me to accommodate him for the present, and inquire, if he would accept
of a commission in the army, towards the purchase of which he should
willingly lend him money. Accordingly, I gave my friend an opportunity
of being alone with me, when, as I expected, he told me that he was
just on the point of being reconciled to an old rich uncle, whose heir
he was, but wanted a few pieces for immediate expense, which he desired
I would lend him and take my bond for the whole. His demand was limited
to ten guineas; and when I put twenty in his hand, he stared at me for
some moments; then, putting it into his purse, “Ay,—’tis all one—you
shall have the whole in a very short time.” When I had taken his note,
to save the expense of a bond, I expressed some surprise that a fellow
of his spirit should loiter away his time in idleness, and, asked why
he did not choose to make his fortune in the army. “What,” said he,
“throw away money upon a subaltern’s commission, and be under the
command of a parcel of scoundrels, who have raised themselves above me
by the most infamous practices. No, I love independency too well to
sacrifice my life, health, and pleasure, for such a pitiful
consideration.” Finding him adverse to this way of life, I changed the
subject, and returned to Don Rodrigo, who had just received the
following epistle from the squire:

“Sir,—Concerning a letter which I received, subscribed R. Random, this
is the answer. As for you, I know nothing of you. Your son, or
pretended son, I have seen; if he marries my sister, at his peril be
it; I do declare that he shall not have one farthing of her fortune,
which becomes my property, if she takes a husband without my consent.
Your settlement, I do believe, is all a sham, and yourself no better
than you should be; but if you had all the wealth of the Indies, your
son shall never match in our family with the consent of
    “Orson Topehall”


My father was not much surprised at this polite letter, after having
heard the character of the author; and as for me, I was even pleased at
his refusal, because I had now an opportunity of showing my
disinterested love. By his permission I waited on my charmer: and
having imparted the contents of her brother’s letter, at which she wept
bitterly, in spite of all my consolation and caresses, the time of our
marriage was fixed two days. During this interval, in which my soul was
wound up to the last stretch of rapturous expectation, Narcissa
endeavoured to reconcile some of her relations in town to her marriage
with me; but, finding them all deaf to her remonstrances, either out of
envy or prejudice, she told me with the most enchanting sweetness,
while the tears bedewed her lovely cheeks, “Sure the world will no
longer question your generosity when you take a poor forlorn beggar to
your arms?” Affected with her sorrow, I pressed the fair mourner to my
breast, and swore that she was more dear and welcome on that account,
because she had sacrificed her friends and fortune to her love for me.
My uncle, for whose character she had a great veneration, being by this
time come to town, I introduced him to my bride; and, although he was
not very much subject to refined sensations, he was struck dumb with
admiration at her beauty. After having kissed and gazed at her for some
time, he turned to me, saying. “Odds bobs, Rory! a notable prize
indeed, finely built and gloriously rigged, i’faith! If she an’t well
manned when you take the command of her, sirrah, you deserve to go to
sea in a cockle shell. No offence, I hope, niece! you must not mind
what I say, being (as the saying is) a plain seafaring man, though
mayhap I have as much regard for you as another.” She received him with
great civility, told him she had longed a great while to see a person
to whom she was so much indebted for his generosity to Mr. Random; that
she looked upon him as her uncle, by which name she begged leave to
call him for the future; and that she was very sure he could say
nothing that would give her the least offence. The honest captain was
transported at her courteous behaviour, and insisted upon giving her
away at the ceremony, swearing that he loved her as well as if she was
his own child, and that he would give two thousand guineas to the first
fruit of our love, as soon as it would squeak. Everything being settled
for the solemnisation of our nuptials, which were to be performed
privately at my father’s house, the auspicious hour arrived, when Don
Rodrigo and my uncle went in the coach to fetch the bride and Miss
Williams: leaving me with a parson, Banter, and Strap, neither of whom
had as yet seen my charming mistress. My faithful valet, who was on the
rack of impatience to behold a lady of whom he had heard so much, no
sooner understood that the coach was returned, than he placed himself
at a window, to have a peep at her as she alighted; and, when he saw
her, clapped his hands together, turned up the white of his eyes, and,
with his mouth wide open, remained in a sort of ecstacy, which broke
out into “O Dea certe! qualis in Eurotae ripis, aut per iuga Cynthi
exercet Diana choros?” The doctor and Banter were surprised to hear my
man speak Latin; but when my father led Narcissa into the room, the
object of their admiration was soon changed, as appeared in the
countenances of both. Indeed, they must have been the most insensible
of all beings, could they have beheld without emotion the divine
creature that approached! She was dressed in a sack of white satin,
embroidered on the breast with gold, the crown of her head was covered
with a small French cap, from whence descended her beautiful hair in
ringlets that waved upon her snowy neck, which dignified the necklace I
had given her; her looks glowed with modesty and love; and her bosom,
through the veil of gauze that shaded it, afforded a prospect of
Elysium! I received this inestimable gift of Providence as became me;
and in a little time the clergyman did his office, my uncle, at his own
earnest request, acting the part of a father to my dear Narcissa, who
trembled very much, and had scarce spirits sufficient to support her
under this great change of situation. Soon as she was mine by the laws
or heaven and earth, I printed a burning kiss upon her lips; my father
embraced her tenderly, my uncle hugged her with great affection, and I
presented her to my friend Banter, who saluted her in a very polite
manner; Miss Williams hung round her neck, and went plentifully; while
Strap fell upon his knees, and begged to kiss his lady’s hand, which
she presented with great affability. I shall not pretend to describe my
own feelings at this juncture; let it suffice to say that having supped
and entertained ourselves till ten o’clock, I cautioned my Narcissa
against exposing her health by sitting up too late, and she was
prevailed upon to withdraw with her maid to an apartment destined for
us. When she left the room, her face overspread with a blush that set
all my blood in a state of fermentation, and made every pulse beat with
tenfold vigour! She was so cruel as to let me remain in this condition
a full half-hour: when, no longer able to restrain my impatience, I
broke from the company, burst into her chamber, pushed out her
confidante, and locked the door, and found her—O heaven and earth!—a
feast a thousand times more delicious than my most sanguine hopes
presaged! But, let me not profane the chaste mysteries of Hymen. I was
the happiest of men!

In the morning I was awaked by three or four drums, which Banter had
placed under the window; upon which I withdrew the curtain, and enjoyed
the unspeakable satisfaction of contemplating those angelic charms
which were now in my possession! Beauty! which, whether sleeping or
awake, shot forth peculiar graces! The light darting upon my Narcissa’s
eyes, she awoke also, and recollecting her situation, hid her blushes
in my bosom. I was distracted with joy! I could not believe the
evidence of my senses, and looked upon all that had happened as the
fictions of a dream! In the meantime my uncle knocked at the door, and
bade me turn out, for I had had a long spell. I rose accordingly, and
sent Miss Williams to her mistress, myself receiving the congratulation
of Captain Bowling, who rallied me in his sea phrase with great
success. In less than an hour, Don Rodrigo led my wife into breakfast,
where she received the compliments of the company on her looks, which,
they said, if possible, were improved by matrimony. As her delicate
ears were offended with none of those indecent ambiguities which are
too often spoken on such occasions, she behaved with dignity,
unaffected modesty, and ease; and, as a testimony of my affection and
esteem, I presented her, in presence of them all, with a deed, by which
I settled the whole fortune I was possessed of on her and her heirs for
ever. She accepted it with a glance of most tender acknowledgment,
observed, that she could not be surprised at anything of this kind I
should do, and desired my father to take the trouble of keeping it,
saying, “Next to my own Mr. Random, you are the person in whom I ought
to have the greatest confidence.” Charmed with her prudent and
ingenuous manner of proceeding, he took the paper, and assured her that
it should not lose its value while in his custody.

As we had not many visits to give and receive, the little time we
stayed in town was spent in going to public diversions, where I have
the vanity to think Narcissa was seldom eclipsed. One night, in
particular, we sent our footman to keep one of the stage boxes, which
we no sooner entered, than we perceived in the opposite box the squire
and his lady, who seemed not a little surprised at seeing us. I was
pleased at this opportunity of confronting them; the more, because
Melinda was robbed of all her admirers by my wife, who happened that
night to outshine her sister both in beauty and dress. She was piqued
at Narcissa’s victory, tossed her head a thousand different ways,
flirted her fan, looked at us with disdain, then whispered to her
husband, and broke out into an affected giggle; but all her arts proved
ineffectual, either to discompose Mrs. Random, or to conceal her own
mortification, which at length forced her away long before the play was
done. The news of our marriage being spread, with many circumstances to
our disadvantage, by the industry of this malignant creature, a certain
set of persons fond of scandal began to inquire into the particulars of
my fortune, which they no sooner understood to be independent, than the
tables were turned, and our acquaintance was courted as much as it had
been despised before: but she had too much dignity of pride to
encourage this change of conduct, especially in her relations, whom she
could never be prevailed upon to see, after the malicious reports they
had raised to her prejudice.




CHAPTER LXIX


My father intends to revisit the Place of his Nativity—we propose to
accompany him—my Uncle renews his will in my favour, determining to go
to sea again—we set out for Scotland—arrive at Edinburgh—purchase our
paternal Estate—proceed to it—halt at the Town where I was
educated—take up my bond to Crab—the Behaviour of Potion and his Wife,
and one of our Female Cousins—our Reception at the Estate—Strap marries
Miss Williams, and is settled by my Father to his own satisfaction—I am
more and more happy.


My father intending to revisit his native country, and pay the tribute
of a few tears at my mother’s grave, Narcissa and I resolved to
accompany him in the execution of his pious office, and accordingly
prepared for the journey, in which, however, my uncle would not engage,
being resolved to try his fortune once more at sea. In the meantime he
renewed his will in favour of my wife and me, and deposited it in the
hands of his brother-in-law: while I (that I might not be wanting to my
own interest) summoned the squire to produce his father’s will at
Doctors’ Commons, and employed a proctor to manage the affair in my
absence.

Everything being thus settled, we took leave of all our friends in
London, and set out for Scotland, Don Rodrigo, Narcissa, Miss Williams,
and I, in the coach, and Strap, with two men in livery, on horseback;
as we made easy stages, my charmer held it out very well, till we
arrived at Edinburgh, where we proposed to rest ourselves some weeks.

Here Don Rodrigo having intelligence that the foxhunter had spoilt his
estate, which was to be exposed to sale by public auction, he
determined to make a purchase of the spot where he was born, and
actually bought all the land that belonged to his father.

In a few days after this bargain was made, we left Edinburgh, in order
to go and take possession; and by the way halted one night in that town
where I was educated. Upon inquiry, I found that Mr. Crab was dead;
whereupon I sent for his executor, paid the sum I owed with interest,
and took up my bond. Mr. Potion and his wife, hearing of my arrival,
had the assurance to come to the inn where we lodged, and send up their
names, with the desire of being permitted to pay their respects to my
father and me: but their sordid behaviour towards me, when I was an
orphan, had made too deep an impression on my mind to be effaced by
this mean mercenary piece of condescension: I therefore rejected their
message with disdain, and bade Strap tell them, that my father and I
desired to have no communication with such low-minded wretches as they
were.

They had not been gone half-an-hour, when a woman, without any
ceremony, opened the door of the room where we sat, and, making towards
my father, accosted him with, “Uncle, your servant—I am glad to see
you.” This was no other than one of my female cousins, mentioned in the
first part of my memoirs, to whom Don Rodrigo replied, “Pray, who are
you, madam?” “Oh!” cried she, “my cousin Rory there knows me very well.
Don’t you remember me, Rory?” “Yes, madam,” said I; “for my own part, I
shall never forget you. Sir, this is one of the young ladies, who (as I
have formerly told you) treated me so humanely in my childhood!” When I
pronounced these words, my father’s resentment glowed in his visage,
and he ordered her to be gone, with such a commanding aspect, that she
retired in a fright, muttering curses as she went downstairs. We
afterwards learned that she was married to an ensign, who had already
spent all her fortune; and that her sister had borne a child to her
mother’s footman, who is now her husband, and keeps a petty alehouse in
the country.

The fame of our flourishing condition having arrived at this place
before us, we got notice that the magistrates intended next day to
compliment us with the freedom of their town; upon which my father,
considering their complaisance in the right point of view, ordered the
horses to the coach early in the morning.

We proceeded to our estate, which lay about twenty miles from this
place; and, when we came within half-a-league of the house, were met by
a prodigious number of poor tenants, men, women, and children, who
testified their joy by loud acclamations, and accompanied our coach to
the gate. As there is no part of the world in which the peasants are
more attached to their lords than in Scotland, we were almost devoured
by their affections. My father had always been their favourite, and now
that he appeared their master, after having been thought dead so long,
their joy broke out into a thousand extravagances. When we entered the
court yard, we were surrounded by a vast number, who crowded together
so closely to see us that several were in danger of being squeezed to
death; those who were near Don Rodrigo fell upon their knees, and
kissed his hand, or the hem of his garment, praying aloud for long life
and prosperity to him; others approached Narcissa and me in the same
manner; while the rest clapped their hands at a distance, and invoked
heaven to shower its choicest blessings on our heads! In short, the
whole scene, though rude, was so affecting, that the gentle partner of
my heart wept over it, and my father himself could not refrain from
dropping a tear.

Having welcomed his daughter and me to his house, he ordered some
bullocks to be killed, and some hogsheads of ale to be brought from the
neighbouring village, to regale these honest people, who had not
enjoyed such a holiday for many years before.

Next day we were visited by the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, most of
them our relations, one of whom brought along my cousin, the foxhunter,
who had stayed at his house since he was obliged to leave his own! My
father was generous enough to receive him kindly, and even promised to
purchase for him a commission in the army, for which he expressed great
thankfulness and joy.

My charming Narcissa was universally admired and loved for her beauty,
affability, and good sense; and so well pleased with the situation of
the place, and the company round, that she has not as yet discovered
the least desire of changing her habitation.

We had not been many days settled, when I prevailed upon my father to
pay a visit to the village where I had been at school. Here we were
received by the principal inhabitants, who entertained us in the
church, where Mr. Syntax the schoolmaster (my tyrant being dead)
pronounced a Latin oration in honour of our family. And none exerted
themselves more than Strap’s father and relations, who looked upon the
honest valet as the first gentleman of their race, and honoured his
benefactors accordingly. Having received the homage of this place, we
retired, leaving forty pounds for the benefit of the poor of the
parish; and that very night, Strap being a little elevated with the
regard that had been shown to him, and to me on his account, ventured
to tell me, that he had a sneaking kindness for Miss Williams, and
that, if his lady and I would use our interest in his behalf, he did
not doubt that she would listen to his addresses. Surprised at this
proposal, I asked if he knew the story of that unfortunate young
gentlewoman; upon which he replied, “Yes, yes, I know what you mean—she
has been unhappy, I grant you—but what of that? I am convinced of her
reformation; or else you and my good lady would not treat her with such
respect. As for the censure of the world, I value it not a fig’s
end—besides, the world knows nothing of the matter.” I commended his
philosophy, and interested Narcissa in his cause; who interceded so
effectually, that in a little time Miss Williams yielded her consent,
and they were married at the approbation of Don Rodrigo, who gave him
five hundred pounds to stock a farm, and made him overseer of his
estate. My generous bedfellow gave her maid the same sum; so that they
live in great peace and plenty within half-a-mile of us, and daily put
up prayers for our preservation.

If there be such a thing as true happiness on earth, I enjoy it. The
impetuous transports of my passion are now settled and mellowed into
endearing fondness and tranquillity of love, rooted by that intimate
connection and interchange of hearts which nought but virtuous wedlock
can produce. Fortune seems determined to make ample amends for her
former cruelty, for my proctor writes that, notwithstanding the clause
in my father-in-law’s will, on which the squire founds his claim, I
shall certainly recover my wife’s fortune, in consequence of a codicil
annexed, which explains that clause, and limits her restriction to the
age of nineteen, after which she was at her own disposal. I would have
set out for London immediately after receiving this piece of
intelligence, but my dear angel has been qualmish of late, and begins
to grow remarkably round in the waist; so that I cannot leave her in
such an interesting situation, which I hope will produce something to
crown my felicity.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


